Society is confronted with a paradox. With the advent of Internet, everything gives
the impression of moving extremely fast. Today’s technology will be next year’s
passé. Today’s news will be tomorrow’s history. With the Internet revolution and
the creation of new social media, such as Twitter and Facebook, every one is
connected and sharing personal information in real time. Society and especially its
newer generation live in an era of instantaneity where space and distances are
irrelevant.

At the same time, for probably the ﬁrst time in history, human beings are
confronted with the fact that physical mobility is regressing. The number of cars is
likely to double in the next 20 years to reach more than 1.7 billion cars and with it
the doubling of fatalities unless new safety technologies and standards are imple-
mented. Fifty years from now, about one hundred megacities will have around
30–35 million inhabitants. Just imagine what it is to organize the transport of
Canada’s population in an area of just 2500 km2, equivalent to a country like
Luxemburg. The issue is not just the share increase in demography but the fact that
in many huge cities,
there is just no place to add new roads. Transport
infrastructures in developing countries are cracking from everywhere under the
emergence of new middle class citizens wishing to get access to the beneﬁts of the
consumer society. In fact, there is a real possibility that megacities will come to a
halt. Already, citizens of Mexico, Sao Paulo, or New Delhi are experiencing more
than 200 km of daily congestion. It is just a matter of time before trafﬁc jams double
in size, increasing the traveling time to unbearable levels (Fig. 1.1).

Salvation will need to come from new transportation technologies, changes in
work patterns, and, most importantly, in our personal choices on transportation
means that the e-mobility revolution can bring.

Is e-mobility just another buzzword used by big corporations to sell a green
image or is there behind the marketing appeal of this word, real fundamental
technological breakthroughs? We believe that e-mobility will help save millions of
passengers from injuries, reduce millions of death from pollution-related diseases,
bring a higher level and better quality of life, reduce global warming trend, and
decrease transportation costs. This might seem too good to be true, but the reality is
that under the convergence of IT and wireless telecommunication, and associating
the increase in power electronics together with the improvement in battery per-
formance, fantastic new opportunities are being unleashed to reduce energy con-
sumption and increase transport capacity, while improving the passengers’ journey
experience.

Fig. 1.1 Trafﬁc jams in New Delhi. Source Nomad [Picture Copyright of NOMAD (CC BY 2.0
via Wikimedia Commons)]; http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

3

There are many articles on private and public urban transport but few documents
in our view exist to help normal citizens understand the challenges facing trans-
portation and potential solutions that can help make the right personal choices.
Furthermore, few analyses of transportation means have been made in a holistic
approach where transportation modes have been compared taking into consider-
ation power consumption, environment impact, transport capacities, social and
economical beneﬁts and costs.

Many reasons could explain this. Firstly, the car industry has one of the
strongest worldwide lobby groups and nothing to gain in promoting com-
parisons between various modes. Secondly, the simple fact that cars and
trains use different combustion fuels made it very complex to even do this
comparison. Obviously the fact that electrical cars are now being sold in
serious quantities enables a more direct comparison. Thirdly, the concepts
used to make such comparison rely on many engineering formulas and ter-
minologies which are complex and hypothesis which may in some cases even
seemed biased. Finally and more importantly, individuals believe their life is
unique and thus their transportation needs are as well. In this context how can
we be sure that we make the right decisions?

Environmentally conscious citizens might believe for instance that by
switching to electrical cars they are making a small contribution, but are they
really? Wouldn’t society as a whole be better off should they buy a monthly
metro pass? If transportation needs are so speciﬁc to each citizen, why bother
trying to get a comprehensive view about such issues and solutions for a city,
region or even country? Surely there can’t be a single recipe to help under-
stand the urban transportation challenges and apply solutions to improve
current and future world transportation woes? And even if there was,
shouldn’t we just trust the authorities to make the right investment choices in
transportation policies and infrastructure? Though there is no single world-
wide recipe to solve all the transportation problems, we believe that by
educating each and everyone we can help people make knowledgeable
decisions each time they are confronted with the choice of buying or renting a
new car, selecting the right technology, choosing between private and public
transport or even voting for the right candidates.

Though there is no silver bullet to solve all transportation woes, we believe that a
good way to start is to identify a few general principles applied to transportation
that we can all agree upon. Surely if we can ﬁnd the right connections between
these principles and the relevant global trends we should be able to get a reasonably
clear picture of what the transportation challenges are. This should help understand
where companies are earmarking billions of R&D money or why cities must spend
billions in new transportation infrastructure.

4

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

1.1 General Transportation Principles

What are these universal principles linked to transportation that everyone could
agree upon? We’ve identiﬁed nine that have a signiﬁcant impact on society and
how people view transportation. Many of
them are more philosophical or
socio-behavioral than technological. The ﬁrst and probably most important prin-
ciple fulﬁlls one of the basic human needs: freedom.

1.1.1 Transportation Brings Freedom to Citizens

If one deﬁnes freedom as the condition of being free of restraints, it is clear that
transportation frees human beings from geographical constraints. Freedom and even
emancipation is often associated with public transport in many minds.

In the USA, Mrs. Rosa Park an African American lady became famous when
she refused to give up her seat to a Caucasian person. As a result of this ﬁght
and many others, in most countries there is today no more discrimination
based on race or skin color in public transport. In most societies, anyone can
enjoy the freedom of traveling wherever he wishes to go for a small fare.
However, explicit or implicit gender discrimination still exists. For instance a
2015 French survey indicated that 100 % of women declared having been
already harassed in public transport. In some countries such as Mexico,
women’s right to safe public transport has been taken into consideration with
speciﬁc train compartments being made available to protect them from men
harassment. On the contrary, in a few existing patriarchal societies such, as
the one of a few Arabic Golf countries, women are still implicitly forbidden
to drive and have no way of commuting alone. They are stranded at home and
cannot travel without the presence of their husband, father or male family
members. Things will change, as Governments are investing in Public
Transport allowing women to use separate gender compartments. These new
investments when they will be ﬁnished around 2016 will bring liberty of
movement to many women and will change profoundly the life of millions of
women of that region. Not surprisingly, some courageous Saudi women have
openly manifested their right to drive in 2013, wishing to anticipate this
freedom.

However, the freedom provided by transport that many Middle East women can
still only dream of, is compromised elsewhere. Though citizens have taken for
granted that they should be able to hop on a bus or drive their car to the grocery
store and be there in a few minutes, in many big cities this freedom of travel is more
and more being victim of its own success. Daily exodus of suburban residents to the

1.1 General Transportation Principles

5

inner city is there to remind us that though cars can reach a speed of 250 km/h, for
at least 4 h per day one can travel quicker by bicycle than by a Ferrari. This is now
representing a threat to the second principle, as cities’ wealth can be now hampered
by trafﬁc jams.

1.1.2 Transportation Enriches Society

Our ancestors were nomads moving from one hunting ground to another.
Traveling by foot was the only way to survive, to ﬁnd food and avoid over
hunting. Around 9000 years ago societies which relied on sedentary agri-
culture appeared. With agriculture came the social stratiﬁcation development
and economic specialization, as well as population densities sufﬁcient to
support urban life. As population in the cities expanded, transportation of
food became more and more complicated. Luckily for human beings two
fantastic developments happened more or less at the same time, creating the
foundation of transportation: the domestication of wild horses, which most
likely started in the Eurasian Steppes (centered probably in Ukraine)
approximately 4000–3500 BC, together with the creation of the wheel around
the 4th millennium BC (which appeared almost simultaneously in several
regions: Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley, the Northern Caucasus and Central
Europe). As city population density started growing to a point where citizens
relied on supply from other regions further and further away, road access
became increasingly important to the vitality and the wealth of the cities.
More recently, with the apparition of trains, tramways and later on cars,
citizens were for the ﬁrst time able to work and live in different areas.
Workers were suddenly able to work in plants far away from their home,
fuelling even more the industrial revolution.

In modern society, working and living in two different regions of the cities or
suburbs is more the rule than the exception. The possibility to meet co-workers,
clients, and suppliers within a few kilometers of distance is an important factor
explaining the increasing importance of cities in the countries’ wealth generation
process. However, massive city trafﬁc jams are now seriously sapping the beneﬁts
that people and society as a whole are enjoying from urban life. Will there be a
point in time where the big cities will come to a standstill or, on the contrary, will
the modern communication tools generated by the Internet society reduce the needs
for commuting? In many big cities, transportation which was for many years per-
ceived as a quality-of-life enhancer, is rapidly becoming a burden on the citizen.
Can the third principle, which is that transportation improves the quality of life,
still be true when poor people from the outskirts of the megacities lose 6 h per day
in buses? Surely something needs to be done, as even in a rich country like the

6

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

USA, drivers of any of the 15 main US cities are now losing as much as 52 h in
trafﬁc jams (2011 ﬁgures) every year.

1.1.3 Transportation Improves Quality of Life

Transportation is meant to improve quality of life in two ways. First, it allows
people to go rapidly where they want to in order for them to do whatever they wish
to do or buy whatever goods they want. Private and public transport favored the
advent of the leisure society enabling people to easily get access to libraries to
borrow books, to theater to watch their favorite movie, get to a football stadium to
play or cheer for their local team.

Secondly, it also favors high population density on smaller areas, which allows
culture, knowledge, and leisure to prosper, and makes cities like New York,
London, or Paris thrive.

Journey time and quality of ride is fast becoming an important factor in the
success of transportation policies. As society grows richer, people expect to
be able to go to work quickly, comfortably and safely. Furthermore, cities
internationally competing against each other must provide decent quality of
ride from home to work to attract talent.

If quality and journey time are so important, why are so many cities failing to
improve such factors? The reality is that there are three other principles in designing
the transportation networks that are not always well apprehended and which can
generate opposite results if badly applied: Integration, design for peak hour, and
competing technologies.

1.1.4

Integration Is Key to Successful Transportation

When city planners design their transportation network they often forget about a
simple factor: people don’t travel from one bus or metro station to another but from
one activity to another (for instance, from resting at home to going to work or
dinning). Furthermore, it is unrealistic to think that most people will walk a long
distance to hop on a bus or a metro every day. It goes back to the principle of
journey time and quality of ride. To improve quality and reduce journey time, city
planners must integrate the different transportation means.

1.1 General Transportation Principles

7

This means buses feeding metro systems or even providing parking space to
enable people to get easily from their home to the metro station. The image of
a ﬁshbone is often invoked to explain the best integration systems. In such
well designed transportation systems, small bus lines come from the low
density residential areas to feed the main metro lines and small residential
roads connect to national roads or highways.

1.1.5 Networks Must be Designed for Peak Hour Capacity

Unfortunately and as for many systems, transportation networks are as good as their
weakest part.

This means that you can build a 7-lane road but if there is a bridge reducing
the available ﬂow to only two lanes, the maximum capacity will be limited to
these 2 lanes. Actually it even could be worst: stop and go movements could
make the car outﬂow slower than if you had maintained a consistent 2-lane
road.

Similarly, the capacity needs to be planned in function of its limit, which hap-

pens during peak hours.

A metro system and its ﬂeet will be designed to meet the peak hour ridership
requirements. This is evidently a waste of resources as the ﬂeet might be
working at full capacity during two hours in the morning and evening and at
only one third of this capacity outside rush hours (commuting time occurs
mainly during the two-hour morning and evening rush, creating over capacity
during most of the day).

The system’s over-dimensioning is an issue any city planner faces and this is
why it is so important to understand the investment costs required by the various
technologies and the ﬁxed and variable costs incurred during operations. In terms of
transport capacity, building a ﬁve-lane road or a metro can probably achieve the
same result. If the end result of transporting people can be achieved either way,
what are the factors that need to be taken into consideration?

8

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

1.1.6 Transit Technologies are Competing with Each Other

In an ideal world, there would be no space or cost restriction. Unfortunately,
investments and space dedicated to private transport is competing against invest-
ment in public transport. Similarly, metros can replace bus lanes and thus mass
transit technologies are also competing with each other. If this is the case what
technical information could be used to help select the best transportation modes?

1.1.7 People Prefer Private Over Public Transport

For several reasons and all conditions being equal, citizens prefer to ride their car
than use public transport.

One reason that might explain such a principle is that people, especially men,
view their cars as extensions of themselves (2007 study conducted for
BMW1). This isn’t obviously the case for public transport. Furthermore, the
car industry spends billion on advertising associating cars with status sym-
bols, such as power, youth, sexiness, etc. This understandably reinforces the
cars’ appeal.

Private transport is also per nature more comfortable and ﬂexible as drivers
will always have a seat, can avoid walking or waiting to get onboard under
cold, hot or rainy conditions. It is also often more practical as it allows
citizens to avoid interconnections.

Thus, in order to encourage people to use public transport, authorities need to
lower fare through subsidies—or exercise coercive
give incentives—gratuity,
measures, such as reducing parking places and imposing city tolls. Public transport
has some cards to play. Journey time is obviously a key potential differentiator in
big cities. Cost when parking and tolls are factored in, can be another key element.

1.1.8 People Don’t Want to Reduce Their Lifestyle

The nature of humans is to react only when facing drastic consequences, and if
given the choice, people won’t reduce their lifestyle even if this would help avoid
global warming.

1The secret life of cars and what they reveal about us; Authors Richard Benson, Dr Iain MacRury
and Dr Peter Marsh; (2007).

1.1 General Transportation Principles

9

Every human being from Canada to Senegal
the
consequences of car pollution on global warming. However, given a choice
and the means, most residents of poor countries would still buy a car,
regardless of the impact. Furthermore, citizens of rich and hot countries will
not switch their air conditioning off, even if they know it consumes more
energy and thus is bad for the environment.

is today aware of

This is to say that only new technologies, better public transport services, higher
costs, or coercive measures will make people switch to more environmentally or
socially friendly transportation means.

1.1.9 Not in My Backyard Syndrome

People want the beneﬁts of new transportation infrastructure but understandingly
don’t want to suffer the consequences of it.

In authoritarian States, transportation planners usually disregard this issue.
After all, the good of the overall society is more important than the well being
of a few. However, in democracy any citizen has the possibility to defend his
rights and use the courts to block any new initiative.

With Internet and the possibility in many countries to review and block initia-
tives through a petition—even those generated by social networks or a referendum
—big infrastructure projects can be delayed for years or killed all together.

These nine principles we’ve just indicated should in our view be considered
by all the players involved in the transportation ﬁeld, be it public authorities,
city planners, consultants, public and private operators, technology partners
and transport manufacturers.

In the following chapters, we will bring a vision of what could be the solutions to
the new challenges facing society, taking these nine principles into account. As it is
difﬁcult to make predictions, especially about the future (a quote, for which there
are several potential owners), we will select a few issues the world is now facing
and new trends within society, which most futurologists agree upon are likely to
have huge impact on mobility.

10

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

1.2 An Increasingly Environmentally Conscious Society

The ﬁrst megatrend, which is affecting transportation, is the impact of human
activities on the environment and the constantly more stringent solutions society is
applying to reduce such impact. In fact, society as a whole is becoming more
environmentally conscious.

Obviously some countries are so much more than others, but everywhere
under the pressure of green activists or forced by the level of pollution and its
health impact, authorities and simple citizens are making it known through
their acts or their vote that society needs to stop degrading further the planet
and hopefully, with clever insight, citizens can start making the right deci-
sions and even start repairing it.

1.2.1 Greenhouse Gas Emission

impact decisions on transport

One of the most obvious issues that
is global
warming. Massive consumption of fossil fuel and the greenhouse gas emission
resulting from it is increasing the planet’s average warmth. Though some scientists
still doubt the impact’s signiﬁcance in terms of temperature increase, it is now
widely accepted by the scientiﬁc community that there is an increase in greenhouse
gas—especially carbon atom—due to human activities.

In the latest forums on global warming, specialists have now suggested
measures, which aims’ aren’t anymore to reduce global warming but rather to
maintain the temperature rise to only 2 °C. Though better than nothing, this
would still have a dramatic effect on sea level, wild life and vegetation and
generate more extreme climate with increased ﬂooding and drought. But even
maintaining such rise will require drastic efforts from most countries, bringing
back their CO2 emission level to levels known 15–20 years ago. These
measures will need to touch most areas of human activity, and in particular
transportation.

Cars and buses using fossil fuel combustion are often criticized as one of the
main sources of such gas emission, while metros and other electrical vehicles are
incensed by public authorities as a clean transport mean. However, this is a sim-
pliﬁed view. In order to compare apples with apples and verify which transportation
means has the lesser impact on global warming, one must compare vehicles’ energy

1.2 An Increasingly Environmentally Conscious Society

11

consumption not only at the point of consumption but also integrating all the
production chain inefﬁciencies.

For diesel and gasoline vehicles, this requires not only to understand their
engine efﬁciency, but to factor in the losses resulting from reﬁning petrol and
transporting it
to the petrol stations. For electrical vehicles it requires
calculating energy loss by power plants, including electrical losses in the
electrical grid (but partially compensated by kinetic energy recuperated
during braking). We know that this is a hot debate between transportation
specialists, but our view is that electrical vehicles can only be as energy
efﬁcient as their regional energy network is, once again factoring in the
recuperated braking energy.

Therefore, comparing vehicle energy efﬁciency means assessing not only the
vehicle’s own energy inefﬁciencies but also for electric cars calculating the network
mix of clean generation technologies (hydro-electric, solar, wind, or nuclear) and
dirty combustion fuel
technology (thermal plants using coal, gas, or petrol)
inefﬁciencies.

1.2.2 Air Pollution

Human activities also have a signiﬁcant impact on quality of air. In many cities,
pollution has reached levels that aren’t just affecting their residents’ health, but is
starting to reduce their economical output. Obviously industries play a key role in
air pollution, but fossil fuel combustion by cars or buses is also one of the main
pollution villains.

Once again, is it fair to criticize conventional cars and buses while incensing
metros, tramways or commuter trains? It is true that the place where the
combustion occurs is important as there are more people in cities to be
contaminated than on the countryside. Obviously the impact on people’s
health is also bigger when smog is concentrated in big cities with fewer
possibilities for pollutants to be evacuated. However, can we consider more
environmentally friendly measures to evacuate particles through a coal power
plant chimney than through the exhausts of a car?

For pollution also, one must compare the direct pollutant emission of oil-based
cars and buses with the indirect emission of electrical vehicles. By integrating the
regional energy mix, we can really get an accurate picture of the more environ-
mentally friendly transportation means.

12

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

1.2.3

Investment in Clean Generation Technologies

In order to reduce pollution and greenhouse gas effects, many governments have
decided to promote clean or carbon-free generation technologies. Most govern-
ments are making political choices to quickly change their energy matrix mix, by
investing massively in wind farms or solar plants, by encouraging the replacement
of old coal and petrol thermal plants, or by making them more efﬁcient.

In the USA and Canada, non-conventional gas and petrol drilling has had an
impact on the power generation network, replacing coal thermal plant by
more environmentally friendly gas thermal plants. Some countries such as
China are investing in new nuclear power plants that don’t affect global
warming, though they are considered by many as pollutant. Germany has
gone in the opposite direction, deciding to close as soon as possible its
nuclear power plants and replacing them by renewable energy, but as a
consequence also using cheap coal from the USA.

All these measures are changing the generation energy mix with three potential

impacts for public transportation:
(cid:129) The electricity consumed is likely to be more environmentally friendly;
(cid:129) As solar and wind generated power increases, stability of electrical grids is
likely to be problematical during certain period of the day or year (i.e., night for
solar and periods with less wind) while transport power consumptions is con-
sistent (mostly during peak hours); and

(cid:129) There is still no easy and cheap way of storing energy and thus electrical car or

bus ﬂeets could be used as temporary storage facilities.

1.2.4

Investment in Clean Combustion Technologies

The automotive and bus industries must invest massively in cleaner technologies.
Under the impulse of government initiatives such as the Californian free air act,
automotive companies must improve tremendously their vehicles’ oil consumption.

Some companies (i.e.: Nissan/Renault) decided to invest signiﬁcantly in
electrical cars while others are using hybrid solutions (i.e.: Toyota) to
improve their overall carbon footprint. As progress in performance of energy
consumption is steady, will there be a time when the energy consumed

1.2 An Increasingly Environmentally Conscious Society

13

through a standard motor is better or similar to energy produced by power
plants? Is it fair to assume that the environmental footprint of an electric Tesla
car consumes as little as a metro or passenger vehicle?

Though there is no deﬁnite answer to the maximum efﬁciency that a conven-
tional car will be able to achieve, we will prove that electrical vehicles are more
energy efﬁcient and cleaner than conventional vehicles.

Furthermore, we will show that the railway industry isn’t caught ﬂat footed and

is also investing in cleaner and more efﬁcient technologies.

These new technologies, such as silicon carbide inverters, permanent magnet
motors, direct drive technology, as well as developing on-board and way-side
technologies for recuperating the energy produced while braking, called
kinetic energy have or will permeate the automotive industry, improving even
more the efﬁciency of electrical systems.

1.2.5 Transport Modes Energy Comparison

Electric cars are more efﬁcient than gasoline or diesel motorized vehicles, especially
when taking into consideration kinetic energy recuperation, while driving in urban
environments.

Car efﬁciency doesn’t always translate into environmentally friendly transport
mode. To use a similar comparison basis, we need to integrate the notion of
capacity and occupancy. Because of mass production and much more relaxed
safety standards, cars have a much lighter weight per surface than buses or
trains. In fact the ratio is almost 50 and 33 % respectively. However, intui-
tively we feel that we can’t compare in terms of capacity a car that can carry 5
passengers on an area of 8–10 m2 with a train or a bus that can withstand at
least 4 passengers per m2 in smaller cities and up to 8 passengers per m2 in
the megacities of the developing world. Moreover, we are all too aware of the
fact that during peak hours, most cars run almost empty. In fact, in North
American and European cities, the average occupancy rate of a car is barely
more than 1 passenger.

However, when capacity and occupancy are factored in, buses and especially
trains have a track record of being much greener than cars, even electrical ones,

14

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

especially in countries where there is a strong culture of public transport. What is
true for energy consumption is obviously applicable as well to pollution emission,
as there is always a strong correlation between energy consumption and pollution.
Is this to say that governments should systematically invest in public transport
rather than in new roads? The simplistic answer would be to say yes, but most
governments are broke and cannot afford new metro or tramway lines.

What is also new, and at the heart of this book, is that there is today a clear
separation between Public and Private Transport. This concept will soon be chal-
lenged by the implication of the new IP technologies on the automotive industry.
The day cars are electric, driverless, and belonging to an operator’s ﬂeet, there will
be no more fundamental difference between these different transport modes, only
semantic. This e-mobility revolution will obviously affect the transport world but
will also have a signiﬁcant impact on all sectors of the energy market, be it the
generation, transmission, distribution, and storage facilities.

1.2.6 Economic Impact of Going Electric for Transportation

What would be the impact on the economy of major non-OPEP countries if their
Transport Minister had a magic stick and could suddenly transform their current
petrol-based ﬂeet
this would create huge
opportunities for infrastructure and energy companies to build the new power plants
required to add capacity.

into an all electric one. Obviously,

For instance, France would need to add about 50 % of its current installed
capacity to address the additional electrical demand. This would create
thousands of jobs and depending on the energy source, foster growth of
companies from the renewable energy or nuclear markets.

However, creating new power plants wouldn’t make economical sense, if in the
end the efﬁciency of these new power plants is lower than the efﬁciency of gasoline
or diesel car engines. The fact is that new generation of power plants are more
efﬁcient than cars in terms of combustion and can reach as much as 60 % efﬁciency
in co-generation mode.

In reality when we calculate the impact of such shift for three big countries—
USA, France and Brazil, which have very different generation mix—we can
calculate huge savings. What is true for these three countries would also be
for any other country relying on reasonably recent power plants. The meth-
odology applied in this book could easily be transposed for comparison sake
to any other country the reader would be interested in.

1.2 An Increasingly Environmentally Conscious Society

15

How much money could this shift generate2? A lot, as for instance, the savings
France would get from such change would be in the range of 13.6 billion euro (US$
17.5 billion) per year. In the USA, yearly reduction in gasoline would represent
around 141 billion liters of gasoline, which would result in annual savings of
around $100 billion.

1.3 Risk Adverse Society

Society is increasingly risk adverse, especially when it comes to environments
where fatalities can happen. Some people might say, rightfully so, that one person
killed on the road or track is one person too many. However, there is a cost to this
choice made by society.

For instance, the railway industry under the pressure of public authorities has
put in place measures and safety principles that have reduced fatalities to a
very few exceptional events. That wasn’t always the case as history of sig-
naling and safety principles have shown us. The railway industry paved the
way for zero fatalities long ago. Efforts to reduce the number of people killed
on roads have also taken place, but with much less drastic intensity. New laws
limiting speed, regulating drinking habits and imposing points on licenses, as
well as enhancements in safety car equipment have improved the safety
record of the automotive industry. However, accidents are still tolerated
because there is a general agreement within society that accidents can be
caused by hazardous situations. The “no one’s fault” excuse is still widely
accepted.

Why did society impose level of investments in safety requirements on the train
industry that have no common measure in the automotive industry? For instance,
why do trains need intrinsically safe equipment or redundancy in software and
hardware but cars can still avoid such costly solutions?

This situation will in our view change, as cars will become more and more
autonomous. This will be especially true when cars will be completely unmanned.
The same safety rules and principles will then need to be applied, to avoid trial
lawyers and class actions.

Though some people might believe that the era of self-driving vehicles will
never happen, we believe that it will come sooner than later. In fact, we don’t
believe that with technology available, car manufacturers will be legally allowed to
continue with more than 1.3 million yearly fatalities worldwide indeﬁnitely, without

2Note: these savings were calculated with 2014 oil prices and would be reduced in 2015 but would
likely recuperate in the mid future.

16

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

being sued or having class action against them. Worst with the doubling of the ﬂeet
size within the next 20 years, this number of fatalities is likely to more than double.

The reality is that many technology and safety principles already exist in the
railway industry, which could be adapted to the car market. Indeed for more
than 10 years now, unmanned trains have been transporting safely billions of
passengers. Furthermore, Private Rapid Transit (PRT) systems already exist
and have proven that cars running on segregated lanes can be unmanned.

The point is that by eliminating altogether the human factor, the metro and PRT
systems have shown that they are safer now than when drivers were at the com-
mand. What is true for trains and PRT will also show for cars running under general
road conditions. Furthermore, other beneﬁts coming from unmanned transport will
permeate throughout society, making the shift from driven cars to unmanned
vehicles even more appealing to society. Moreover, besides these additional
beneﬁts, at least three megatrends will push the advent of unmanned vehicles:
The graying of society, an increasingly pro-litigation society with its impact on
safety requirements and a world where mathematics play an increasingly funda-
mental role.

1.3.1 Graying of Society

The word has never seen so many people over 70. As people grow older they tend
to use more often public transport instead of driving their own cars, though not
necessarily by choice. This is possible for senior citizens who live in urban areas.
But what happens to people with driving or health problems living in low density
areas? They surely also would prefer to live at home as long as possible and still be
able to travel wherever they need or wish, without depending on others. This is why
in the future senior citizens will beneﬁt tremendously from these self-driving cars
and plebiscite their sale. As the number of senior citizens will grow exponentially,
what could still be perceived as a niche market, will become a pace setter for the
industry.

1.3.2 Litigation Society

The reader could probably expect such a megatrend to have a negative impact on
the development of such unmanned technology. Our view is that provided there is a
clear legal framework, unmanned technology is likely to prevail. Such a highly
regulated market as the railway industry has started going that way and won’t go
back. Though in this book we will mainly use the railway industry as a way to show

1.3 Risk Adverse Society

17

the impact of new technologies and safety concepts on the automotive market, let us
focus for a few minutes on an entirely different
industry to understand the
ineluctable one-way road toward unmanned systems.

1.3.3 Safety Systems

In order to understand better the future of transportation, it is good to analyze
the past.

In 1852, Elisha Graves Otis, a mechanic from New York, invented the ﬁrst
safety hoist. By the end of that century the newly constituted Otis elevators
company had brought many improvements to elevators,
fuelling the
“verticalization” process that turned big cities like Chicago and New York in
what they are. Few people realize today the impact elevators had on modern
architecture. By enabling residents or workers to avoid exhaustion when
climbing stairways of sky-scrappers, they allowed the densiﬁcation of people
in down-town areas. Today’s elevator design is more or less the same as the
one introduced in 1903 by Otis, with its gearless-traction electric elevator,
especially if you include the 1915 company improvement of a self-leveling
device that allowed the elevator platform to stop exactly at ﬂoor level. With
the introduction of the push-button in 1924, which made possible stops and
automatic speed, a fundamental change in the industry occurred: elevator
attendants became optional and were progressively made redundant. Today,
only when traveling in developing countries can we still see occasionally
people seating all day long and pushing the button for the clients. In devel-
oping countries one needs to be over 50 to remember seeing such attendants.

If we want to make analogies to other transportation means (an elevator is after
all, a vertical transportation means), we need to ask ourselves why have elevators
become unmanned? There are four factors at play:
(cid:129) Cost: The obvious answer would be that it costs too much to put someone in an
elevator just to push buttons. As a matter of fact, in countries were hourly rates
are extremely low, we can still see a few attendants here and there.

(cid:129) Technological: Development of a relay-based logic, which through push buttons
and contactors allowed the passenger to select the right ﬂoor. Programmable
Logic Controllers (a kind of industrial PC)-based elevators have now replaced
the sequencing of ﬂoor selection, optimizing this selection in functions of other
criteria such as speed of access, energy efﬁciency, etc.

(cid:129) Legal: A transfer of operational responsibility from the company to the users.
(cid:129) Procedural: Emergency procedures taking into consideration the absence of any

trained attendants: ﬁre evacuation, immobilization procedure, etc.

18

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

Why has the evolution from attended to semi-autonomous (people selecting the
ﬂoor) and then to unmanned elevators (people getting access only to the ﬂoors they
are cleared for) happened ﬁrst within the elevator business and not in the auto-
motive or mass transit markets? The probable answer is that it was far less risky and
technically complicated to do this with elevators than with other transportation
means.

Nature of the environment The evolution from an attended transport mean to a
semi-autonomous system requires reducing uncertainty to the minimum acceptable,
for a speciﬁc operational level (Fig. 1.2).

An elevator is after all a cabin clamped to a wire, which cannot collide with
any other obstacle. This reduces uncertainty to its bare minimum. On the
contrary, lanes or tracks are per nature open environments, where uncon-
trollable events (i.e.: pedestrian, next train’s driver braking suddenly, snow or
rain, or even an object parked in the middle of the lane) can happened. For
instance in many metro environments, the level of automation is such that
drivers are there only to manage the unexpected, such as someone jumping in
front of a metro. In order to avoid such uncertainty, unmanned systems even
introduced safety doors that can only open when trains have stopped. In such
monotonous environment, the drivers are kept alert by having to close doors,
a feature that could be done safely automatically.

The human risk factor Most accidents are due to drivers taking on a curve too
quickly, driving too fast for operating conditions, or simply being in a state of

Fig. 1.2 Implementation of platform doors controlled by the signaling system removes
operational uncertainty and allows for unmanned metro operation. Source Author

1.3 Risk Adverse Society

19

fatigue, stress, or under unauthorized substances. When they aren’t due to drivers,
accidents are caused by people in the control center making the wrong assessment.
In other words, the human factor brings in risks that automated systems can reduce
or eliminate.

Firstly, safety systems can be tested under all conditions, especially under
emergency situations. Once tested and validated, the answer is systematically
through software upgrades any new ﬁnding or best
adopted. Secondly,
practice can be incremented to the system, thus making the system even safer.
On the contrary, any change to a process usually meets resistance from
drivers. Thirdly at high speed, the drivers aren’t able to assimilate quickly
enough all the data and react in time for any emergency situation. Automating
and getting rid altogether of the human factor is the best way to reduce
accidents and fatalities.

trends that we can regroup under

Going from manned to driverless systems Under the convergence of several
the word of e-mobility—
technological
Information technology, Internet access, wireless telecommunication, and power
electronics—Public and Private transport are going the same way as elevators:
unmanned.

The railway industry has already implemented for the last century, technol-
ogies and concepts that have limited the harm caused by erroneous human
decisions. By doing this, the safety track record of this industry has been
improved tremendously and now completely outperforms the automotive
industry. However, this is going to change not only for technological reasons
but also under the scrutiny of the legal society.

Whenever cars will become autonomous, zero accident will be the norm. The
question is can the concepts used by the railway industry be applied to the auto-
motive environment? Will the automotive industry adopt a mixture of smart infra-
structure and cars as it is in the railway industry supervised by an operational control
center or will it be uniquely governed by smart cars and dumb infrastructure?

1.3.4 Mathematics and Algorithms

A third important trend that enables such e-mobility revolution is the increasing
importance of mathematics in our daily life, resulting from the creation of more and
more powerful algorithms. Though many people might not perceive it, because it is

20

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

hidden behind software or incorporated into the equipment’s structure or func-
tionality, we live in a mathematical world governed by algorithms.

Most people are familiar with search engines from companies such as Google
or Yahoo. The software behind these engines is composed of thousands of
mathematical formulas linked together by a set of rules applying to the cal-
culation formulas, such as optimization models. These set of rules are making
the systems each day more intelligent. So much so, that the notion of artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) is more and more invoked to describe these powerful
algorithms. In fact, among the traits that we associate with AI there are
reasoning, knowledge, planning, learning, communication, perception and the
ability to move and manipulate objects in the case of robots. Furthermore,
what deﬁnes intelligence is not just one of these elements but the combination
of several of these features working together.

Why is Artiﬁcial Intelligence important for transportation? In our view, today’s
unmanned systems from the railway industry and tomorrow’s unmanned cars can
be assimilated to systems relying on AI. Though this characteristic isn’t frequently
used to describe these systems, we believe it is very appropriate. In fact, whenever a
is usually no longer considered as AI.
technique reaches mainstream use,
However, there is a good reason why unmanned cars are also called robot-cars.
They have to rely on several quantitative models for detecting the environment,
understanding it, and making the right decisions accordingly.

it

Obviously AI raises ethical issues. In the case of unmanned vehicles, the fact
that they don’t look like human beings have so far not really antagonized the
media and the ordinary citizen. This might change when these self-driving
cars will start putting taxi drivers out of business. Will the bankruptcy of an
entire industry raise ethical questions? The fear of robots creating a workless
society will most certainly be used by the taxi industry to try to shield their
protected market. Furthermore, it will also raise philosophical issues such as
who will be responsible for paying the parking ticket of an unmanned car?
From a legal perspective, robot-cars cannot be prosecuted so in the case of an
accident will the owner, the manufacturer or the infrastructure provider be
liable?

Governments will need to address the legal issues robot cars will raise, to
unleash the full potential of these new IP driven technologies in the automotive
industry.

1.3 Risk Adverse Society

1.3.5 Security

21

We make a difference between safety and security. A safety-related accident will be
caused by a failure in the system coming from equipment or software or by the
wrong decision of a human being. Security-related events will actually not be called
an accident as it originates from the action of a human being wishing to harm
someone intentionally.

In the last years, IP technologies have changed the entire security market.
Most readers are familiar with IP cameras and network video recorders. For
those working in high security areas, access codes with biometric detection
are well known. These technologies have been introduced to the train envi-
ronment. On the way-side, mainly the same technologies have been intro-
duced to control key and sensitive areas of the networks. However, on the
onboard environment new technologies allowing for real time view within the
compartments have been implemented. New compression technologies have
allowed for increasing recording capacity on hard disk caddies or even
remotely on network servers.

The IP revolution, which hit like a storm the security industry, has been adopted
in most railway and bus environments. The next wave of new technologies will be
software driven.

Video or audio analytics, such as empty train detection, crowd detection or
proﬁling are already under test in many operations. Problems due to poor
lighting or light reverberation are been tackled with two different approaches.
Simpler video analytics are being integrated at the level of the camera, for fast
analysis and immediate response. More sophisticated video analytics are
being integrated at the level of the Video Control Unit or Network Video
Recording servers. The next phase will be to use such events to automate train
functionalities.

The car industry has also started using CCTV system to monitor car accidents. In
some countries like Russia, onboard CCTV is now the norm and used to protect
citizens in court. In a not too distant future, our legal society will impose CCTV in all
cars, as a way to identify car crash responsibility. With the introduction of onboard
IP technologies, new security risks will be unleashed, such as hackers getting into
the car system and tampering equipment to generate accidents. It won’t be long
before movies or TV series picture car fatality due to software manipulation.

22

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

1.4 Mega Cities

Another megatrend, which is affecting transportation, is the urbanization of society
and the surge of megacities in developing and poor countries.

As countries industrialize, people living in rural areas are leaving in great
numbers their farms to ﬁnd better opportunities and living conditions in the
cities. This creates huge issues. Commuting facilities become a vital neces-
sity, as peasants who tend to be poorer, can only ﬁnd housing on the cities’
outskirts but need to travel to the center to ﬁnd job opportunities.

After a few years of massive internal migration, transportation problems will

increase exponentially within these urban areas.

1.4.1 Massive Urbanization of Developing and Poor

Countries

The world is going through massive urbanization. Today more than 50 % of the
world population is living in cities and this number is likely to hit the 70 %
threshold. As people live in cities, they tend to work far from where they live and as
a consequence, transport which was at the origin of urbanization, perceived as an
occasional need, becomes an absolute necessity in a city where work and living area
are decoupled.

In some rich countries such as the USA, people tend to live in the suburbs and
work in the city by choice. In other countries, it can be based on necessity,
because of the cost of housing in inner cities (i.e.: European cities).

The selection of such development model can have a signiﬁcant social and
economic impact on any city adopting this typical American lifestyle model.
In cities that already have the commuting infrastructure, down-town area can
become in the best case a ghost area during the evening. In the worst case, the
downtown starts becoming a haven for criminality. As things get out of
control, citizens and jobs move out to the suburbs, amplifying this trend. This
phenomenon is often described as the “donut” effect.

The urban sprawl impact can be pretty negative for rich countries but is terrible
for megacities of the developing world. In fact it is far from certain that these cities
can add several peripheral roads or build new metro lines that would be necessary to
cope with such development model.

1.4 Mega Cities

23

Megacities in China are probably an exception. Indeed, China with its new
wealth can tackle the problem by spending lavishly on new infrastructure. For
instance, Beijing will be adding its seventh peripheral road in 2015, which
totals 940 km and will be constructing its 15th metro line. Unfortunately,
poor countries of Africa, Asia or South America can’t even afford contem-
plating public transport investment at all.

The second problem is that megacities of developing or poor countries don’t
already have a mass transit or signiﬁcant road and highway networks that can cope
with the increased demand. Everything must almost be done from scratch, requiring
tremendous efforts.

Third, the megacity expansion has usually been done without a master plan and
can be described at best as disorganized. This means that usually there is no more
physical space to build new roads, Bus Rapid Transit, or tramway lines from scratch.

Underground systems can be added but are extremely slow and expensive to
build. The only solution is to expropriate existing houses or building, which is
also extremely costly and socially difﬁcult to do for city mayors. They can also
conﬁscate existing roads to build a system with higher capacity, a concept for
which we have introduced the notion of “appropriation”. This concept is very
often forgotten by city planners who propose BRTs or tramways. The reality is
that these new segregated lanes in the middle of the city can have a negative
impact on trafﬁc.

Last but not the least, in democracies activists have several laws that they can

use to kill projects.

As seen, any neighbor of a new BRT or a metro line can become a potential
opponent, under the “not in my backyard” principle. Environmental laws that
are there to protect nature are often used as a tool to kill projects even though
the overall impact of a new metro line should be extremely beneﬁcial. In
megacity slums, the fact that land ownership often isn’t clear makes it also a
weapon to postpone indeﬁnitely land release.

This makes it extremely difﬁcult and painful to build new infrastructure within a
reasonable time frame. Construction is stopped for long periods, often resulting in
additional costs to civil construction companies that need to demobilize and
remobilize often. These extra costs are then transferred back to society through
claims or absorbed by the civil companies that then need to increase their risk
provision on their future project costs.

24

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

1.4.2 Mega Transportation Problems of Megacities

In the last 10 years, the world has seen the emergence in developing countries of
megacities, which can have between 10 and 30 million inhabitants. This is sig-
niﬁcant because transportation problems in megacities increase exponentially.
Indeed not only does the city expand horizontally by urban sprawl, it also expands
vertically by higher housing densiﬁcation. In other words megacities don’t explode,
they implode. As they implode through a “verticalization” process, there is no
possibility to build new roads to cope with additional inhabitants.

The consequence of this is that each day during peak hours, many megacities
are at a standstill with 200–300 km of trafﬁc jams and residents loose 2–6 h
commuting. As seen, the only solutions are either to:
– Build underground infrastructure, which is extremely expensive;
– Expropriate houses, which is socially explosive and almost impossible

in densely populated areas; and

– Appropriate existing roads to build new public transport, which creates
other problems, such as new trafﬁc jams, separation of cities along these
corridors, increased noise and pollution.

As any potential solution would take time, many city politicians prefer reverting

to palliative solutions, such as creating restriction on car use.

For instance in Mexico City or Sao Paulo, cars cannot be used one day out of
the week, depending on their plate number. The reality is that such measures
penalize the poor citizens, as the richer ones use taxi or buy a second hand car
to avoid the restriction. As older cars pollute more than newer ones, the end
result of such measure is often worst.

Politicians could use an easy ﬁx for lack of transportation capacity. They could
do more with the existing transportation infrastructure. There are basically two
ways of achieving it:
(cid:129) Increase the number of passengers transported per each vehicle; and
(cid:129) Put more trains, buses, or cars on an existing line or lane.

1.4 Mega Cities

25

1.4.3

Increased Vehicle Capacity

Vehicle capacity is a function of the number of passengers that can be carried by the
vehicle. This is deﬁned by four elements: physical characteristics, safety standard,
comfort level, and occupancy rate.

To illustrate how these elements are intertwined, we will use an example that
everyone will understand easily. A soccer mum’s car could transport most of
to sit on each others’
the team members if the children would accept
lap. However, the law which deﬁnes the safety criterion would impose that
every child buckles up. Thus legally, the soccer mum’s family car couldn’t
carry more than a maximum of 6 children. For comfort reason though, she
could decide to reduce this number to 5 children. However, whenever she
goes to work like millions of commuters, she would most likely be alone in
her car.

Transport authorities have a few cards up their sleeve to improve vehicle capacity.
They can buy larger, longer, or two-storey vehicles. Train or bus manufacturers can
also improve the design by, for instance, putting equipment on the roof. Transport
authorities could decide to change the train or bus comfort level by reducing the
number of seats or inner space dedicated to seating area. They can also take a more
drastic attitude, which is to buy trains or buses that can withstand higher volume of
standees per area, affecting directly the level of passenger comfort.

In most countries, this level is 4 passengers/m2 but in some megacities of
South America and India, they apply an 8 passengers/m2 ratio. This measure
almost doubles capacity instantly, but at the detriment of the quality of ride.
Some potential clients might then decide to revert to their car, defeating the
purpose of such measure. They will then join the cohort of drivers with no
other passengers.

In modern cities of Europe and North America, the occupancy rate is only
1.1 passengers per car during peak hours. Investing in car pooling is one of the
cheapest and best ways to improve capacity. Another way of improving Public
Transport occupancy rate is to increase subsidies.

1.4.4

Increased Network Capacity

Public authorities can also improve the network throughput. Larger and longer
vehicles, running faster and closer to each other can make better use of existing

26

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

infrastructure. Thus, they can play with four variables: the capacity of the vehicles,
the number of vehicles running on the system, their average speed, and the headway
for trains or interspacing between buses and cars. Though train, bus, and car obey to
these same four variables, the way they are impacted can differ.

Vehicle capacity: Besides the own limitation of the trains that we’ve seen
above, the capacity is also limited by the physical network characteristics.
There are many physical limitations such as station clearance and length,
tunnel envelop calculated with jerking, electric grid connection type, etc. This
explains why railway manufacturers must mostly tailor-make their train to the
network and don’t really beneﬁt from economy of scale. The environment of
cars and buses is much more standardized. Roads always have a minimum
width that doesn’t really impact manufacturers. Buses maximum length,
which is mainly function of the number of sections, can only be restricted by
tight curves. For cities that envision using double-deck buses such as in
London city, overpass height may also create issues.
Number of vehicles: There is a maximum number of vehicles that can run on
a track or lane at any given time. However, till this number is reached there is
always a possibility to add extra capacity. Once this number is reached, there
is no point in adding more vehicles, as the extra vehicles would only stay idle
or would need to slow down to maintain the same safety inter spacing.
Average speed: The speed of a line or lane is function of the inherent
characteristic of the vehicle, the safety and comfort of passengers, as well as
the limiting factors of the network operation. For instance, vehicle’s accel-
eration, maximum speed and deceleration are key factors inﬂuencing the
overall system speed. In most metro applications, because distances between
two stations are short, trains are almost always accelerating and decelerating.
Metro car motorization is usually adapted for those speciﬁc conditions.
However, a metro operator must also take into consideration, the passenger’s
safety and comfort when accelerating and decelerating. After all they don’t
want passengers to ﬂy through the windshield, when they apply the brakes.
Another limiting factor to speed is the network operation. Average speed
clearly changes according to railway application type. For instance, metro
average speed will be in the range of 30–35 km/h, while high speed trains will
hit the 380 km/h mark in operational mode.

Though car acceleration or speed possibilities are usually more a function
of the driver’s wealth and his willingness to show it off, in most countries
even the cheapest automobile isn’t
limited by its inherent motorization
characteristics. Infrastructure speciﬁcities, weather conditions or legal speed
limitation are the main restricting factors. Trafﬁc light and potentially any
people, cars or objects blocking road access will also inﬂuence speed.

Bus speed is inﬂuenced by a mixture of all the above, which explains why
generally buses running in urban areas have a problem going over 20 km/h.

1.4 Mega Cities

27

Headway and interspacing: The distance between two vehicles moving in
the same direction is important for network capacity because it limits the
number of vehicles you can add to this system without reducing the overall
speed. The terms interspacing and headway are usually used for cars and
trains respectively. In both cases, distances are transformed into time. For
cars, people maintain naturally the equivalent of a 2-s minimum distance,
regardless of their speed. In the railway industry the minimum headway is an
area of great investments. With new electronics and powerful software, sig-
naling companies have been able to reduce signiﬁcantly the time without
increasing safety risks. This evolution of safety standards that we will
describe in detail in Chap. 3, have enabled through moving block technology,
headways in the range of 60 s. Going from 120 s, which was already difﬁcult
to achieve with ﬁxed block technology, to 60 s can almost double the network
throughput capacity.

1.4.5 Road Capacity

Maximum highway capacity seems quite straightforward to calculate. For con-
ventional cars running on one lane, ﬂow rate is limited to around 1800 vehicles/h.

However, this number isn’t proportional to the number of lanes, as the
possibility of people changing lane will affect throughput but is nevertheless a
good indicator. The number of heavy vehicles, the width of the lanes, driving
habits will also inﬂuence the throughput. For roads, it is a little more com-
plicated to calculate as street lights, stops or possibilities to turn at junctions,
as well as potential interference such as pedestrian crossings and bicycle lanes
will also greatly impact throughput. Intelligent lighting systems, integrating
video cameras on an IP network can improve capacity by reducing waiting
time in function of the counted number of cars.

One interesting aspect of the e-mobility revolution that we will tackle in the
book is the possibility to do platooning/convoying of cars. Under the leadership of a
main vehicle, cars will be able to follow each other a few meters apart. In other
words, thanks to Vehicle to Vehicle communication (V2V) technology, cars will
also be adopting the moving block principles, where speed is a function of the front
vehicle’s own speed and the minimum distance required to brake safely.

28

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

Adopting such driving scenarios, could more than double highway capacity.
We will argue that cars will need to adopt one of the safety principles called
“brick wall”, which could limit such huge capacity beneﬁts. However, even if
the brick wall principle were to be applied to unmanned cars, they would still
increase throughput by around 30 %.

Once the road ﬂow rate is calculated, we still need to factor in the occupancy
rate. Thus in most European and North American countries, we need to add a
1.1 and 1.5 ratio, which leaves us with a real occupancy rate of around 2000
passengers per lane per hour at peak hour and 2700 passengers on average. For
politicians, the easiest capacity win is thus to promote car pooling campaigns.
Adding an extra passenger to all running cars would almost double the capacity
instantaneously.

1.4.6 Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) Capacity

Since its ﬁrst introduction in Brazil 40 years ago, operational concepts have been
improved and have transformed BRTs into a direct competitor of metro systems.

One concept, which is difﬁcult for railway people to understand, is that
throughput of the BRT line isn’t limited by the number of vehicles nor dwell
time. This misunderstanding has often made discussions between bus and
train specialists seem like people living on two different planets. In railway
systems, trains stop at station and usually upcoming metros must wait for the
train ahead to depart the station to be allowed into the corresponding block.
Buses in BRT systems don’t behave that way. They depart the lane and go to
curbside spaces where they can stop to unload and load passengers, also
called berths. There can be up to 5 berths per bus stop. Dwell time is thus not
on the critical pass for overall BRT capacity, as load can be done in parallel.
In other words and if we didn’t take into consideration the departing and
reinjection into the lane, all 5 buses could take only 20 s dwell time, if all
these buses were synchronized perfectly. However, synchronization is
impossible and the efﬁciency of the 5th berth can be as low as 10 % for
random arrivals.

1.4 Mega Cities

29

1.4.7 Mass Transit Capacity

The capacity of metro or commuter trains can vary substantially from one network
to another.

shapes,

size, height,

length and width. For

As the globe-trotters of this world have probably noticed, trains and metros
those
come in various
globe-trotters who have a keen interest in train infrastructure, they probably
also noticed that station length, platform size and height, tunnel diameter and
other network characteristics were also very different from one city to
another. Furthermore, they were probably astounded to observe that in some
countries during peak hour, it seems that a metro departs from the station
when a new metro arrives, with almost no time between trains. In a form or
the mass transit’s capacity.
another,
Although some changes can eventually be made to these network variables,
it’s not easy to adapt the network to the modiﬁcations in demography or in
the neighborhood proﬁle, expected over time.

these are all variables that affect

Knowing that changing existing capacity cannot be done easily, what are the
parameters that city planners should look at in priority when designing their mass
transit network? Should they ﬁx the infrastructure dimensions and let the train
manufacturers come up with the best solution for train capacity? On the contrary,
should they deﬁne the train characteristics and calculate the tunnel and station size?
We are strong believers in turn-key approach and in our view they should avoid both
tendering strategies. They should focus on deﬁning what is the capacity required at
the start of the operations, 15 and 30 years from now and let the system providers and
civil construction companies come up together with their best solution. By focusing
on immediate and future capacity requirements, the tendering outcome will most
likely result in the most optimized solution for the tax payers and the users.

In fact, compiling origin-destination data allows city planners to identify the
likely users, station per station, from one side of the network to the other and
in both directions. By knowing where commuters will embark and get off the
metro, they can calculate the maximum capacity required in terms of PPHPD.
This PPHPD will then be analyzed hour per hour and deﬁne what is the
operational ﬂeet required during the entire day. Two other variables are used
to size a network’s capacity.
– Ridership expressed in daily number of passengers, will calculate how
many passengers have indeed been transported during a given day.
– Passenger × kilometer travelled will also be used to calculate the number
of trips performed and passengers transported by a given network.

30

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

We will explain in the section dedicated to mass transit capacity the main train,
station, network, and headway features that have an impact on these indices. More
importantly, we will describe how standards can impact capacity and how new
technology can increase it.

1.4.8 System Price Comparison

Transportation networks can stretch from a few to thousands of kilometers. Of all
the big infrastructure work, it is probably the most inﬂuenced by the geographical
environment on which tracks or asphalt are laid on.

Even though each transport infrastructure is unique and can be inﬂuenced by
thousands of criteria, there are some commonalities that allow comparison
between the various transportation means. In order to use comparable data, it
makes sense to avoid considering speciﬁcities, such as building a bridge,
digging a tunnel running under a river, doing deep tunneling, building rails
over a 6 % ramp, etc. To get an average worldwide cost per transport means,
one must also factor in cost of land and property, regional salary level and
other characteristics speciﬁc to a country, without forgetting costs that are
usually not taken into consideration, such as health costs due to pollution, lost
productivity due to trafﬁc jams and appropriation of land. Even then, risks,
project and network speciﬁcities still create huge differences, which means
that any comparison would still suffer 10–20 % variability.

In Chap. 6, we will try to give budgetary information about the following inner
city land transport means: road, highway, bus, tramway, Light Rail Vehicle, and
metro.

1.5 Connected Cities

Many newspaper articles emphasize the passage from an industrial era to a civili-
zation of Knowledge. In this new civilization, cities are playing a fundamental role,
both as an environment fostering talent and creating new growth opportunities.

Many Marketing people, always happy to surf on a wave, have coined the
term “intelligent cities” or “smart cities” to describe this new environment.
However, we believe that the term “connected cities” is more appropriate, as
there isn’t yet a mega computer supervising all aspects of our urban daily

1.5 Connected Cities

31

lives. That said, Authorities are trying to associate their town with this
“intelligent city” concept. In fact, many international cities have realized that
they are competing with each other to attract talent. Educated people tend to
look for quality of life when selecting their place to live in. Good transpor-
tation facilities, as well as good social infrastructures such as universities and
hospital, score high on the agenda of such mobile crowds. Furthermore,
young highly mobile people want to connect everywhere and at any time.
They must be able to on the go—be it walking, standing in a bus or in a
metro, or driving—to access all information that they deem necessary.

In order to attract the brightest and youngest, cities and, also companies, will
want to invest in technology enhancing quality of life and its pendent for trans-
portation—quality of the journey. Being able to know when the next train or bus
will arrive and where the passengers must change line is one of these key attractive
new technologies perceived as improving the quality of ride. This is why public
authorities are favoring the implementation of new Internet applications in their
city, aiming at fulﬁlling this need for real-time traveling information.

1.5.1 Constant Network Connection

For the newer generations, being informed everywhere and at any time is indis-
pensable but also seems technically easy to achieve. However, it is only with the
advent of Internet and newer mobile technologies that people can get access to
information on the go.

Instant and constant connectivity changes not only our daily habits, it also
impacts dramatically our social life, with the possibility to maintain contact
with family, friends and co-workers regardless of the place on earth we are in.
Mobile technologies are permeating throughout all spheres of society—
business, politics, entertainment and education—changing our relationship to
information. These technologies aren’t
redeﬁning how we access
Knowledge but even what Knowledge is. Before the advent of internet, a
cultivated man or woman was someone who could articulate his/her thoughts
around information accumulated over many years of reading and studying.
For instance, providing the information on how transport ﬁrst started, as we
just did, would have required many hours of sweating at public libraries
going through several books or microﬁlms. Even then, we would have needed
to be lucky enough to have a librarian with sufﬁcient transportation back-
ground to guide us, or a library classiﬁcation scheme. With internet, such
knowledge is now available at the click of a mouse. With the early days of

just

32

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

internet, Knowledge stopped being recalling the information and became
knowing how to retrieve it. However, with new powerful search engines,
even such searches are becoming easier. Even more so,
in a mobile
environment, where anyone can instantaneously and 24/7 search whatever
subject they are interested in. As search engines become more and more
powerful and information growing exponentially on the net, Knowledge will
in our view become more and more a question of connecting information,
events, or even bits of information in a way that makes sense. To illustrate our
point of view, let’s take an example. Suggesting that transport started with the
advent of domestication of horses and the wheel creation as we just did, is
more relevant than ﬁguring when these two independent events occurred, as
both dates are easily available on internet. However, it doesn’t mean that we
didn’t miss other important factors, without which transportation wouldn’t
have happened.

This raises also the issue about the validation of information, especially in
a web environment. The Italian semiotician and novelist Umberto Eco, in an
interview3 on the impact of Wikipedia (Wikinews 24-04-2010), raised the
issue about validation of information in such a collaborative environment.
Quality of reviewers and correctness of information are at the heart of the
criticism of Knowledge acquired through internet.

Why is the validation of information in collaborative environment relevant to
transportation? In fact, the “Internet of things” is build around these same collab-
oration principles. We could even say that the newer Internet technologies are
inherently built around a collaborative model. Service Oriented Architecture,
Service Delivery Platform, Event Driven Architecture (EDA), Plug and Play
designs, are a few of these technologies. As they are an intrinsic part of this
e-mobility revolution, explaining how they work and are changing the mobile
world, makes it in our view mandatory, in order to apprehend the issues facing the
“Internet of things” implementation in transportation.

Furthermore, as we will see, connectivity doesn’t only apply anymore to human
beings. In fact, Machine to Machine (M2M) communication or its speciﬁc trans-
portation variant V2V, V2I and moving block will change profoundly transporta-
tion. What is true for an environment where people need to ﬁlter and assess
information becomes even more crucial
in a world where no human beings
intervene.

3The Italian semiotician and novelist Umberto Eco, in an interview on the impact of Wikipedia
(Wikinews 24-04-2010).

1.5 Connected Cities

33

1.5.2 The “Internet of Things”

The concept of “internet of things” was introduced to society before the new
millennium. The main idea behind this concept was that everything would be one
day connected through Internet. At the time, the limitation of the IP technologies
made that prediction bold. Today’s Internet revolution is still based around the same
old technology: TCP/IP suite of protocols.

Several times, IT experts have said that the internet was too limited for it to
prosper. The reality is that the IT industry has been able to provide “patches”
and new concepts that allows internet to thrive. With all their limitations,
TCP/IP protocols can still provide end-to-end connectivity specifying suc-
cessfully how data should be formatted, addressed, shipped, routed and
delivered to the right destination.

However, this suite of protocols is being enhanced by new mobile, network, and
software technologies, which will be explained in simple ways for non IT spe-
cialists in Chap. 5. What is important to understand is that these technologies are
being developed conceptually using the “collaborative” principles we referred to.

Even centralized network design (i.e.: bus or tree network topologies) are
being replaced by non hierarchical topologies (i.e.: ring, or mesh), where
fall-back options are possible in case of problems. Service Oriented
Architecture is one of these collaborative tools. In this new world, this
architectural software separates functions into distinct units (services), which
can be distributed over a network and can be combined and reused to create
business applications. Any element connected to a network (i.e.: PC, mobile,
any type of machine) can use the service and provide itself services for other
the use of other network elements. EDA technology complements SOA
architecture because it introduces the notion of events, which can trigger a
service. This software architecture promotes production, detection, con-
sumption of, and reaction to events. Plug and Play technology associated with
SOA simpliﬁes connectivity, as any element (i.e.: CCTV, camera, door, etc.)
can automatically conﬁgure itself and decide which are the services they will
use and provide to other elements. This allows for immediate equipment
connectivity without the need for hard core programming, reducing cost and
possibility of interface errors.

When all the “collaborative” technologies are combined, any equipment can
seamlessly and automatically connect and know which of the million bits of
to the network is actually meant for it. The issue in this
information sent

34

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

technological world is similar to that described by Umberto Eco, where validating
information received is extremely critical. For instance, in the security world,
receiving too much false information (also called false positive) is as bad as not
detecting a dangerous situation. Furthermore and as we already indicated, in this
Internet world, knowledge is not only validating the information but deciding which
services can be associated together to create more added value. In a world where
human beings are absent, data mining software will become crucial. Specialists with
real knowledge in speciﬁc areas will develop algorithms associating events or bits
of information that at ﬁrst glance don’t seem to have any link, unleashing the power
of trillions of interconnected objects.

1.5.3 M2M Communication

One of the limiting factors of old Internet technology was linked to the addressing
of devices or computers through a Unique Resource Identiﬁer. Originally, this
identiﬁer was a 32-bit number (IPv4) but to allow for trillions of devices to be
interconnected, a 128-bit identiﬁer was launched in 2013 under the IPv6 initiative.

With IPv6, the “internet of things” exponential growth isn’t limited anymore
by software restrictions. Every device will have its own identiﬁcation number
and, when associated with collaborative technologies, will be able to receive,
consume and transmit seamlessly information to other devices on the network.
In the next ten years, M2M communication will grow exponentially. Though
there is still no deﬁned standard for M2M, most likely the technologies will
evolve around the collaborative software and architecture we just mentioned.

M2M is changing profoundly railway operation. Automation of equipment,
which requires M2M connectivity, is increasingly becoming a common denomi-
nator in railway yards and garages. Moreover, predictive maintenance which relies
mainly on M2M information is an area where railway manufacturers and operators
are investing a signiﬁcant part of their R&D budget.

Through predictive maintenance, rolling stock reliability and availability can
be greatly enhanced, allowing for a signiﬁcant reduction in railway total cost
of ownership and also reduced penalties for operators and manufacturers.
This trend being pushed by Governments enables private or public operators
to provide transportation services at the lowest possible cost, at a deﬁned set
level of quality.

1.5 Connected Cities

35

1.5.4 M2M Applied to Cars

The automotive industry has been a laggard in terms of development of onboard IP
technologies. In fact, many onboard network technologies are more than 20-years
old. However, the industry has ﬁnally decided to work jointly on a common
standard platform based on IP technologies.

The ﬁrst cars using such an IP backbone are likely to hit the roads in
2015–2016. Furthermore, initiatives pushed by the US and EU Governments
will force all car owners to equip their car with a safety related SIM card
likely to be included in new cars, allowing automatic contact with emergency
centers. By imposing SIM cards to all new cars, these Government initiatives
will create the communication pipeline that will enable a new set of value
added services such as predictive maintenance or automatic emergency calls
as well as create some of the telecom infrastructure that will help push V2V
and V2I telecommunication. By the same token, it will allow for the mobile
advertising market to grow exponentially.

With the advent of SIM cards, an entire array of new services will become
available to car owners. The same revolution that the railway industry is going
through will hit the automotive industry. New added services, such as car failure
anticipation, remote diagnostic will create thousands of new companies in a new
market worth billions. It will in fact profoundly disrupt the automotive market as we
know it. Other market trends and business models are already affecting the public
and private transport markets. How quickly and how deeply they will affect
transportation depends also on how governments can ﬁnd ﬁnancing and funding
solutions to build new infrastructure.

1.6 New Business Models

Around one-third of all worldwide investments needed each year in infrastructure
projects cannot be ﬁnanced by private corporations or funded by governments.
Moreover, with the growth of population and its urbanization, this gap is increasing.
After the sub-prime crisis of the end of the past decade, many rich countries ﬁnd it
increasingly difﬁcult to allocated funds for such big projects.

The reality is that most politicians ﬁnd it difﬁcult to justify big spending while
at the same time imposing austerity measures on their citizens. This is
unfortunate, as big infrastructure projects have the ability to create quickly
thousands of jobs and ease the economy out of recession. This Keynesian

36

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

approach is especially productive in the current situation of extremely low
interest rates, resulting in cheap loans. The reality is that most countries are
almost bankrupt and cannot easily increase their debt level. Furthermore,
some countries like the USA prefer, for ideological reasons, to see their
bridges collapse rather than refurbished them through tax hike.

In Chap. 6, we will propose solutions to bridge the $1 trillion gap, while

reducing the environmental footprint.

Such solutions include:
– Creating favorable laws promoting the private sector’s involvement in big

transport projects;

– Asking the World Bank and global institutions to formally recognize that
public transport is a green solution and whenever the carbon market
recuperates, enable realistic numbers to be applied to metro and railway
lines;

– Incentivize through subsidies or ﬁnancial market institutions the transfer

from conventional combustion cars to electric cars;

– Incentivize new business models that reduce car ownership, such as car
pooling or car sharing, and thus decrease the pressure on new
infrastructure;

– Allow rich people to cross-subsidize public transport by for instance,
allocating urban fast lanes along metro lines, even though this could be
perceived as socially unjust;

– Create ﬁnancing instruments that capture for the project the anticipated
real-estate speculation in a certain city area (i.e.: around metro stations);
and

– Give corporations incentives to invest in big green infrastructure projects
in parts of the word where no private companies would consider investing,
through tax exoneration scheme.

1.6.1 Privatization

Most governments will continue not being able to bridge their ﬁnancing gap for the
foreseeable future. The private sector would have the resources to bridge that gap
but has been incapable or not motivated enough to do it. In fact, many long-term
investors ﬁnd it hard to ﬁnd attractive long-term projects and would be happy to
become potential investors in infrastructure projects, if provided with the right

1.6 New Business Models

37

opportunities. Thus, the easy way to solve the gap would be for governments to
accept that the private sector needs a decent return on investment or reduce the level
of risks transferred to the concessionaire.

The issue for many Governments is to assess what the acceptable proﬁtability
versus risk level should be when considering such risky business environ-
ments as a 30-year road or metro concession. Furthermore, even if this
acceptable level can be found, it is often impossible for Governments to
accept it for social and political reasons. Unfortunately for election purposes,
Governments will still prefer to push through projects that cannot ﬁnd serious
investors, rather than adapting the proﬁtability and risk levels. As a conse-
quence and in the best case scenario, the project will be killed. In the worst
scenario, the construction will start with adventurous companies and then
become paralyzed for lack of liquidities, leaving a no-man’s land in the
middle of the city.

The reality is that Public Transport needs subsidies and privatization of such
service requires a sound legal framework. It is a utopia to expect ﬁnancial insti-
tutions or big corporations to accept 30-year concession risks and to ﬁnance the
project from their own assets and the concession’s operational proﬁts, without any
form of government ﬁnancial transfer.

One of the ﬁrst key factors to successful transport privatization is to accept
that countries’ legal foundation must allow for “Project Finance” rather than
only “Corporate Finance”. Because of the amounts and risks involved,
companies need indeed to limit their potential losses to the equity strictly
required by banks to get the necessary loans. The aftermath of the sub-prime
crisis and the “Basel 3” banking rules consequence have already made banks
reluctant to ﬁnance by debt a big share of such projects. Asking corporations
to increase their equity commitment, while at
the same time imposing
unlimited liability exposure for 30 years, is deﬁnitely a no go for many
institutions.

A second key success factor for privatization has been not to oversell the
privatization beneﬁts. Higher efﬁciencies that can be brought by the private
sector, resulting from lower operating and maintenance costs, are usually an
important reason invoked to justify privatization. In many countries, priv-
atization of transportation infrastructure or services has been perceived
favorably, especially when the level of ﬁnancial commitment or risks trans-
ferred to the private sector was high. However, in some countries where only
the operations were tendered to the Public Sector, resentment within popu-
lation has made difﬁcult the privatization of something perceived as of the
Public domain. The route cause of unsuccessful privatization has often been

38

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

linked to the creation of false expectations. Privatization cannot be the pan-
acea and solve all problems. First of all and as mentioned, it is illusory to
expect public transport concession to break-even in mass transit operations
(the exception is when the operator also owns land, which it can resell such as
in Hong Kong). When heavy investments are required along the operations
(i.e.: doubling of autoroute lane or maintaining rail infrastructure), there is
also a need for funding from Public Authorities. This Government ﬁnancial
help can come under different forms: cheap ﬁnancing, direct subsidies,
minimum revenue guarantee, etc. As Public entities need to pass along
funding to the private sector, a clear legal framework is required.

The third success factor is thus a clear legal framework to enable the
contracting of consortiums to take over the concession responsibilities. These
laws, which come under the name of Public Private Partnership (PPP), have
been pushed through legislature in many countries. Though there can be as
many types of PPP as types of concessions, all PPPs have in common that
they deﬁne the risks that will be shared by the different Parties.

1.6.2 Financing Transportation Projects

There is an appetite for ﬁnancing big infrastructure projects, especially for markets
where proﬁtability can be achieved without Government payment
transfer.
Unfortunately in most transportation systems, governments need to fund partially
the project. This makes transportation project more risky and more difﬁcult to bank,
especially after the sub-prime crisis. Indeed, the main banks that used to do project
ﬁnance before the crisis have reduced the debt to asset ratio of the Special Purpose
Enterprises (temporary entities created with the sole mission of managing the
project). Other actors must put more equity, pushing more risk toward investors.

Short term investors, such as private equity funds, have stayed shy from
public transportation markets, though some recently have entered PPPs in the
energy sector. If the proﬁtability could be increased, the more aggressive ones
could probably be convinced of entering such opportunities. Long term
investors such as insurers and pension funds have in the past entered as equity
partners in big infrastructure projects. However they usually hate risks
associated with the construction period and prefer to transfer this risk alto-
gether to railway manufacturers or civil construction companies. Very often
they are eager to buy back the shares of these companies after a few years of
proven proﬁtable operations. Sovereign wealth funds, another type of long
term investors, have not been really active in the ﬁnancing of big infra-
structure market. With the change of its by-law to allow investment in energy

1.6 New Business Models

39

projects, Norway’s Sovereign Wealth Fund, could maybe set an example and
enable transportation ﬁnancing by these funds.

Private companies are being asked to invest more of their money to foot in
the bill. There are few real concessionaires, which main business purpose is to
take concession risk over a thirty years period. This is why Governments
expect companies that have an interest in delivering the civil construction
works or provide the system to participate with equity in the projects. The
the ﬁnancial markets don’t assess
problem for these companies is that
favorably such investment, preferring ﬁnancial ratios that show that money is
better used in other areas.

As few players are really interested in such long-term risky investments, new

ﬁnancial incentives must be found to bridge the gap.

1.6.3 Financial Instruments and Incentives

We will present in Chap. 6 a few of the ﬁnancial instruments that have been used or
could be adapted for ﬁnancing transport projects.

Most have in common that they are geared towards reducing the impact of
human activities on the environment. Though they could in theory apply to
other areas, their methodology is biased towards forestation or renewable
energy projects. Green bonds, Carbon Credit and Voluntary Carbon markets
have added useful ﬁnancing, allowing several small infrastructure projects in
poor countries to be implemented.

The big institutional players such as the World Bank or important private donors
need to recognize that taking out thousands of polluting cars of the inner cities is as
much a priority of the Greens as saving the green forest, or as important as ﬁghting
diseases in Africa.

Governments from the Rich World should also recognize the beneﬁts of creating

a BRT or a commuter line in their Development Aid Policy.

We suggest that investing in Public Transport projects in poor countries,
should give right to corporate or personal tax exemptions. Providing transport
to millions of poor citizens from the city outskirt will bring job opportunities,
reduce journey time, accidents and health problems of the poorest of the
poorest. This is in our view in line with the deﬁnition of eligible donation
matters.

40

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

1.6.4 Capturing Future Wealth Increase

One of the most interesting ﬁnancial instruments that has been created to ﬁnance
infrastructure project comes from Brazil. The certiﬁcate of potential increase in
construction (CEPAC in Portuguese) works on the principle that real estate spec-
ulation that would inherently result from the increased attractiveness of a region due
to work improvements can be anticipated and promoted to ﬁnance public work.

CEPAC is a ﬁnancial instrument emitted by a municipality (i.e.: Rio, São
Paulo), used as a counterpart for the right to increase the construction level in
a dedicated area of the city and is equivalent to a value of m2 for construction
area. This ﬁnancial instrument has been used successfully to rebuild entire
degraded Brazilian neighborhoods, allowing for the ﬁnancing of private and
public transport, such as tramway lines. However, to be successfully repli-
cated in other countries, CEPAC would need a similar legal framework,
sound ﬁnancial controlling authorities and growing real estate market like the
one of Brazil’s megacities. This would obviously be complicated to imple-
ment in poor countries.

We believe out-of-the-box ideas based on e-mobility solutions could partially
substitute such ﬁnancial instrument, based also on improvement to the quality of
infrastructure.

For instance, some public transport such as BRT or tramway lines underes-
timate their CAPEX, by not taking into consideration the land occupation cost.
Building a monorail or a metro actually allows for road re-appropriation. By
bundling with a private concession the future beneﬁts of road appropriation,
circulation improvement to a large avenue resulting from these new mass
transit system could be used to cross subsidize the infrastructure works and
mass transit operations. Rich people or even taxis would be willing to pay
twice the price of a bus ticket to avoid spending hours in trafﬁc jams. The same
e-mobility technologies that exist on highways to pay tolls without stopping,
would allow people to get in and out quickly from these exclusive lanes. For
those who wouldn’t want to create cross subsidies by mainly improving the
life of the Rich, there would be the possibility of using congestion charges
within the new line’s neighborhood to subsidize the mass transit operation.
The same charges used to discourage residents from driving within certain area
could be applied. In fact, there is no technological limitation to installing the
same video technology that reads your driver’s plate and checks if you have
paid electronically your charges in smaller area alongside the network’s line.

1.6 New Business Models

41

The extra revenues resulting from such ideas could help reduce public transport
reliance on subsidies. Another new source of revenues could be coming from online
research, while passengers are commuting.

1.6.5 Mobile Advertising

Citizens of the rich or developing world spend hours in trafﬁc jams or stuck in buses
and metros. In fact, Americans will spend around 5 years of their life in their car or
roughly 5–7 % of their daily time. If one would only consider available free time
and if we were able to turn the lost time spent in transport into productive time, this
could generate around 20 % more opportunity for people to buy or do research
online.

Half the consumers based in Rich Countries, spends 75 % or more of their
total shopping time conducting online research. This situation explains
greatly the growth of companies such as Google and Amazon. With the
advent of smart phones, product searches are now done increasingly on the
go. For instance, European mobile users are spending more than one ﬁfth of
their time doing online research on the go. This trend is likely to continue and
even accelerate with 4G telecom services.

When we add the craving for new mobile online searches and the available extra
time provided by transport, we can all understand easily why the IT companies of
this world are trying to get their technology into cars or in public transport.

1.6.6 Geo-localization Advertising

Location-based information or advertising uses GPS capabilities to know the
position of a mobile user and deliver an ad for a product or service that can be found
nearby. These ads or messages are triggered whenever a mobile user crosses a
predeﬁned area, which can be extremely narrow or cover an area of a few kilo-
meters. Obviously areas such as train station or bus hubs are extremely pertinent for
such specialized advertisement, as millions of people cross them every day. Public
transport with their systematic ﬁnancial losses could beneﬁt tremendously from
such extra income. Based on a pay-per-click of a little less than 1$, a great chunk of
the deﬁcits could be eliminated, if only passengers were to do a few daily online
searches and the money be transferred directly to the Public operator.

42

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

The reality is ownership of geo-localized advertising isn’t clear from a legal
stand-point. Two fundamental legal principles are playing against each other:
intellectual property and land owner rights. The ideal situation would be that
passengers use public transport portals but this is unlikely to happen.

1.6.7 Portal of Choice

In the past few years, many transport applications have been developed.

“Waze” one of the most well-known Apps has been bought by Google. Other
applications such as Moovit are also likely to be eventually snapped up by IT
companies. By providing real time passenger information without having to
go through the Public transport operator data base and intellectual property,
these applications make the million passengers aware of any network dis-
turbances and the best alternative routes. It also creates a strong motivation
for thousands of passengers to go through the portal of these applications.

Having gone through these Apps’ portals, the most likely next step for pas-
sengers is to do online research through related applications or to be exposed
through geo-localized advertising. Big incumbent operators must fear to see their
brand being commoditized in the future.

1.7 Changing the Face of Transportation

E-mobility technologies can bring fundamental changes to transport as we know it.
In order to unleash the power of these technologies, Governments must make the
right decisions and commit resources to enable their quick implementation. The ﬁrst
and easy decision to make is to promote home employment and ﬂexible hours.
Government should incentivize companies to organize shifts that would limit peak
hour commuting. Out-of-the box ideas and easy measures can also be found.

For instance, incentivizing companies to ask their employees to start work
twice a week outside of peak hours, would have in our view a more positive
inﬂuence on trafﬁc jams than reducing car owner’s right to drive certain days,
based on their driving plates. A simple accompanying measure such as

1.7 Changing the Face of Transportation

43

allowing companies to account for carbon reduction resulting from their
employees’ avoided commuting trips could go a long way in reducing their
carbon footprint.

1.7.1 Electrifying Transport

If governments are really serious about ﬁghting global warming, they need to be
coherent with their declared policies. One of the best ways of meeting global
warming commitments is to electrify transport.

The UK Governments has made that choice and will be investing in nuclear
power plants to support that shift in the midterm, as well as in new mass
transit systems and high speed trains. In the long term, renewable energy
should pick up the extra demand but in the mean time, transport will sig-
niﬁcantly reduce CO2 emission.

Though the initial work and investments might be high, we will prove that the
beneﬁts of such policy on the economy will be huge, shrinking the commercial
balance deﬁcit of most Rich Countries.

1.7.2 Encouraging New Business Models

Public authorities should promote the new business models that e-mobility tech-
nologies are enabling. These business models revolve around the fact that in
megacities and big cities of this world, owning and using a car is expensive and
complicated.

Indeed, ﬁnding any free parking is increasingly difﬁcult, as many city
planners are intentionally reducing areas devoted to parking spaces. Buying
or renting a parking place is becoming out of reach for most families.
Furthermore, driving in inner cities is becoming increasingly nerve racking as
city planners are favoring pedestrian zones, bicycle lanes and public transport
over private transport. Driving is also much more expensive as congestion
taxes or toll charges are applied in speciﬁc urban areas to dissuade suburbans
to come enjoy the inner city’s pleasures by car. In the past, citizens would
have grumbled and just lived on with such annoyance but a megatrend is also
favoring these new business models.

44

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

The younger generation doesn’t crave to own a car, as the older generations did.
For the baby boomers’ grandchildren, holding a tablet or a phone is more valuable
than driving a Porsche at 20 km/h. It makes increasingly more economical sense in
inner cities to rent rather than buy cars, especially when we consider that cars stay
idle on average more than 90 % of the time and lose 30 % of their value the day
they are driven out of the car dealership.

For transport authorities wishing to ﬁnd a quick win against trafﬁc jams, the best
solution is to promote usage of different car pooling services managed by several
new Apps. Because any extra car sharing passenger has no impact on road capacity
and very little on carbon emission, transport authorities should treat car pooling as a
priority all over the world. We highly recommend investing in road infrastructure
adaptation to facilitate boarding in safe areas near main arteries running into the
main working areas.

The following business models have also the potentiality to reduce automotive

footprint in inner cities:
(cid:129) Peer-to-peer car sharing, which basically consists of renting private cars for a
short period of time through Apps or car rental by the hours. City authorities
should provide ample parking access in densely populated areas, to encourage
people to abandon their second car for these more practical solutions.

(cid:129) Peer-to-peer taxi or hailing services is democratizing taxi usage by reducing
signiﬁcantly the fee per kilometer charged. Moreover, these new service pro-
viders are giving credentials to an industry that
lacks such credibility by
increasing timely offer and providing traceability on the provided service.

Not surprisingly, these service providers, of which Uber is the most well
known, are turning the industry upside down and meeting ﬁerce resistance
from taxi drivers. By offering better services for less, they are challenging the
highly regulated and protected taxi market, which so often over charges
passengers. Governments might decide to continue protecting such an
industry for fear of massive retaliation through strikes and road blocking, but
we believe it would be better off buying back licenses whenever applicable
and liberalizing such an industry.

The fact is, the taxi business, as we know it, will disappear ﬁrst through these
hailing services and in the future through the use of unmanned cars. In most cities,
unmanned taxi service will cost 70–80 % less and there is no way taxi drivers can
resist such a price difference. The taxi drivers’ fate will be the same as the elevator
attendants; they just don’t know it yet!

1.7 Changing the Face of Transportation

45

1.7.3 Creating the Legal Framework for Unmanned

Vehicles

Government shouldn’t resist but promote the advent of the unmanned vehicle era.
The beneﬁts for society in terms of accident reduction alone are such that transport
authorities should embrace the enabling technologies. Job losses like the ones in the
taxi industry will happen but thousands of new jobs and new companies will be
created. Beneﬁts to society in terms of health cost reduction, better quality of living
for the elderly and the handicapped, reduced pollution are all additional beneﬁts that
should motivate governments to push through legislation enabling self-driving cars.
As we will see in Chap. 2, there will be a progression in the level of car
autonomy. At ﬁrst, passengers will stay in command and at the last stage humans
won’t be involved at all in driving. At each and every step, governments will need
to support the initiative by creating the necessary laws but also by investing in the
supporting infrastructure, till the private sector takes over.

Driverless cars will happen. The question is how soon? The answer to this question

will depend on how fast barriers to adoption can be successfully broken down.

1.7.4 Barriers to Adoption

One of the main barriers to adoption is cost.

The 2014 price of a self-driving system from Google that reached around
$150,000 will need to be lowered to a range between $10,000 and $20,000 to
be installed in the high end automotive market. To be installed in mid size
cars, the extra cost will need to be lower than $5000. The big car manufac-
turers are working together with their OEMs to ﬁnd ways to lower cost by
miniaturization and mass producing equipment that is still custom-made, such
as Lidar or lasers. According to IHS Automotive forecasts4,
the $3000
threshold should be achieved by 2030. At that price, self-driving technologies
will permeate the entire automotive supply chain allowing for its adoption by
the global mass market.

Another barrier to adoption is legal.

We believe that driverless vehicles are much safer than driven vehicles. The
proof can be found in the railway industry that has been able to reduce

4IHS Automotive forecasts, January 5, 2015 IHS is a registered trademark of IHS Inc.

46

1 Principles and Megatrends Affecting Transportation

signiﬁcantly the number of accidents by getting rid of the drivers or
attendants in the control centre. After the elevator and more recently the train
environment, the automotive industry will go driver free. This will create
fundamental changes in the way the courts judge accidents. Today the likely
culprit is one of the drivers involved in the crash. When there will be no
driver and since judges cannot charge a robot-car, the logical culpable will
most likely be thousands of kilometers from the accident.

This book will give a view on the likely penal responsibilities based on a system
approach. It is indeed our view that the likely technological and business model that
will prevail for driverless cars will follow the same paths as the train approach, with
a separation between signaling, vehicle manufacturing, infrastructure provider, car
owner, and operator.

The last barrier for adoption will be the attitude that people have toward
robot-cars. Though unmanned trains could already be deﬁned as robots, people
don’t have such a close relationship as they have with their cars. Thus, we can say
that for the ﬁrst time, humanity will be confronted with machines able to circulate in
the open, by their own means.

Many science ﬁction novels have depicted the resentment of human beings
for robot. Luckily for the industry, cars don’t look like human beings. We
believe that for the older generation, it will come as a shock to hop on a car
without any steering wheel or brake pedal. As for unmanned elevators or
trains, people will at ﬁrst feel strange but will quickly get use to their
robot-car.

Acknowledgments and disclaimer The use of pictures, or references made to studies or com-
panies and their brand does not in any way suggest that the authors of such studies or the
mentioned companies endorse in any way this book or its content. The author endeavors in
respecting the copyright subsisting any of the graphics, and texts that he uses, to use graphics and
texts he has himself created or to use graphics and texts not covered by copyright. All trademarks
and brand names quoted in the book including those protected by copyright of third parties are
subject unreservedly to the provisions of current copyright law and the rights of ownership of the
registered copyright holders.

Companies and Brands Stated in the Chapter

(cid:129) Twitter Inc.
(cid:129) Facebook Inc.
(cid:129) Ferrari S.p.A.

Companies and Brands Stated in the Chapter

47

(cid:129) BMW AG (Bayerische Motoren Werke AG)
(cid:129) Nissan Motor Company Ltd
(cid:129) Renault S.A.
(cid:129) Toyota Motor Corporation
(cid:129) Tesla Motors Inc.
(cid:129) Otis elevators company
(cid:129) Google Inc.
(cid:129) Amazon.com Inc.
(cid:129) Yahoo Inc
(cid:129) Transmilenio SA
(cid:129) WazeTM of Google
(cid:129) Moovit
(cid:129) Porsche AG
(cid:129) Uber Inc.

Chapter 2
Risk Adverse Society

Acronyms

Alternating current and direct current
Automated people mover
Automatic train control
Automatic train operation
Automatic train protection
Automatic train supervision

AC and DC
APM
ATC
ATO
ATP
ATS
CAPEX and OPEX Capital expenses and operational expenses
CCTV
CBTC
CALM
DSRC
DVR
DTO
EMU
ETMS
ETD
EGNOS
ERTMS
ETCS
EDR
GPS
GSM
ITCS
IP
IMS
JPEG
LDW
LMA
LTE/4G
MADD
MPEG

Closed-circuit television
Communication-based train control
Continuous air-interface, long and medium range
Dedicated short-range communications
Digital video recorder
Driverless train operation
Electrical multiple unit
Electronic train management system
End of train device
European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service
European Rail Trafﬁc Management System
European Train Control System
Event data recorder
Global positioning system
Global system for mobile communication
Incremental train control system
Internet protocol
IP multimedia subsystem
Joint photographic experts group
Lane departure warning
Limit of movement authority
Long-term evolution/fourth generation
Mother Against Drunk Driving
Moving Picture Experts Group

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
S. Van Themsche, The Advent of Unmanned Electric Vehicles,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-20666-0_2

49

50

MSAS
NDGPS
NHTSA
NTSC/PAL
OCC
OCR
PRT
PTC
PFD
RRF
SIL
STO
SDP
SOA
SIP
UTO
UMT
UPnP
VCC
VCU
VII
VOBC
V2C
V2I
V2V
VANET
VoIP
WAAS
WAVE
WLAN
WHO
Wi-MAX

2 Risk Adverse Society

Multi-functional Satellite Augmentation System
National Differential GPS
National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration
National Television System Committee/Phase Alternating Line
Operational Control Centers
Optical Character Recognition
Personal rapid transit
Positive train control
Probability of failure on demand
Risk reduction factor
Safety integrity level
Semi-automatic train operation
Service delivery platform
Service oriented architecture
Session Initiation Protocol
Unattended train operation
Universal Mobile Telecommunication
Universal Plug and Play
Vehicle control center
Vehicle control unit
Vehicle infrastructure integration
Vehicle on-board controller
Vehicle-to-cloud
Vehicle-to-infrastructure
Vehicle-to-vehicle
Vehicular ad hoc network
Voice over IP
Wide Area Augmentation System
Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments
Wireless Land Area Network
World Health Organization
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access

2.1

Introduction

We’ve used the expression “risk adverse society” to describe several elements and
factors of modern society that are growing in importance and creating a durable
impact on the way people see things and how they help shape laws. Although these
megatrends are seen by many as favorable per se, they have consequences that can
create issues for society and will have a strong impact on transportation. Two mega

2.1 Introduction

51

trends play a key role in this new behavior: the graying of society and a society
prone to litigation.

On the other hand, an important mega trend which is the increasing role of
women in modern society cannot be associated as a key factor for a more risk
adverse society. Indeed, two studies have tended to show that women don’t
seem more risk adverse than men.

A 2008 study1 on the Kasai tribe of India showed that it is untrue that the
average female avoids risky behavior more than the average male. Additionally
a 2009 study2 “Gender differences in risk behavior: Does nurture matter”
shows that an “average girl from single-sex schools are found in their
experiment to be as likely as boys to choose the risky behavior. This suggests
that observed gender differences in behavior under uncertainty found in pre-
vious studies might reﬂect social learning rather than inherent gender traits”.
Maybe can we only say that women bring more caring to society? Deﬁnitely
the creation of associations such as Mother Against Drunk Driving (MADD) is
a good example of such attitude. Such a program, summed up hereafter has a
great impact on transportation policies in the USA:
– Education about

the dangers of drunk driving, advocacy and victim

assistance;

– Strict policy on illegal blood alcohol content (0.8 % or lower) and using

stronger sanctions for offenders;
– Helping victims of drunk driving;
– Maintaining the minimum legal drinking age at 21 years; and
– Mandating alcohol breath-testing ignition interlock devices for everyone

convicted of driving while legally impaired.

2.1.1 Graying of Society

Steady advances in medical technology, increase in wealth, better diets as well as a
wide range of other factors have caused populations around the world to reach old
age in growing numbers. Life expectancy of a woman in Japan is now of more than
82 years, while the average world age expectancy is about 67 years according to the

1Kasai tribe of India; Author studied by Gneezy, Leonard and List (2008).
2Gender differences in risk behavior: Does nurture matter. Author Alison L. Booth and Patrick j.
Nolen (University of Essex/Australia) 2009 study.

52

2 Risk Adverse Society

World Factbook of the CIA3. Global population aged 65 and over is set to double
by 2050.

In wealthy nations, older people now constitute 15 % of the population but will
account for 26 % by 2050. Poor nations historically have had very low percentages
of older people, but this percentage is expected to increase from about 6 % now to
15 % in 2050.

At the same time, citizens of all continents, except Africa, are deciding to have
fewer children. Several countries are now experiencing a fertility index of less than
2.1, level at which deaths are replaced by births. This growth in old age population
cannot compensate for the decline in growth in many rich countries, and thus
population in countries such as Japan and Germany is shrinking.

While we all know senior citizens that can be more risk prone than many
teens, the reality is that they are on average more cautious, conservative and
risk adverse. A study published in 20134, by the Yale School of Medicine
in
showed
decision-making.

decreased risk-taking

that with increased

comes

age

To add to this scientiﬁc analysis, we will use the thoughts of Isaac
Asimov, probably the most renowned science ﬁction novelist. In his ﬁrst
library success in the 1950s, “The Caves of Steel”5 an earth police ofﬁcer
Elijah Baley, was sent to resolve a murder mystery on Aurora, a planet
colonized by explorers whose life expectancy was between 300 and
350 years. Hans Fastolfe, an Auroran politician who was a colleague of the
murdered victim expressed his wary of the drawbacks of such a long life to
Baley:
“If you were to die now, you would lose perhaps forty years of your life,
probably less. If I were to die, I would lose a hundred ﬁfty years, probably
more”.
Horriﬁed by all of this, Baley thought Aurorans were unable to collaborate
with one another and too risk-averse, because of their longevity.

We believe that the graying of society will give a formidable push on e-mobility
technologies and especially self-driving cars. We know that older generations still
have a love affair with their cars, especially men. For those who live in the
downtown area, grocery shops, hair dressers, banks, doctors, and all the other
services that we take for granted when we are young can still be easily available for

3World Factbook of the CIA (Public domain). https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/index.html.
4Study published in 2013 by the Yale School of Medicine (If at Levy, assistant professor in
comparative medicine and neurobiology at Yale, and colleagues).
5The novel “The Caves of Steel”; Author Isaac Asimov, (1954).

2.1 Introduction

53

people with eyesight or reﬂex problems. However, for senior citizens living in
suburbs or on the countryside, not being able to drive is a synonym of having to
rely on family or friends to get by.

Transport is freedom and not being able to commute means very often having to
move into old age residences or at least settling into a more urbanized environment.
Having driverless cars would allow senior citizens to delay or even avoid the day
when they need to go through such a traumatizing experience. Furthermore, and as
we will see, unmanned technology is much safer than driven technology. The baby
boomers will plebiscite safer and more reliable transportation means.

2.1.2 Society of Litigation

Already in 1981, A.E. Dick Howard an American specialist in constitutional law
suggested in the Wilson quarterly report6:

we may be well on our way to becoming a “litigation society”. The courts have often served
as a useful “safety valve” – they led the way in ending de jure racial segregation. But of
late, they have tried to resolve an increasing number of social questions that are less
susceptible to judicial remedy. The real difﬁculty, Howard says, may be the breakdown of
old sense of community and compromise that led Americans to settle political disputes out
of court – in legislatures and party conventions.

2.1.3

Impact of These Trends on Transportation

The graying of society and the increasing importance of litigation throughout the
world have three immediate impacts on transportation:

Safety In Public transport, this has been an important investment driver, creating
new technologies, which have reduced drastically the number of fatalities and
injuries. Society doesn’t accept fate in this regulated environment. Although acci-
dent statistics have improved throughout the years in private transport, there are still
too many killed and injured people. With the emergence of e-mobility technologies,
road fatality numbers will need to drop or there will be massive class actions against
car manufacturers or road infrastructure operators.

Security Senior citizens who are very often the most vulnerable people in public
transport need to feel comfortable and secured while traveling. Under terrorism
threats and other security issues, more and more speciﬁc security technologies are

6A.E. Dick Howard; Wilson quarterly report (1981).

54

2 Risk Adverse Society

being developed for public transport, especially CCTV. Here, also society doesn’t
accept inaction, and public transport authorities will therefore cover all stations and
onboard vehicles with IP cameras, which is able through intelligent software to
detect abnormal behavior or situations.

System homologation A litigation society always needs someone to blame.
Homologating bodies’ role is perceived as being the system’s ultimate guarantor,
creating extra hurdles on system approvals, with huge impact on delivery schedule
and cost of all new systems.

We will present in the next sections, the worldwide issues that transportation is
facing in regards to safety, homologation and security, and how they are impacted
by the e-mobility revolution.

2.1.4 Safety Facts and Figures

Safety is the condition of being protected against physical consequences as a result
of failure, damage, error, accidents, harm, or any other non-desirable event. It
integrates the control of recognized hazardous situations to achieve an acceptable
risk level. It also takes into account protection measures against exposure to an
event that could cause health or economical losses. It considers protection of people
and assets.

Worldwide accident statistics According to the World Health Organization
(WHO)7, each year nearly 1.3 million people die as a result of a road trafﬁc
collision. Worst, more than half of these fatalities aren’t even on board the car. The
vast majority of these victims die in poor or middle-income countries (less than 8 %
die in rich ones). Twenty to ﬁfty million more people sustain non-fatal injuries from
a collision, and these injuries are an important cause of disability worldwide. To
bring that to a country level, 32,885 Americans died in 2010 of car accidents, while
over 2 million people were injured!

Due to a quick increase in car use in developing countries, the WHO is esti-
mating that the death number will skyrocket, more than doubling by 2030. On top
of the terrible consequences for the families and the injured themselves, economic
losses due to car crashes are catastrophic. Based on an estimated negative impact
on the economy between 1 and 3 % of the respective GNP of the world countries,
these crashes can generate a total yearly cost for society of over $500 billion
(Tables 2.1 and 2.2).

7Global Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011–2020, produced by the World Health
Organization (WHO).

Table 2.1 Description of fatalities according to Private and Commercial Transportation type

55

Crashes with trains
and rail transit

2.1 Introduction

Transport mode

Cars and light trucks
Pedestrian and
bicycles
Motorcycles
Other
Total
Large trucks

Private transportation
Crashes solely
involving Private
users

26.678
4.930

Crashes with
commercial
highway carriers

3.766
545

156
–

3.989
1.252
36.849
Commercial transportation
Passengers

4.467

245
592

2
−2
837

Employees

Bystanders

30
7
22

Buses
Rail Road
Rail Transit
Other
Total
Source Comparing the Fatality Risks in United States Transportation Across Modes and Over
Time; Author: Ian Savage; White paper published in Research in Transportation Economics: The
Economics of Transportation Safety, volume 43(1), 2013

9
27
3

15
19

883

182

4
–

Table 2.2 US fatalities per
billion passenger miles and
km (2000–2009)

Passenger fatalities per

Billion
passenger
Miles

km

Riding a motorcycle
Driver or passenger in a car or light truck
Passenger on commuter rail and Amtrak
Passenger on urban mass transit rail
Passenger on a bus
Source Comparing the Fatality Risks
in United States
Transportation Across Modes and Over Time; Author:
Ian
Savage; White paper published in Research in Transportation
Economics: The Economics of Transportation Safety, volume 43
(1), 2013

342.03
11.71
0.69
0.39
0.18

212.57
7.28
0.43
0.24
0.11

The white paper8 from Mr. Ian Savage describes the fatalities from the var-
ious transportation modes during the period of 2000–2009. The most
important ﬁnding is that 94 % of the US total deaths happened on the

8Comparing the Fatality Risks in United States Transportation Across Modes and Over Time;
Author: Ian Savage; White paper published in Research in Transportation Economics: The
Economics of Transportation Safety, volume 43(1), 2013.

Table 2.3 Fatality comparison between the USA and the UK, IRTAD 2012a

Measure (2009)

Country

Highways

56

Fatalities

Distance driven (billion km)

Distance driven (km) per
thousand licensed drivers

2 Risk Adverse Society

Rural
roads

17.264
1.423
1.191
224
5.7
6.3
3.9
3.6

Urban
street

12.497
782
2.414
191
11.5
5.4
7.9
3.1

Total

33.883
2.337
4.759
516
22.7
14.4
15.5
8.3

USA
UK
USA
UK
USA
UK
USA
UK

4.122
132
1.154
101
5.5
2.8
3.8
1.6

Distance driven (km) per
thousand licensed drivers
aIRTAD: Database including accident and trafﬁc data and other safety indicators for 29 countries
(2012); http://internationaltransportforum.org/irtadpublic/about.html

American road network. Of these road fatalities, 74 % were car and light
truck passenger related. 55 % of the fatalities were involved in crashes with
no other vehicle, but occurred when a vehicle rolled-over without a prior
collision, stroked a ﬁxed object at the side of the road, an animal or debris in
the roadway, or caught ﬁre. Almost 10 % of all fatalities were motobikers, an
unreasonably high number considering the low biker percentage. About 15 %
of total road fatalities were not occupants of motorized vehicles, but mainly
pedestrians.

Car accidents Even though there are several campaigns against drunk driving and
for buckling up, about a third of highway fatalities involved in the US at least one car
or motorcycle driver impaired by alcohol and almost half the fatalities concerned
occupants not wearing a seat belt or using a child safety seat at the time of death. The
type of road also has a signiﬁcant effect on the fatality risk. The following chart,
extracted from the IRTAD 2012 study9, shows fatality values for the USA and the
UK (Table 2.3).

Based on this data, roads in rural areas have a fatality risk that is 2.7 times
greater than that in urban areas. In general, the lower average speeds, greater
provision of lighting, greater deployment of trafﬁc control devices and fewer
curves in urban areas more than compensate for factors such as the greater
number of intersections and the presence of pedestrians. The safest functional
class of roads is the Interstate Highway System. This type of highway has a
fatality rate per vehicle km that is about half the US average for all roads.

9IRTAD: Database including accident and trafﬁc data and other safety indicators for 29 countries
(2012). http://internationaltransportforum.org/irtadpublic/about.html.

Population (in
thousands)
Vehicles (in thousands)

2.1 Introduction

57

Table 2.4 Fatality comparison between the US and a few European countries; IRTAD 2012a

Year

US

Sweden UK

Netherlands S.UK.N

Measure

Fatalities

42,708
41,259
37,423
33,883
32,885
37,632
303,965

445
471
397
358
266
387
9.188

3298
3058
2645
2337
1905
2649
61,408

730
709
677
644
537
659
16,436

Total

4473
4239
3719
3339
2708
3696
87,032

256,944

5.351

34,850

9045

49,246

2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Average
2006–
10
2006–
10
2009

8799

8345

2009

7701

81,444

15,511

724,417

126,966

516,007

4,758,450

Vehicle distance driven
(million km)
Vehicle distance
driven/person
(million km)
Fatality rate per million
people
Fatality rate per million
motorized vehicles
Fatality rate per billion
km driven
aIRTAD: Database including accident and trafﬁc data and other safety indicators for 29 countries
(2012); http://internationaltransportforum.org/irtadpublic/about.html

123.8

146.6

2009

2009

2009

8272

40.1

72.9

44.4

72.4

42.2

43.1

42.5

5.1

7.1

4.6

4.5

75

76

Safety improvement to infrastructure such as elimination of intersections and
integration of space or concrete blocks between opposite lanes reduce the
frequency of crashes, albeit crashes when they do occur tend to be more
severe due to higher speeds. In general, the riskiest types of roads are those in
rural areas that do not have a middle division between oncoming trafﬁc.

Table 2.4, extracted from the same study, gives the number of fatalities, popu-
lation, motor vehicles (excluding mopeds), and vehicle distance driven by
country. It shows that the fatality rate is substantially lower for each studied
European countries than for the USA.

Compared with road transport, other modes have considerably lower annual

fatality counts, even though the totals are still substantial.
Railway and mass transit accidents Public transport ﬁgures are much better though
not perfect. Fatal train collisions and derailments command most media attention
because they are usually spectacular, even though they are infrequent and account
for only a small minority of railway fatalities.

58

2 Risk Adverse Society

Table 2.5 Main cause of accidents on Indian Railways, per type of users; Indian Railway
yearbooka

Year

Collisions

Derailments

Level crossing accidents

Fire

Other

Total

20
30
16
9
13
9
8
8
13
9

2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
aIndian Railway Yearbooks; (2012 study)

344
279
216
197
136
130
96
100
85
80

83
88
96
95
70
75
79
77
69
70

15
9
14
14
10
15
4
5
3
2

2
8
7
5
3
4
8
4
7
4

464
414
349
320
232
233
195
194
177
165

In the USA, railroads (which includes in that country a very large network of
freight lines) and mass transit claimed an average of 63 lives a year to which
we would need to add 65 fatalities involving pedestrian trespassers (2013
Study with data considering more than 10 years of statistics) (see Footnote 8).
The yearly average in this study shows that there were on the American

rail transit 22 passenger deaths and 3 employees’ death.

To give the reader a rough order of magnitude of casualties in developing
countries, we decided to select India. The following charts show the improving
evolution of accidents in this country with a huge train network but still with
deﬁcient safety systems. Tables 2.5 and 2.6 were extracted from the Indian Railway
Yearbooks10. It shows that the main cause of accidents is derailments followed by
level crossing accidents and collisions.

The table 2.6 from the same yearbooks gives an idea of what are the main
causes of the accidents on the Indian network. As expected it clearly indicates that
at the origin of an accident, 75 % of the time, a human being was involved, be it is
a staff member, a passenger or another person, such as a trespasser or a car or lorry
driver.

Tables 2.7 and 2.8 from the same yearbooks show the favorable trend in the
number of accidents and the number of casualties and injuries per type of people. If
we look at the 2010 ﬁgures, we can see that the reduction achieved was signiﬁcant
with only 0.17 accidents per million train × km.

10Indian Railway Yearbooks; (2012 study).

2.1 Introduction

59

Table 2.6 Main causes of accidents on Indian Railways; Indian Railway Yearbooka

Cause

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

6

13

17

11

16

184

248

284

109

103

118

Failure of railway
staff
Failure of other
person
Rolling stock
problem
Track problem
Electrical problem
Signaling
Sabotage
Combination of
factors
15
Incidental
2
Other
349
Total
aIndian Railway Yearbooks; (2012 study)

20
5
414

11
4
464

19
4

11
1

10
2

14

161

119

120

85

107

78

86

84

6

7
1
2
18

5

7
2

4
1

1

6

1
5

4

6

8
1

86

81

4

3

1
7

15
3
320

14
2
232

11
3
233

6
1
195

8
4
194

76

75

13
4

5
4
177

63

75

3

3

14
1
4

2

165

Table 2.7 Train accident
evolution on Indian Railway
(2001–2010): Indian Railway
Yearbooka

Year

Accidents per million train km s in %

2001
0.65
2002
0.55
2003
0.44
2004
0.41
2005
0.29
2006
0.28
2007
0.22
2008
0.21
2009
0.19
2010
0.17
aIndian Railway Yearbooks; (2012 study)

Bus accidents The following table 2.9 from the US department of transport shows
that buses have a great safety track record. It also shows that the trend in fatalities is
favorable but might have hit a threshold at about 275 fatalities per year.

Public versus Private transport track record The clear conclusion from all these
numbers is that public transport is much safer than private transport. In fact, any
American has a 15 times higher probability of dying in his car than on board a train
or a bus. The odds of dying in a motorcycle accident are just staggering and it is
surprising that in a country prone to litigation, no class action has yet been done
against motorcycle manufacturers.

60

2 Risk Adverse Society

Table 2.8 Number of
accidents on Indian Railways,
per type of users; Indian
Railway Yearbooka

Year

Passengers

Railway
employees

Others

Killed

Injured Killed

Injured Killed

Injured

55
114
157
84
35
168
38
9
52
67

2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

281
595
658
279
86
483
227
245
257
2010
253
aIndian Railway Yearbooks; (2012 study)

27
38
45
28
8
31
24
26
22
9

8
14
29
3
5
9
6
10
12
4

153
168
232
155
181
138
164
172
145
167

175
175
279
159
209
113
151
135
165
135

With such a poor track record, what could the automotive industry learn from the
railway or bus industries? Well, as we will see they can go driverless. By doing this,
the number of accidents and fatalities will drop drastically, probably to a level
comparable to the other transportation means.

2.1.5 Security

Security deﬁnition It is the condition resulting from the protection against delib-
erate action of another human being to harm someone else or damage intentionally
property. It integrates the control of hazardous situations involving malevolent acts
to achieve an acceptable risk level. This takes into account the protection measures
against exposure to someone who causes health or economical losses, including
protection of people and assets.

Nature of criminality The nature of crimes to be committed within public transport
is quite diverse. It includes various threat categories to which several scenarios can
be associated:
(cid:129) Crime: pick-pocket, violence, prostitution, drug trafﬁcking;
(cid:129) Terrorism: conventional bombs, dirty bombs (biological, chemical, nuclear),

stabbing, poisoning;

(cid:129) Fire: Arson, person on ﬁre;
(cid:129) Sabotage: infrastructure, switching equipment, cable theft;
(cid:129) Vandalism: grafﬁti, destruction; and
(cid:129) Disorder: Hooligans, aggressive behavior, racial harassment.

Fear of crime Fear of crime is an important issue for the rail and bus industry.
Passenger growth, and the general health of the industry, could be undermined if

2.1 Introduction

61

s
e
i
t
i
l
a
t
a
F

s
e
h
s
a
r
c

l
a
t
a
F

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

s
e
h
s
a
r
c

s
u
b

n
i

g
n
i
v
l
o
v
n
i

s
e
s
u
b

d
e
r
e
t
s
i
g
e
r

s
e
s
u
b

d
e
l
e
v
a
r
t

s
e
l
i

m
e
l
c
i
h
e
v

n
o
i
l
l
i

m
0
0
1

r
e
p

s
e
t
a
R

n
o
i
l
l
i

M

s
e
s
u
b

y
b

s
e
l
i

m
e
l
c
i
h
e
v

d
e
l
e
v
a
r
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
i
l
a
t
a
f

s
e
h
s
a
r
c

s
u
b

l
a
t
o
T

t
n
a
p
u
c
c
O

s
e
i
t
i
l
a
t
a
f

s
e
h
s
a
r
c

l
a
t
a
f

n
i

d
e
v
l
o
v
n
i

g
n
i
v
l
o
v
n
i

s
e
s
u
b

d
e
r
e
t
s
i
g
e
r

s
e
s
u
b

s
e
s
u
B

s
e
h
s
a
r
c

l
a
t
a
F

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

r
a
e
Y

a
0
1
0
2

t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
T

f
o

t
n
e
m

t
r
a
p
e
D
S
U

;
s
e
h
s
a
r
c

s
u
b

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A

9
.
2

e
l
b
a
T

0
7
.
4

4
8
.
4

4
8
.
4

7
9
.
4

3
6
.
4

7
8
.
4

7
9
.
4

4
2
.
2

0
1
.
2

7
7
.
1

0
0
.
2

8
2
.

4

3
1
.

4

0
0
.

4

9
2
.

4

0
1
.

4

1
0
.

4

0
5
.

4

4
9
.

1

9
6
.

1

4
5
.

1

1
8
.

1

6
2
4

.

9
0
4

.

0
0
4

.

5
2
4

.

6
0
4

.

8
9
3

.

7
4
4

.

3
9
1

.

9
6
1

.

4
5
1

.

8
7
1

.

0
9
5
7

0
7
0
7

5
4
8
6

2
8
7
6

1
0
8
6

0
8
9
6

3
8
7
6

6
1
5
4
1

,

3
2
8
4
1

,

7
8
3
4
1

,

9
8
7
3
1

,

0
0

.

7
5
3

0
0

.

1
3
3

0
0

.

1
3
3

0
0

.

7
3
3

0
0

.

5
1
3

0
0

.

0
4
3

0
0

.

7
3
3

0
0

.

5
2
3

0
0

.

1
1
3

0
0

.

4
5
2

0
0

.

6
7
2

2
2

4
3

5
4

1
4

2
4

8
5

7
2

6
3

7
6

6
2

4
4

5
2
3

2
9
2

4
7
2

1
9
2

9
7
2

0
8
2

5
0
3

1
8
2

1
5
2

1
2
2

9
4
2

3
2
3

9
8
2

4
7
2

8
8
2

6
7
2

8
7
2

3
0
3

0
8
2

1
5
2

1
2
2

5
4
2

s

’

5
2
1
,
6
4
7

8
4
5
,
9
4
7

7
1
7
,
0
6
7

0
5
5
,
6
7
7

4
7
2
,
5
9
7

3
5
0
,
7
0
8

9
5
9
,
1
2
8

6
3
4
,
4
3
8

8
0
3
,
3
4
8

3
9
9
,
1
4
8

1
5
0
,
6
4
8

0
0
0
2

1
0
0
2

2
0
0
2

3
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

6
0
0
2

7
0
0
2

8
0
0
2

9
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

a

0
1
0
2

s
t
c
a
F

h
s
a
r
C

s
u
B
d
n
a

k
c
u
r
T

e
g
r
a
L
/
n
o
i
s
i
v
i
D
s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
A
S
C
M
F

;
s
e
h
s
a
r
c

s
u
b

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

0
1
0
2

t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
T

f
o

t
n
e
m

t
r
a
p
e
D
S
U

62

2 Risk Adverse Society

stations were to become places which people would rather avoid. Security measures
such as implementing CCTV systems clearly reduce malevolent acts.
On the contrary, in private transport, the type of crime is rather limited to carjacking
and auto theft. With self-driving technology, we will see that cyber terrorism will
become possible in the future.

2.1.6 Homologation

Homologation deﬁnition It is the granting by an authorized organization to operate
or sell a given product or system, according to safety and other technical
requirements.

Homologation bodies play mainly two important roles:
(cid:129) Making sure that a product or system meets the speciﬁc technical requirements

or the general technical requirements, as indicated in a standard; and

(cid:129) Giving the authorization to operate under safety conditions.
The ﬁrst role can be considered a traditional role of homologating bodies, whereas
the second is quite new and becoming increasingly important.

Railway standards The railway market is highly regulated. The vast majority of
products and equipment applied in such environments must meet many stringent
standards. To give the reader an idea of these norms, we’ve indicated some of the
most important railway standards:

(cid:129) EN 15 227: Requirements of crash safety;
(cid:129) EN 15 085: Welding of railway vehicles;
(cid:129) EN 45 545/DIN 5510 EBA: Guideline for ﬁre protection requirements;
(cid:129) EN 50 155: Electrical equipment, requirements on hardware;
(cid:129) EN 61 508: Functional safety, electrical systems;
(cid:129) EN 50 121: Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC);
(cid:129) EN 50 126: RAMS LCC Management; and
(cid:129) EN 50 128/EN 50 129: Software/safety proof.

Authorization to operate In a risk adverse society, governments and administrative
bodies want to be sure that a metro or train will operate safely under any condition.
More importantly, they want to be sure that if any accidents happen, there will be
someone to blame. Till a few years ago, these homologating bodies were there
mainly to review the information supplied by the engineering or manufacturing
companies. However, they are now being seen as the guarantor of the system safety.
Not only have these companies been prosecuted in case of accidents, but also their
employees have been personally liable to criminal inquiries.

2.1 Introduction

63

This simple change of status has created huge bottlenecks in the approval
process, as their employees now request much more details before approving
personally safety related solutions. This has also had a drastic impact in the
volume of documents that must be supplied before approval. As a conse-
quence, delivery schedule of European train suppliers haven’t been met in the
last years. In fact, this movement towards more stringent homologation has
been estimated by some specialists as adding as much as one to two years to
deliveries. A consequential damage of this change in status and role is that
important extra costs have been added to manufacturers or system integrators
in an industry known for very low margins. Unless the industry is able to
change its processes to adapt to these new demands, the extra costs will be
passed to society through higher taxes or more expensive fares.

Safety improvements do not come cheap but whenever new accidents happen,
there will always be public outcry for more safety measures. As one of our nine
principles is that all transportation means compete against each other, all these
measures are pricing out trains in regards to cars or buses. Luckily two important
elements should help the railway industry. First and as we will see in the next
section,
the railway industry has shown resilience to new safety regulations
throughout its history and has a strong embedded safety culture. Second and
probably more importantly, in a litigation society, no industry can go on forever
allowing millions to be killed or injured. The day all vehicles are unmanned, the
same safety concepts, and stringent regulation will be applied to the automotive and
bus industries, leveling the playing ﬁeld.

2.2 Safety Concepts

Safety of passengers has always been a key concern of public transport authorities.
No politician or operator’s President in his or her right mind can show complacency
when the life of passengers is involved. On the other hand, car and motorcycle
manufacturers have mostly been able to escape costly legal battles, except when
class actions were able to prove that the deaths or accidents were due to equipment
malfunction. In cases where accidents were due to poor road state or bad signaling,
infrastructure owners have been able to escape such litigation, because of the
difﬁculty of proving that such accidents were caused by malfunctioning infra-
structure. How can someone pushing his or her way into a train through partially
closed doors successfully sue the metro operator for any injuries suffered by his or
her act, when someone hitting an icy patch on the road can’t?

The reality is that there is a double standard measure. Private transport industry
can invoke the act of God principle or the “he took his chance” syndrome. Public
transport and especially the train industry must on the contrary plan for all types of

64

2 Risk Adverse Society

conditions, even if this means increasing tremendously the cost of trains or its
railway infrastructure, even though the probability of such event occurring is
negligible. As we’ve just seen,
the safety homologation process is becoming
increasingly complex, lengthy, and thus expensive, reducing the competitiveness of
the railway transport means in regards to private transport. Imagine if car manu-
facturers had to build in fail-safe systems to ensure braking under any conditions, or
equipment redundancy to ensure that any equipment malfunction would automat-
ically be taken over by substituting equipment.

Everyone within the private transport chain, be it manufacturers, infrastruc-
ture operators as well as private car owners can still invoke the “fate” excuse
to avoid being prosecuted. On the other hand, under the megatrend of a risk
adverse society and under the inﬂuence of a litigation society, laws have been
getting tougher for railway or bus employees responsible for gross negligence
involved in accidents. Recently, railway employees responsible for accidents
have been trialed and arrested if found guilty. It has not always been that way.
At the beginning of the era of train transportation, risks were part of train
travel. Today even a small derailment without any onboard passenger is likely
to make the newspaper headlines. Is the private transportation going that
way?

The ﬁrst signs of going in that direction are there. Under the assaults of the
litigation society, drunk or over-speeding drivers must now respond rightfully so
for their acts criminally. Things are changing and we believe that with the new
e-mobility technologies, the day isn’t far where any car accident involving casu-
alties will be investigated and the responsible party be it manufacturer, infra-
structure, driver or car owner, prosecuted. With the emergence of new technologies
allowing for driverless cars, this trend will accelerate. In order to understand how
e-mobility is likely to inﬂuence safety in the automotive industry, let’s take a look
at the evolution of safety in the railway industry. We could ideally learn how
railway safety could help shape a safer automotive environment or at least see how
the automotive industry is likely to evolve from a safety perspective in the coming
years.

2.2.1 Railway Safety Concepts

Trains being guided by ﬁxed rails are uniquely susceptible to collision, unlike cars
or buses. Furthermore, trains cannot stop as quickly as automobiles, and frequently
operate at speeds that do not enable them to stop within the driver’s sighting
distance. Thus safety was from the start one of the top priorities of any new train
operation, though fate was at the start an inherent part of the journey.

2.2 Safety Concepts

65

In the early days of the railway adventure, horse mounted ﬂagmen preceded
trains. Hand and arm signals were then used to direct train drivers. To
compensate for poor visibility conditions (i.e.: fog, rain, snow), wayside
attendants introduced in the 1830s elevated ﬂags and lanterns, which could be
seen from far away. However, many accidents still occurred. So much so, that
in 1889, England introduced the ﬁrst safety regulation (Regulation of
Railways Act), which forced the application of interlocked block signaling.
Almost simultaneously, the USA introduced similar regulation.

Regulation evolved and new technologies were developed, but the three main
safety principles that were established at the end of that century are still applied
today:
(cid:129) Locking a section of the railway;
(cid:129) Making sure that no trains occupy such section; and
(cid:129) Insuring that the system’s integrity is maintained throughout operations.

Block interlocking It is a very simple concept: under normal circumstances, railway
sections—known as blocks—can allow only one train at a time. Thus, trains cannot
collide with each other if they are not permitted to occupy simultaneously the same
section of tracks. However, this is only a certainty if the trains are spaced far
enough apart to ensure that they cannot collide, taking into consideration factors
such as speed, braking time, etc.

In the early railway days, signalmen were responsible for ensuring that any
switch was set correctly before allowing a train to proceed. Early interlocking
systems used mechanical devices both to operate the signaling appliances and
to ensure their safe operation. Beginning around the 1930s, electrical relay
interlocking was used and since the late 1980s, new interlocking systems
have tended to be electronic based.

Block signaling This is the second safety principle: signaling to the next train
driver (or an unmanned train today) that no train is in that section.

At the beginning of the railway adventure, employees were standing at
intervals along the line with a chronometer and used hand signals to inform
train drivers that a previous train had passed, as well as when it did so.
However, the signalmen couldn’t know whether the train had cleared the line
ahead, so if this preceding train had stopped for whatever reason, the fol-
lowing train driver would have no way of knowing it before it was too late.
Even though drivers were expected to slow down when a train had passed

66

2 Risk Adverse Society

very recently, accidents were frequent then. With the use of telegraph, it
suddenly became possible for signalmen in a station or at an interlocking
tower to send a message to conﬁrm that a train had passed and that a speciﬁc
block was cleared. This safety enhancement became known as the “absolute
block system”. Fixed mechanical signals began replacing the hand signals
from the 1830s. When a train passed into a block section, signalmen would
protect that block by setting mechanically the signal to “occupied”. When an
unoccupied message was received, signalmen would move the signal into the
“clear” position.

With the 1989 legislation, Great Britain made mandatory the use of block sig-
naling together with interlocking for all passenger railways. Based on these two
principles, railway engineers came up afterward with new developments to increase
safety on the wayside, on board the train and at the controllers’ level in the station,
and more recently within the control centers.

Integrity The next safety issue railway engineers tried to solve was that even
though a train might have left a block section, there was always the possibility that a
few wagons had separated from the front locomotive. This safety problem which
can be described as the “carriage integrity” principle was especially critical for long
freight convoy. The other integrity issue that needed to be solved was the integrity
of the railway tracks. In long distance freight operations like the ones in North
America, freight trains could travel through forest for thousands of miles without
meeting anyone. Being able to identify that the tracks weren’t broken was a key
issue.

2.2.2 Safety Procedures

Things don’t always go as planned. To address issues coming from abnormal or
emergency situations, the railway engineers came up with safety operational mode,
also known as degraded modes.

Degraded mode safety principles: Under normal weather conditions (not
under misty or rainy conditions) trains were allowed at the low speed of
30 km/h, a velocity judged sufﬁciently low to enable safe braking during sight
driving, to overpass signals indicating the line ahead was occupied. This
operating mode was called “permissive block”. In order to split or join trains
together or even rescue failed trains, the operator had to allow multiple trains
to enter in an absolute block. In giving authorization, signalmen needed to
ensure that drivers knew precisely what to expect ahead, and act in a safe

2.2 Safety Concepts

67

manner. In such situation, the signal would remain at “danger” and the driver
could pass that signal at low speed.

2.2.3

Interoperability

Interoperability is a newer concept not related to safety but more to economics or to
a political vision. Convergence of rail networks is promoted by governments.
Countries seek to build interoperable networks, and international organizations seek
to build macro-regional and continental networks. For instance, the EU has set out
to develop interoperable freight and passenger rail networks across its entire area,
and is seeking to standardize gauge, signaling, and electrical power systems.

Although interoperability decision isn’t made for safety reasons, it has impli-
cation for safety. Once the decision is made to integrate various elements of a
system, these elements need to work together in a safe way. Physical but also
conceptual interoperability needs to be sought to integrate various rail networks.

The most obvious railway interoperability parameter is the gauge similarity.
Rolling stock on the network must have wheel sets that are compatible with
the gauge, and therefore the gauge is a key parameter in determining inter-
operability between two lines. There are many other parameters, such as
electro-magnetic compatibility, voltage, compliance with control system
parameters such as the signaling system, axle load, loading envelope, etc.

2.2.4 WaySide Safety Technologies

Railway engineers came up with several technologies to solve the issues of sig-
naling, interlocking, and integrity. On most railways, physical signals are erected at
the line side to indicate the drivers whether the line ahead is occupied and to ensure
that sufﬁcient space exists between trains to allow them to stop.

Mechanical signal Older forms of signal displayed their different aspects by their
physical position.

The earliest types comprised a board that was either turned face-on and fully
visible to the driver, or rotated so as to be practically invisible. While this type
of signal is still in use in some countries (e.g. France and Germany), by far the

68

2 Risk Adverse Society

most common form of mechanical signal worldwide is the semaphore signal
(introduced as way back as 1842). This comprises a pivoted arm that can be
inclined at different angles. Each angle would deﬁne a level of risk.

Color light signal On most modern railways, color lights have largely replaced
mechanical signals as they can display the same aspects at nights and days and
require less maintenance.

Although signals vary widely between countries, and even between railways
within a given country, a typical aspect would be (as on roads):
– Green: run to the next line speed;
– Yellow: Prepare to ﬁnd next signal displaying red; and
– Red: Stop.

The following two technologies were used mainly to help identiﬁed cleared

blocks:

Axle counter Using axle counting is a simple method of determining the occupied
status of a block. These devices located at the block’s beginning and end count the
number of axles entering and leaving. If the numbers accounting for axles leaving
and entering the block are the same, then the block is assumed to be clear.

Track circuit Its principle is a relatively simple alternative: the rails at either end of
each section are electrically isolated from the next section and an electrical current
runs through both running rails at one end. A fail-safe relay at the other end is
connected to both rails. When the section is unoccupied, the relay coil closes the
electrical circuit, and is thus energized. However, when a train enters the section, it
short circuits the current in the rails, and de-energizes the relay, indicating the same
token that the block is occupied. This method does not explicitly need to check that
the entire train has left the section. If part of the train is left in the section, this part
will continue to be detected by the track circuit.

This type of circuit is also used to detect the absence of trains, both for the
purpose of setting the signal indication and for providing various interlocking
functions—for example, not permitting switching points to be moved when a
train is standing over them. Electrical circuits are also used to prove that
points are in the appropriate position before a signal supervising them may be
cleared.

2.2 Safety Concepts

69

Track integrity check Rail breaks are a serious threat to operation and to passengers.
Another interesting feature of track circuit is that it can automatically detect some
types of track defect such as a clear broken rail, though cracked rails cannot be
identiﬁed, as current can still pass through. Many companies are working on
alternative technologies such as ultrasonic or electromagnetic broken rail detector or
similar other technologies. All these technologies have in common that they send a
ﬂow in the rail which measures any variation in regards to a normal response time or
pattern. These systems are installed either on the trains or on maintenance machines.

2.2.5 Fixed, Semi-Fixed, and Moving Block Principles

As we’ve seen, railway engineers came up with the concept of block which forbids
the entry of a new train before the previous train exits such block. Without changing
this safety principle, the engineers worked throughout the years to shorten the
spacing between the blocks. Until recently, this spacing was ﬁxed along the tracks
and depending on the operational mode, its length was more or less important. With
the need to transport thousands of commuters during peak hours, spacing became
critical because reducing it meant increasing signiﬁcantly the operational capacity.
Headway Space between two vehicles, running on the rails, inﬂuences directly the
system’s capacity. It is a direct consequence of the minimum stopping distance
required to bring a train to a complete stop. The stopping distance is the sum of the
distances a train will run due to the driver’s perception and reaction time, and the
distance a vehicle will travel from the point when its brakes to when it comes to a
complete stop. It is primarily affected by the vehicle’s speed and the coefﬁcient of
friction between wheel and rail surface.

The railway industry came up with the concept of headway, which translates
distance into time. The minimum safe headway measured tip-to-tail (from the front
to the end of a train) deﬁned by the braking performance is on a ﬂat section (on a
slope, we would need to take into consideration the gravity impact):

T min ¼ L=V þ tr þ Pr þ kV=2 1=af (cid:2) 1=al

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

;

where:
Tmin minimum safe headway time in minute;
L
V
tr
Pr
af

length of the vehicle;
speed of the vehicle;
reaction time;
perception time;
maximum braking deceleration of the following train in m/s2;

70

al
k

maximum braking deceleration of the leading train in m/s2; and
arbitrary safety factor superior or equal to 1.

2 Risk Adverse Society

Let’s calculate the minimum theoretical headway, using realistic values for a
light metro operation, with a driver. We can select a 100 m long EMU
composed of 4 cars train-set. A speed of 80 km/h (22 m/s) is typical of metro
operation’s maximum speed,
running between two stations. 1.5 and
0.5 s for reaction time and perception respectively can be considered accurate
values.

For a metro car of this length, the average braking deceleration would be
around 1.2 m/s2, but we could use an emergency braking value of around
about 1.38 m/s2. A higher value of 1.5 m/s2 is possible but could cause
injuries to passengers who would fall. As railway safety rules require that the
minimum distance considers absolute distances (also called “brick wall”
stopping), this means that the speed of the leading train shouldn’t be con-
sidered. With a safety factor of 1.5, the minimum headway time would be

Ttot ¼ 100=22 þ 2 þ 1:5 (cid:3) 22=2 (cid:3) 1=1:38

ð

Þ ¼ 18:5 s:

With an unmanned system, the 2 s due to perception and reaction time

would be eliminated.

would be around 230–250 m.

Based on this 18.5 s, the braking distance for such a train conﬁguration

Calculating operational headway is much more complex than what we’ve just
done, as it requires taking into consideration other safety factors such as overlap-
ping distance, as well as integrating an intermediary signaling for safety reasons and
the dwell time at stations. To complicate matters even more, some metro operations
can consider up to three-signal spacing (the following graph (Fig. 2.1) shows
two-signal spacing).

Line of sight

Following Train

Overlap

Front Train

Headway distance

Sigthing
distance

Signal spacing
distance

Signal spacing
distance

Overlap
distance

Train length

Fig. 2.1 Headway distance considering two-signal spacing. Source Author

2.2 Safety Concepts

71

Fixed block As seen, a ﬁxed block signaling solution allows a single train to
occupy a speciﬁc block of the railway line. As a train or metro moves along the
track, it will occupy blocks which prevent another train from entering that area;
mechanical or color light signals provide information to the driver on available
blocks and routes. Railway engineers calculate the blocks’ length using speed,
grades, stopping areas, operational properties of the train, and location of physical
elements such as switches and stations. Once the blocks’ length has been calculated,
signals are physically placed on the line to instruct drivers on scheduling and
routing information.

For many lightly operated lines, ﬁxed block length isn’t an issue. For these
non mass transit lines, railway designers usually favor positioning the blocks
at the start and end of the stations. The following operational modes still use
mainly such positioning:
– Timetable: trains following a schedule; and
– Train order: messages sent from a central dispatcher to line side station
operator and train crews (regarded as immutable command orders), which
control and protect train movements.

However, when system capacity starts to be an issue, as in mass transit
operations, designers usually put the blocks with the start and end of the
signal levels. The lengths of blocks are then designed to allow trains to
operate as frequently and quickly as safely possible. A lightly used line might
have blocks many kilometers long, but a busy commuter line might have
blocks only a few hundred meters long.

As indicated, the previous headway formula would need to integrate the overlap,
additional spacing distances, and the dwell time at stations (necessary time for
passengers to hop on and off the metro). When all these distances and additional
safety time are factored in, the minimum headway time, in which metros can
operate safely with ﬁxed block technology, is around 90 s. As we will see for many
mass transit operators, this isn’t good enough and this is why technology providers
have been trying to introduce a newer technology.
Semi-moving block technology In the early twenty-ﬁrst century, companies tried to
adapt ﬁxed block technology to enable more and more trains to operate on the
heavy commuter and metro lines, on shorter spacing distance. With blocking
spacing calculated to their bare minimum, operating systems could almost simulate
the performance of moving block technologies. However, technology providers are
now all proposing moving block technology, which changes the concept of spacing.
Moving block technology One disadvantage of having ﬁxed blocks is that the faster
trains are allowed to run, the longer the stopping distance, and therefore the longer
the blocks need to be. This obviously decreases the line’s capacity (Fig. 2.2).

72

2 Risk Adverse Society

Occupancy

Fixed block technology

Line of sight

Following Train

Occupancy

Overlap

Front Train

Moving block technology

Occupancy

Occupancy

Following Train

Front Train

Train length

Safety
zone

Safety
zone

Train length

 

Fig. 2.2 Distance comparison between ﬁxed and moving block technologies. Source Author

The spacing concept of moving block system doesn’t take into consideration two
ﬁxed points on the line but rather a safety zone around each moving train that no
other train is allowed to enter. Similar to the calculation of ﬁxed block length, this
safety zone is calculated using speed, grades, and the operational properties of the
train. An additional buffer zone is provisioned around the train, which can vary
depending on the location of the vehicle and its surrounding elements.

Normal operating and worst-case scenarios are simultaneously considered when
calculating this safety zone. Normal braking rates are used for calculating safety
stopping distances. Other factors integrated in the calculation are positional
uncertainty, runaway propulsion, and delays in brake application. A guaranteed
emergency braking rate is also applied.

This safety zone, which is calculated in real time by a vehicle on-board con-
troller (VOBC) and centralized computers, depends on knowledge of the precise
location, speed, and direction of each train, which is determined by a combination
of several sensors:
(cid:129) Passive markers along the track: Track-based transponders are activated by a
low-frequency signal, which receives its energy from a passing train and
transmits data to the train. Typical data transmitted by ﬁxed balise typically
includes the location of the balise, the geometry of the line, such as curves and
gradients, as well as any speed restrictions;

(cid:129) Active markers along the track: Track-based transponders are powered from
the signaling supply that continuously sends packets of information to passing
trains;

(cid:129) Train-borne tachometers: This technology is based upon the principle of
detecting rotational wheel speed by means of a pulse produced by a transducer
and calculating any deviation of distance between two markers;

2.2 Safety Concepts

73

Moving block technology

Radio transmission

Traffic Control 
center

Downlink data:
Movement Authority

Interlocking 1 

Speed

Calculated
by VOBC

Uplink data:
Train position and speed

Following Train

Radio 
transmission

Front Train

Radio
Transmission

Interlocking 1 
supervision

Interlocking 2 
supervision

Interlocking 1

Train length

Safety
zone

Safety
zone

Train length

Fig. 2.3 Illustration of moving block transmission technology. Source Author

(cid:129) Speedometers such as GPS systems: They cannot be used alone, because they
don’t work in tunnels (see section on GPS for more technical information); and

(cid:129) Wayside signals: With moving block technology, they are unnecessary.

It is important to mention that the occupancy calculated in these systems must
include a safety margin for location uncertainty added to the length of the train.
This safety margin depends on the accuracy of the train’s odometers and sensing
devices.

On a moving block system, the line is usually divided into sections, managed on
the wayside by one interlocking equipment. Each interlocking equipment is con-
trolled in real time by a computer at the control center level. As shown in the
following illustration (Fig. 2.3), this control center receives and downloads data to
all ﬂeet trains. In such a system, the train position and its braking curve are con-
tinuously calculated by the train’s VOBC, and then communicated via radio to the
wayside equipment.

Based on the speed and train position data received from the trains, the wayside
equipment is able to establish protected areas, called Limit of Movement Authority
(LMA), up to the nearest obstacle (i.e., the front train, or whatever obstacles, such
as an end of line) (Fig. 2.4).

2.2.6 WaySide Interoperability Technologies

Things that aren’t interoperable per nature cannot work together.

Track gauge This was one of the main reasons why track gauge was originally so
different from one country to the other, as many countries built different systems in
order to avoid invasion, limit freight competition from neighboring countries, or
simply adopted the gauge system from their colonial power.

74

2 Risk Adverse Society

Speed curve applying emergency brake figures

Normal speed curve applying service braking figures

Radio antenna

Propulsion 
system

MMI

VOBC

tag reader

Brake system

Front 
train

LMA

Worst case stopping distance

Balise 

Normal Stopping point

Positional         Occupancy
and safety
uncertainty
zone

  Safety distance

Fig. 2.4 The safety distance concepts for moving blocks. Source Author

As incredible as it seems, throughout history many different track gauges
could be found, for instance 0.6, 1 m (small gauge), 1.6 m (large gauge).
A 3 m gauge track was even contemplated (the Breitspurbahn) by Adolph
Hitler’s Nazi regime. Today all new built lines tend to adopt the standard
gauge, which is 1.435 m system. Interoperability issues can be huge in some
areas such as Spain, as one can ﬁnd small,
large and standard gauges
alongside. No wonder that for interoperability purposes, Spanish manufac-
turers introduced in 1968 a bogie with variable gauge wheelsets (variable
axle). Such variable gauge technology allows trains to travel across a break of
gauge and as the train passes through the gauge changer, wheels are auto-
matically unlocked, moved closer together, or further apart, and are then
re-locked.

Overhead electric system Electric trains collect their current from an overhead line
system by pressing a device called pantograph against the lowest wire of an
overhead line system (contact wire). Metro lines use mainly a brush that is in
contact with a connector called third rail. The current collectors are electrically

2.2 Safety Concepts

Fig. 2.5 Picture of a
tramway’s pantograph in
contact with a catenary line.
Source Author

75

conductive and allow current to ﬂow through to the train or tramway and back to
the feeder station through the steel wheels on one or both running rails (Fig. 2.5).
include

transmission schemes

electrical power

Alternative

trains

for

ground-level power supply, batteries, and electromagnetic induction.

There are two main electrical power transmission technologies: AC and DC.
Each one may present different voltages and in the case of AC, different frequencies
as well.

Example of AC and DC technologies
– 600 V DC;
– 750 V DC;
– 1500 V DC;
– 3 kV DC;
– 15 kV AC, 162=
– 25 kV AC, 50 or 60 Hz.

3 Hz (16.7 kz);

Although there are always some exceptions, AC lines are mainly used for main

line trains and DC for commuter and metro operations.

Signaling system interoperability Signaling interoperability is mainly an issue on
main railway lines (but also sometimes on commuter lines of huge city commuter
network). Indeed on metro networks, lines operate independently from one other.

For main lines, the EU speciﬁed the use of a standardized signaling system
called European Train Control System (ETCS). It is a signaling, control and
train protection system designed to replace the many incompatible safety

76

2 Risk Adverse Society

systems currently used by European railways, especially on high-speed lines.
ETCS requires standard trackside equipment and a standard controller within
the train cab. In its ﬁnal form, all wayside information is passed to the driver
electronically, removing the need for signals which, at high speed, could be
almost impossible to see. It is now a requirement that all high-speed trains
within the EU adopt ETCS and many high-speed networks outside the EU
have also adopted it.

ETCS is speciﬁed at four different levels:

Level 0: ETCS-compliant locomotives or rolling stock interact with wayside
equipment that is non-ETCS compliant;
Level 1: ETCS and non-ETCS equipment co-exist on the same line;
Level 2: a dedicated system with wayside train integrity supervision; and
Level 3: works like Level 2, but train integrity is controlled by onboard
equipment monitoring distances between trains constantly and ﬂuidly.

Other wayside interoperability issues Most railway lines have different clearance
requirements, as well as axle load issues (maximum weight per axle that the line can
support). This complicates the life of railway manufacturers who need most of the
time to build tailor made equipment for each railway and metro operations.

2.2.7 Train Integrity Technologies

Carriage integrity: In the early railway days, when a train left a block, the
driver needed to inform the signalman controlling the block entry, but had no
way of knowing if the last convoy’s wagon was still attached. This is why
railway engineers came up with a procedure: even if the signalman received
the message that the previous train had left a block, the signalman of the next
block had to make a visual contact to check if he could see the ‘end-of-train
marker’ on the last vehicle, conﬁrming the train’s integrity and allowing the
next train to enter the block. The end of train marker was usually a red
colored disc by day and a red electric lamp by night. In case he couldn’t see it,
the signalman would ask the next signal box to stop the train and investigate.

End of Train markers Today, the “end-of-train marker” used in freight convoys,
usually called end of train device (ETD), is a self-energized electronic device.
Introduced in the 1980s under the drive to lower operational cost, it can be divided
into two categories: ﬂashing red light and radio-based ETDs, sending back a

2.2 Safety Concepts

77

message that the end wagon occupies the same position in regards to the head
locomotive. Any signiﬁcant change in distance will automatically give a message to
the crew that there is a problem.

For passenger trains,

the carriage integrity is today performed by logical
sequencing done by the computer-based vehicle system called vehicle control unit
(VCU). These VCUs, before entering in operation, will check the vehicles integrity
and even establish the train’s conﬁguration.

2.2.8 Train Protection Technologies

The consequence of a train driver failing to respond to a signal’s indication can be
disastrous. As a result, various auxiliary safety systems have been developed. Any
such system will necessitate the installation of onboard equipment to some degree.
Some of these systems only intervene in the event of a signal being passed. Others
include audible and/or visual indications inside the driver’s cab to supplement the
wayside signals. Some systems act intermittently (at each signal), but the most
sophisticated systems provide continuous supervision.

Cab signaling This system communicates track status and driving position data to
drivers present in the train cab. The simplest systems display trackside signal
aspect, while more sophisticated systems also display allowable speed and dynamic
information about the track ahead.

Cab signaling systems range from simple coded track circuits, to transponders
communicating with the cab, and communication-based train control
(CBTC). In modern systems, a train protection system is usually overlaid on
top of the cab signaling system to warn the driver of dangerous conditions,
and to automatically apply brakes and bring the train to a stop if the driver
ignores the dangerous condition.

Train protection systems All types of train protection systems are based on the
desire to eliminate possible driver errors resulting from failing to obey to a visual
displayed line side or to an in-cab signal instruction. The development of such
technology on main line railways began with the introduction of warning systems
and subsequently progressed to instruction enforcement issued by these systems.
There are three main train protection systems that will work closely together to
maintain a train within a deﬁned tolerance of its timetable: ATO, ATC, and
ATP. The combined systems will marginally adjust operating parameters such as
the ratio of power to coast when moving and station dwell time, in order to bring a
train back to the timetable slot deﬁned for it.

78

2 Risk Adverse Society

Line of sight

Train

     Station platform

Station stops

Fig. 2.6 ATO principles. Source Author

Automatic Train Operation (ATO) The earliest ATO system on a full metro line
was introduced in 1961 on the Barcelona Metro line 2. ATO is the non-safety part
of train operation related to station stops and starts. The basic requirement of ATO
is to tell the train approaching a station where to stop, so that the complete train is in
the platform, after receiving conﬁrmation from the ATP that the line is clear. The
sequence operates as shown in Fig. 2.6.

The train approaches the station under clear signals so it can do a normal run-in.
When it reaches the ﬁrst balise (originally a looped cable now mostly replaced by
ﬁxed transponders), a station brake command is received by the train. The VOBC
calculates constantly and updates the braking curve to enable it to stop at the correct
point.

Many operators using ATO systems decide to maintain drivers to mitigate risks

associated with failures or emergencies.

Automatic Train Control (ATC) Many modern systems integrate ATC systems that
carry out normal signaling operations such as route setting and train regulation.
The ATC hardware is divided into two parts:
(cid:129) Vehicle on-board control (VOBC) located on the vehicle and composed of a
dual-processor computer that continually monitors the position, speed, and
general status of the train; and

(cid:129) Vehicle control center (VCC) located in the operations and maintenance center
that directs the train movement, via the VOBCs of a portion of the ﬂeet.
The VCC is indeed limited to the control of about 125 trains and normally
communicates with trains at least once every second. An important safety fea-
ture is that if the communications between a VOBC and the VCC were to be lost
for more than 3 s, the VOBC fail-safe mechanism would immediately halt the
train by applying emergency brakes.

Automatic Train Supervision (ATS) This system is usually integrated within the
ATC system. Its main function is to monitor the system status and provide
appropriate controls to direct train operation with the objective of maintaining the
intended trafﬁc patterns and minimizing the effect of train delays on the operating
schedule.

2.2 Safety Concepts

79

Automatic Train Protection (ATP) ATP is the safety system which ensures that
trains remain a safe distance apart and have sufﬁcient warning to allow them to stop
without colliding with each other. ATP systems were ﬁrst introduced on metros in
the late 1960s. Most metro applications use ATP in conjunction with ATO. ATP
was also introduced in various forms on a number of main line railways, often in
conjunction with high-speed train operation. There are mainly two types of ATP
systems:
(cid:129) Intermittent systems: They use electronic beacons (inductive or radio fre-

quency) or short electrical loops positioned within a meter; and

(cid:129) Continuous systems: They use permanently active data transmission and
monitoring systems, either through electrical inductive coupling by means of
track loops or coded track circuits or by means of radio transmission.

ATP is a predictive enforcement system, which continuously monitors the speed of
a train in relation to either a target speed or distance. It intervenes when a train is
prevented from passing a Limit of Authority or exceeds a speed limit. This speed
limitation will be deﬁned by the line’s proﬁle or signal indication. If the allowable
speed is exceeded, braking will be applied until the speed is brought within the
required limit or the train stopped.

As an ATP system recognizes track condition and driving information of a
corresponding train, it permits shorter headway and increases track capacity, by
ensuring a minimum braking distance.

Braking system The interface between braking and ATP systems has been designed
to automatically authorize trains to brake if they consider that the driver does
exceed predeﬁned speed or if the train isn’t in a safe mode.

2.2.9 Onboard Operational and Safety Procedures

Operating rules, policies, and procedures are used by railroads to enhance safety.
Speciﬁc operating rules may differ from country to country and even from railroad
to railroad within the same country. Most railway systems around the world use
what is known as “speed signaling.” Under this speed signaling principle, the
signaling elements inform the driver of the speed at which he or she may proceed,
but not necessarily the route the train must take. Speed signaling requires a far
greater range of signal aspects than “route signaling,” but places less dependence on
the drivers’ route knowledge. This usually takes out the human error factor, which
is far safer.

A notable exception is Great Britain, which generally conforms to the “route
signaling” principle. Under such procedure, the driver is informed about

80

2 Risk Adverse Society

which route the train must take beyond each signal. This is achieved through
route indicator attached to the signal. The driver uses his route knowledge,
reinforced by wayside speed restriction signals to drive the train at the correct
speed throughout the portion of the route. This principle requires that drivers
be familiar with the route, and in emergency situations drivers might have
problem when diverted to other routes. As several accidents have been caused
by such situation, UK drivers are only allowed to drive on routes for which
they have been trained on and must regularly drive on these alternative routes
to keep their knowledge up to date.

2.2.10 Positive Train Control (PTC)

In the USA, PTC is a system of functional requirements for monitoring and con-
trolling train movements to provide increased safety. The American Railway
Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association (AREMA) describes positive
train control (PTC) as having these following primary characteristics:
(cid:129) Train separation or collision avoidance;
(cid:129) Line speed enforcement;
(cid:129) Temporary speed restrictions; and
(cid:129) Rail worker wayside safety.

The main concept in PTC (as deﬁned for North American Class I freight
railroads) is that the train receives information about its location and where it
is allowed to safely travel (LMA). Equipment on board the train then enforces
this, preventing unsafe movements. PTC systems may work in either dark
territory or signaled territory, and may use GPS navigation to track train
movements.

2.2.11 System Interoperability Procedures

One of the fascinating differences between the North American and European
railway systems is in the priorities given to freights and passenger cars. Actually, if
we want to generalize, one could say that priorities are inverted across the two sides

2.2 Safety Concepts

81

of the Atlantic. In Europe, freight cars must wait on the sideline for the passage of
the passenger cars, whereas in North America, passengers must wait several min-
utes for the long wagon convoy to pass through.

This signiﬁcant difference (together with the difference in distances, the
electriﬁcation of the lines, and the type of transported goods) has had con-
sequences on the design of the locomotives which favored more powerful
locomotives in the USA running at lower speed, whereas European loco-
motives can typically go at speeds of 160 km/h but are usually limited in
power output.

2.2.12 Grade Crossing

A railway crossing is an intersection between a railway line and a road or path, at
the same level. Many accidents occur at these level crossings with cars or even
pedestrians. Grade crossing safety systems use either passive solutions, such as
signs, or use safer active warnings, such as lights and warning tone. Radar sensor
systems or empty space detection by video analytics are some of the new e-mobility
technologies implemented to improve safety of level crossings.

2.2.13 Safety Integrity Level (SIL)

SIL is deﬁned as a relative level of risk reduction provided by a safety function. It is
deﬁned by a number of quantitative and qualitative factors (i.e., development
process and safety life-cycle management). In the European Functional Safety
standards, based on the IEC 61,508 standard, four different SIL levels are deﬁned.
This standard deﬁnes two broad categories: hardware safety integrity and system-
atic safety integrity. A device or system must meet the requirements for both
categories to achieve a given SIL level.

The SIL requirements for hardware safety integrity are based on a probabi-
listic analysis of the device. In order to achieve a given SIL, the device must
meet targets for the maximum probability of dangerous failure and a mini-
mum Safe Failure Fraction. The concept of “dangerous failure” must be
rigorously deﬁned for the system in question, normally in the form of
requirement constraints whose integrity is veriﬁed throughout system

82

2 Risk Adverse Society

Table 2.10 SIL probabilistic requirements

2

1

SIL level

PFD
0.1–0.01
0.01–0.001
0.001–0.0001
0.0001–0.00001
Source Standard IEC 61508

4

3

RRF
10–100
100–1000
1000–10,000
10,000–100,000

PFH
0.00001–0.000001
0.000001–0.0000001
0.0000001–0.00000001
0.00000001–0.000000001

RRF
100,000–1,000,000
1,000,000–10,000,000
10,000,000–100,000,000
100,000,000–1,000,000,000

development. The actual targets required vary depending on the likelihood of
demand, the complexity of the device(s), and types of redundancy used.

The probability of failure on demand (PFD) and the risk reduction factor

(RRF) of operational demand for different SIL levels are as in Table 2.10.

For continuous operation, it is necessary to use the Probability of Failure per

Hour, which we’ve indicated in Table 2.10.

Hazards of a control system must be identiﬁed then analyzed through risk
assessment. Mitigation of these risks continues until their overall contribution
to the hazard is considered acceptable. Certiﬁcation schemes are used to
establish whether a device meets a particular SIL level. Requirements of these
schemes can be met either by deﬁning a rigorous development process or by
establishing that the device has sufﬁcient operating history to argue that it has
been proven in use.

2.3 Communication-Based Train Control (CBTC)

CBTC technology is behind the concept of various technologies, such as
(cid:129) PTC,
(cid:129) European Train Control (ETCS),
(cid:129) electronic train management system (ETMS), and
(cid:129) incremental train control system (ITCS).
The IEEE deﬁnes CBTC as follows:
(cid:129) Continuous, ATC system utilizing high-resolution train location system, inde-

pendent of track circuits;

2.3 Communication-Based Train Control (CBTC)

83

(cid:129) Continuous, high-capacity, bidirectional train-to-wayside data communications;

(cid:129) Train-borne and wayside processors capable of implementing ATP, ATO, and

and

ATS functions.

The advent of digital radio communication technology during the early 90s
encouraged the signaling industry to replace transmission loop by radio
telecom-based systems for wayside to train communication. CBTC makes use of
telecommunications between train and track equipment for trafﬁc management and
infrastructure control.

CBTC technology gives a more accurate train position than traditional sig-
naling systems. This results in a more efﬁcient and safe way to manage
railway trafﬁc. Metros and other railway systems are able to improve head-
ways while improving safety. Improving headway as we have already seen,
allows for capacity increase. Furthermore, CBTC allows for reduced sig-
naling system CAPEX and OPEX by eliminating all mechanical and elec-
tromechanical signals along the line.

CBTC systems are designed to be vital standalone systems, which may also have
an overlay capability on ﬁxed blocks for migration purposes. A CBTC system must
be implemented in a fully fail-safe manner in order to be able to provide vital
moving block functionality (Fig. 2.7).

Fig. 2.7 View from a monorail’s front car, showing heavy concrete switch beams managed
automatically by a CBTC system. Source Author

84

2 Risk Adverse Society

CBTC technology

Radio transmission

ATS

Downlink data:
Movement Authority

Way-side ATO

Way-side ATP

Uplink data:
Train position and speed

Interlocking 1 
supervision

Interlocking 2 
supervision

Interlocking 1

Onboard ATP / ATO

Radio 
transmission

Train length

Safety
zone

Fig. 2.8 A typical radio-based CBTC architecture. Technical solution may differ from one
supplier to another. Source Author

2.3.1 CBTC and Moving Block

The CBTC technology was ﬁrst introduced in 2003, at SFO AirTrain, in San
Francisco Airport, and on Singapore’s North East Line. In the modern CBTC
systems, trains continuously calculate and communicate their status via radio to the
wayside equipment distributed along the line. As seen, this status includes, among
others parameters, the exact position, speed, travel direction, and braking distance.
This information allows calculation of the area potentially occupied by the train. It
also enables wayside equipment to deﬁne the points on the line that must never be
passed by other trains on the same track. These points are communicated to make
the trains automatically and continuously adjust their speed while maintaining
safety and comfort requirements. So trains continuously receive information
regarding the distance to the preceding train and are then able to adjust their safety
distance accordingly (Fig. 2.8).

Typical architecture of a modern CBTC system comprises the following main
subsystems:
Wayside equipment, which includes interlocking and the subsystems con-
trolling every zone in the line or network (typically containing wayside ATP
and ATO functionalities).
CBTC onboard equipment.
Train to wayside communication sub-system.
Onboard ATP system: Subsystem in charge of continuous train speed
control and communication with the wayside ATP subsystem;

2.3 Communication-Based Train Control (CBTC)

85

Onboard ATO system: Responsible for automatic control of traction and
braking effort;
Wayside ATP system: Manages all communications with the trains in its
area and calculates the limits of movement authority;
Wayside ATO system: Controls the destination and regulation targets of
every train.
Communication system: Digital networked radio system using antennas or
leaky feeder cable (especially used in tunnels) for bidirectional communica-
tion between the track equipment and the trains. The 2.4 GHz band is most
commonly used in these systems (same as WiFi);
ATS system: Interface between the operator and the system, managing the
trafﬁc schedule according to the speciﬁc regulation criteria.

2.3.2 Metro Evolution Toward Unmanned Railway Systems

The evolution of autonomy in the railway environment can be seen as a continuous
movement toward more sophisticated systems. Based on the Brussels located
there are ﬁve Grades of
International association of public transport UITP,
Automation for trains:
(cid:129) GoA 0 is on-sight train operation;
(cid:129) GoA 1 is manual train operation where the driver controls many operational

functions;

(cid:129) GoA 2 is a semi-automatic train operation (STO) where starting and stopping

are automated but the driver in the cab can intervene;

(cid:129) GoA 3 is a driverless train operation (DTO) where starting and stopping are
automated but a train attendant operates the doors and drives the train in case of
emergencies; and

(cid:129) GoA 4 is an unattended train operation (UTO) where all operations are fully

automated without any on-train staff.

Completely man managed As expected, railway systems started as entirely man-
aged by personnel. In the Grade of Operation 0 and 1 environments, all operational
functions are performed by human being. On the wayside, tracks are switched
mechanically by the train dispatchers and the trains are obviously driven by people.
The safety functions were ﬁrstly ensured by mechanical devices and logic. With
electromechanical devices, relay-based logics started to be implemented and safety
functions on the wayside started to be controlled by the signaling control center.
Similarly, onboard safety was improved with more intelligent electromechanical
devices.

86

2 Risk Adverse Society

Semi-autonomous As more and more intelligence was built into the signaling
systems and the train, the track switches started to be operated remotely from the
control centers or even from the moving train. In systems, with Grade of
Automation 2, drivers were and are still there mainly to make decisions in emer-
gency situations. These systems are still the norm in most regional and intercity
lines. Vast majority of metro lines are now going to driverless applications.

Driverless Driverless trains (Grade of Automation 3) were introduced in the 80s. It is
probably of no surprise to anyone that the introduction of driverless systems initially
happened in closed environments such as airport or small metro applications.

The paternity of such introduction is however still in doubt. The ﬁrst light
driverless metro was built in the North of France in the city of Lille, by the
French company called Matra (later purchased by Siemens). The VAL
(véhicule automatique léger), which is a light rubber tire metro, was origi-
nally built
automated people mover
(APM) commercial operation opened for service in September of 1980 at
Hartsﬁeld-Jackson Atlanta International Airport with an unmanned system.
The system was originally built by the American company Westinghouse. As
a result of acquisitions and mergers with other companies, the system has
been operated and maintained under several brands.

in 1983. However,

the ﬁrst

The next technologies that evolved toward autonomous driving were the Light
metro, APM, and Monorails. Metros are also going unmanned in the big cities of
this world.

Fig. 2.9 A view of a monorail GOA 4 operation front end, without any driver or attendant in the
city of Sao Paulo in Brazil. Source Author

2.3 Communication-Based Train Control (CBTC)

87

Today, we see new systems being implemented without the need for any onboard
staff to attend the train (Grade of Automation 4). What people should realize is that
for the ﬁrst time in history, they are confronted to a completely unmanned operation,
which could also be described as a robotized application (Fig. 2.9).

2.4 Applying Railway Safety Principle to Cars

Does it make sense to apply railway technologies or principles to future automobile
design? To answer this question, let’s look at Great Britain. There were 1754 road
deaths in 2012, which means that around ﬁve people died that year on Britain’s
roads every day. As seen hereafter, the variety of route causes are such that merely
maintaining the status quo isn’t acceptable.

The following are the most common causes of road accidents due to human
factor and must be considered jointly (there is often more than one cause of
accidents):
Speeding: Around 400 people (22 %) a year are killed in crashes in which
someone exceeds the speed limit or drives too fast for the conditions;
Drink driving: Around 280 people (16 %) die a year in crashes in which
someone was over the legal drink driving limit;
Seat belt wearing: Around 300 lives each year (17 %) could be saved if
passengers always wore their seat belt;
Careless driving: Around 300 deaths a year (17 %) involve someone being
“careless, reckless or in a hurry”;
Aggressive driving: a further 125 deaths were involved (7 %);
Fatigue: involves around 20 % of all car accidents;
At-work: Around one third of fatal and serious road crashes involve someone
who was working (33 %);
Inexperience: More than 400 people are killed in crashes involving young
car drivers aged 17–24 years, every year, including over 150 young drivers,
90 passengers and more than 170 other road users (22 %)
Failed to look properly: 40 % of road crashes involve someone who failed to
look properly;
Loss of control: One third of fatal crashes involved loss of control of a
vehicle (33 %); and
Misjudge other person or car Path/Speed: One in ﬁve crashes involve a
road user failing to judge another person’s path or speed (20 %).

Source of information11: web page of Royal Society for Prevention of

Accidents

11Web page of Royal Society for Prevention of Accident (ROSPA) updated on 15/072013). http://
www.rospa.com/faqs/detail.aspx?faq=298.

88

2 Risk Adverse Society

Obviously, car accident statistics are typical of any given country and might
differ from one region to the other in relation to each government’s attitude toward
such cause of accidents, as well as in function of the media’s crucial role in
promoting safe driving behaviors. The point is that many of these fatality causes
could have been eliminated with unmanned operations, especially had railway
safety principles and technology been applied in the UK or anywhere else. The
following paragraphs will give ideas about how to adapt railway principles to the
car environment.

2.4.1 Automotive Block Interlocking Concept

Block interlocking concept, which forbids vehicles to occupy the same space, at the
same moment, will need to be applied to unmanned cars. The issue to solve for
automotive system engineers will be how to space cars far enough apart to ensure
that they cannot collide.
Fixed block The automotive environment will not use the ﬁxed block concept as
road environments simply don’t allow for ﬁxed sections.

Moving block We strongly believe that the concepts behind the moving block
technology could be applied to the unmanned car environments. Firstly, its spacing
concept is well suited for cars as it doesn’t take into consideration two ﬁxed points
but a safety zone around each moving vehicle in which no other vehicle would be
allowed to enter. This safety zone would be calculated using speed, grades, and the
car’s operational properties. Secondly, an additional buffer zone would be provi-
sioned around the vehicles, which would vary depending on location and sur-
rounding elements. Thirdly, the car’s normal braking rates would be used for
calculating safety stopping distances, with probably a guaranteed emergency
braking rate that could be used in critical situations. The big question will be
whether the concept of brick wall stopping will be applied or not, and under which
conditions.

This safety zone, which would be calculated by an onboard computer like the
one used within the Google cars, would use the deﬁne location, speed, and direction
of each car through an accurate GPS. In some critical areas, passive or active
markers could be used to indicate dangerous curves or gradients, or even in tunnels
to give more accurate positioning information (Fig. 2.10).

from an exclusively horizontal dimensional

The block notion will need to evolve because of the ﬂuidity of the road envi-
ronment,
toward a
tri-dimensional space, which will take into consideration length, width and even
height parameters. Because of the need to overpass cars or run on parallel lanes,
virtual moving blocks will also be calculated to account for the safe zone needed to
overtake front cars (Fig. 2.11).

concept

2.4 Applying Railway Safety Principle to Cars

89

Occupancy and

 Lateral

 Detection

Safety             zone

Detection zones

by radar and
Lidar

normal 

stopping 

point

Worst 

stopping 

distance

Positional

Uncertainty

Fig. 2.10 Automotive moving block interlocking with safety zone calculation and detection
zones. Source Author

2.4.2 Automotive Block Signaling Concept

The second railway safety principle of signaling to the next vehicle that no train is
in that block will also need to be applied.

In a railway moving block application, the track line is usually divided into
sections that are each controlled in real time by a computer at the control center

90

2 Risk Adverse Society

Fig. 2.11 Real and virtual
moving blocks. Source
Author

Real
Moving

Block

Virtual 

Moving

Block

level, with its own telecom transmission system. Would that architecture be rep-
licable in a road environment? This would be important because in a moving block
environment, the continuously calculated car position and its braking curve must be
communicated to the wayside equipment to establish protected areas (LMA). In a
highway environment, we could imagine having such dedicated computers per lane
sections. However, in an urban environment besides the complexity and cost of
having computers throughout the city areas, the major issue to apply such a moving
block concept would be to maintain constant connection of vital functions (the
absence of communications between the VOBC and the VCC stops the trains).

2.4 Applying Railway Safety Principle to Cars

91

Obviously and as we will see in the next sections, engineers are working on a blend
of various communication technologies, as well as a mesh network architecture,
which would provide fallback solutions in case of technical problems. With cloud
computing, information would be centralized without having to dedicate fail-safe
computers. However, major differences between railway and automotive opera-
tional environments will need to be taken into consideration.
(cid:129) Vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication: Because in a road environment cars
can come from all directions, communications between all cars will be required
within a calculated perimeter, which will be accounted for in real time according
to the cars safety braking distance.

(cid:129) Obstacle detection: Most metro networks are closed environments, reducing
uncertainties to the bare minimum. On the contrary, cars (bus or even tramways)
do face issues with obstacles such as pedestrian, animals, cars, or even falling
objects such as rocks. It is true that long distance detection technology is being
tested in the railway environment to prevent accidents but the difﬁculty is that
trains at great speed need very often a kilometer to brake, eliminating the
beneﬁts of such technology. Unmanned cars, on the other hand, can brake
within meters and as they will need mandatorily to avoid obstacles, they must
use sensor technology to avoid crashing on pedestrians, animals, cars equipped
with failing V2V equipment, or even working cruises. As we will see in the next
sections, sensor technology such as lidar, radar, and cameras will be integrated
within unmanned car environments.

(cid:129) No dispatching: Unlike trains, car destination won’t be centralized as it goes
against the main transportation principle: freedom to go wherever we want.

With these major differences needing to be accounted for, it is unlikely in our view
that the automotive concept of LMA will be centralized. Indeed the safety spacing
calculation, which is given by a centralized computer in the railway environment,
will be calculated by each car individually and shared directly between all cars
within a certain perimeter. Additional safety parameters will need to be accounted
for, such as direction, safe braking distances of each car, distance and time to reach
another car’s LMA (especially when overtaking), safety priorities, all non-car
detected object, animal or human being, ﬁxed or removable beacons or balises, etc.
Geo-localized messages (see Chap. 5 for more information) will be pushed to the
road from the V2C to indicate the passing cars that an obstacle or a special situation,
such as a working crew, can be found within vicinity of the location (Fig. 2.12).

2.4.3 Automotive Integrity Concept

Is the integrity concept relevant on roads? After all, cars unlike trains are made of a
single body shelve and no wagon or section can depart from the motorized section.
Roads also unlike tracks cannot brake suddenly and derail a car.

92

2 Risk Adverse Society

48° 51' 23.81'' N
2° 21' 8.00'' E
32.54 m

Geo
positioning
message

Mesh 
Network

V2I

WIMAX
Base
Station

LTE
Base station

V2C

Server 1

Server 2

Fig. 2.12 Automotive block signaling with V2V, V2C, and V2I communication through LTE,
Wi-MAX, and mesh networks. Source Author

2.4 Applying Railway Safety Principle to Cars

93

Well in our view it is. First, cars don’t run alone. Trucks can lose their charge.
Cars also can tow a motor home or a trailer, which can separate from the cars. These
would need to be accounted for. Specialists could always argue that any separated
trailer would be treated as any other road obstacle and be detected by the onboard
sensors. True, but the car’s VOBC would need to calculate that such element could
change lane, roll over, decelerate or accelerate depending on the slope, etc.
Secondly and more importantly, in a platooning environment (a convoy of cars that
follow each other a 5 m apart), no detection system would give the braking system
is
enough time to avoid such separated trailer. In fact,
extremely relevant in such platooning operation, as the platoon itself could be
considered a convoy of attached parts, which integrity would need to be checked
regularly (Fig. 2.13).

the integrity concept

2.4.4 Automotive Protection Technologies

Unmanned cars will need to integrate some of the protection technologies we’ve
described. Obviously, the equipment and the software will be different, but the basic
functionalities will be similar.

ATC The Vehicle On-Board Control (VOBC) continually monitoring the position,
speed, and general status of the car will be mandatory. On the other hand, the VCC
portion of the ATC will be superﬂuous as the safety braking distance will be
calculated within the VOBC.

In fact,

ATS It will be needed to monitor the system status and provide appropriate controls
with infrastructure equipment, with the objective of maintaining the intended trafﬁc
patterns.
the ATS functions will be integrated within the V2C
(vehicle-to-cloud) environment.
ATO This non-safety part of train operation related to station stops and starts won’t
really be necessary in a road environment. Exact stopping distances will be cal-
culated by the VOBC with the support of sensors.
ATP This predictive enforcement system, which continuously monitors the train’s
speed in relation to either a target speed or a distance, will be required. It will
intervene whenever a car exceeds a speed limit (as speed restrainers already do) or
when the car infringes the Limit of Authority, calculated in the VOBC, taking into
account other cars moving block and safety braking distance.

Braking system If the allowable speed is exceeded, braking will be applied until the
speed is brought within the required limit or the car stopped.

94

2 Risk Adverse Society

V2I

Fig. 2.13 Platooning with illustration of integrity issue. Source Author

2.4 Applying Railway Safety Principle to Cars

95

2.4.5 Automotive System Interoperability

Interoperability for any system is always a key issue to address. Cars will need to
communicate with each other, with the infrastructure and the cloud in ways that can
be understood by each other, independently from the cars’ brand. This means that at
least continental standards will need to be applied for cars to be able to travel from
one country to the other. As we will see, it is unlikely that a worldwide standard
will be adopted, as for instance, we already know that the technology behind the
V2V Japanese, American, and European system won’t be interoperable.

2.4.6 Other Relevant Automotive Safety Concept

In the previous section, we’ve seen other concepts such as degraded mode proce-
dures, safety integrity level (SIL). There is no doubt in our mind that these safety
concepts and other technology from the railway environment will be applied to the
automotive unmanned environment. In fact, in the next section, we will present the
car automation level. As the reader will see, the similarities are just striking!

2.5 Automation Level in the Automotive Environment

For every 30 s, someone somewhere dies of a car crash, and ten more are seriously
injured. This hideous number doesn’t show the complete picture. In the rich world,
the number of crashes per driver has been constantly dropping. Higher vehicle
standards are a big reason for falling death rates in the rich world. Restraints on
drivers and investment in safety programs, be it through better infrastructure,
awareness campaigns on seatbelts or new technologies, have also helped slashed
road deaths in rich countries. Newer technologies such as alcolocks, which prevent
drunk-driving and self-driving cars, will make roads in the rich world even safer.
However, additional safety measures must be taken in developing and poor
countries, if we want to avoid WHO’s hecatomb prevision that expects deaths to
more than triple in the very poor countries.

Experience in the Rich World has shown that roads can be made safer
cheaply and simply. Some of the recent safety measures such as dedicated
cycle roads, count-down lights at crossings and strict vehicle standards are
pricey, but if the road designers and investors would only earmarked a small
it would dramatically
fraction of the road cost for safety improvement,
improve the fatality statistics. For instance, roads need pedestrian paths but
84 % of the worldwide roads have none. This measure is easy to address.

96

2 Risk Adverse Society

Roads with fast trafﬁc need well designed junctions and crossings. For very
poor countries that can’t invest in central barriers of concrete or metal,
allocating space between the opposite lanes can dramatically help stop
head-on collision. Installing rumble strips on hard shoulders can also be a
good way of alerting drivers that they are moving from their lanes. Ensuring
that courts and police enforce laws against speeding and driving under
alcoholic or drug substances as well as bringing ticket money also can reduce
signiﬁcantly all the road tragedies.

All these measures make a big difference and should be contemplated every-
where. However, we will maintain the focus of this section on the e-mobility
technologies that can also reduce signiﬁcantly the number of fatalities. We will try
to present these technologies that can address some of the main causes of road
accident as described in the previous section.

2.5.1 Reducing or Eliminating the Human Factor

in Driving

One of the more interesting lessons we can learn from the evolution of safety in the
railway industry is that the human factor is one of the main causes of accidents and
eliminating it altogether will improve accidents statistics. As the car manufacturer
Volvo puts it, most accidents are caused by the four D’s: distraction, drowsiness,
drunkenness, and driver’s error. Another crucial lesson learned from the railway
industry is that safety improvements can come from three different areas: system,
vehicle, or infrastructure. In railway industry,
three industries have originally
pushed these three options: signaling companies, train manufacturers, and railway
operators. Governments, through regulations and even more essentially through
norms and standards, have also played a key role in improving safety. Let’s
understand what the concepts behind automated cars are.

2.5.2 Level of Car Automation

We’ve seen that there are different levels of automation within the metro or train for
CBTC signaling technologies (as well as safety levels). As for the train industry, the
automotive industry has come up with an almost similar classiﬁcation. In the United
States, the National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration (NHTSA) has estab-
lished an ofﬁcial classiﬁcation system. However, there is still no worldwide stan-
dard and thus the following is an explanation based mainly on this classiﬁcation.

2.5 Automation Level in the Automotive Environment

97

Level (0) Non-Automated The driver completely controls the vehicle at all times.
There is no automation at all. While most current vehicles can be included in this
category, vehicles with warning systems that assist drivers also fall into this cate-
gory. Vehicles equipped with these technologies will not assume control for any
driving tasks, but will provide additional information to the driver and/or warn the
driver of situations requiring immediate attention.

Navigational global positioning system (GPS) is an example of a currently
available e-mobility technology, which provides information useful to the
overall task of driving. V2V communications and Lane Departure Warning
(LDW) are also two examples of warning technology, alerting the driver
when the vehicle begins to drift out of the lane of travel.

Level (1) Automation-Assisted Individual vehicle controls are automated. This
category still leaves the driving authority with the driver. However, under limited
normal driving or crash imminent circumstances, technologies in this category will
take control away from the driver (Fig. 2.14).

Fig. 2.14 Picture of an active lane-keeping shown on the dash board. Source Author

98

2 Risk Adverse Society

An example of this type of technology is the Electronic Stability Control.
This system uses automatic computer controlled braking of individual wheels
to assist a driver in maintaining control in critical driving scenarios in which
the vehicle is beginning to lose directional stability. Another advanced
example of automation-assisted driving is a lane-keeping system that will
actively steer a vehicle back toward the center of its lane when the system
detects that the vehicle is drifting into an adjacent lane or is on a collision
course with a vehicle in an adjacent lane.

Level (2) Monitored Automation This category is the ﬁrst in which technology will
share the driving responsibility with the driver. However, in this category, the
human driver is expected to intervene at any moment (e.g., lane markings disappear
and the vehicle can no longer position itself in the center of the lane). Thus, the
autonomous technology is only able to assume the responsibility of driving when
the conditions permit.

of

type

parking

technology

systems. This

For example, some vehicles on the market today are available with automatic
from
parallel
automation-assisted driving technologies because the driver gives a general
command to the vehicle (e.g., “park in this space”) and the vehicle performs
that command by assuming entirely the steering control and making the
necessary steering calculations. Another potential example is the combination
of adaptive cruise control with lane-keeping. The combination of these two
technologies would potentially enable vehicles to proceed on the highway
with little or no input from drivers.

differs

Level (3) Conditional Automation In this category, the driver can fully cede control
of all safety-critical functions in certain conditions to the onboard computer. The
driver doesn’t need to keep constantly an eye on the road. The car senses when
conditions require the driver to retake control and provides a “sufﬁciently com-
fortable transition time” for the driver to do so. Level 3 is full automation in
certain situations (most likely for highway driving).

In 2014, several automakers, like Audi, BMW, Nissan, and Mercedes tar-
geted self-driving capabilities by roughly 2020. Others are more bullish.
Tesla and Ford for example, targets respectively 2016 and 2017 to market
such cars. For speed lower than 60 km/h (38 mph), Mercedes Benz’s
“intelligent drive” kit can already allow drivers to relax and enjoy, while their
car accelerate, steer and brake autonomously.

2.5 Automation Level in the Automotive Environment

99

Table 2.11 Comparison between car and rail automation level according to UITP and NHTSA
classiﬁcation

Level of train automation (UITP)
Level

Description

Level of car automation (NHTSA)
Level

Description

GoA 0
GoA 1
GoA 2

On-sight train operation
Manual train operation
Semi-automatic train operation

GoA 3
GoA 4
Source Author

Driverless train operation
Unattended train operation

Level 0
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5

Non-automated
Automation-assisted
Monitored automation
Conditional automation
Full automation
Unmanned

Level (4) Full Automation The car performs all safety-critical functions for the
entire journey, with the driver not expected to control the vehicle at any time.
However, level 4 will maintain the possibility to shift control to a human driver.
This vehicle would integrate various technologies from the previous three catego-
ries to perform all driving tasks.
Level (5) Unmanned This is an unmanned system where human control won’t be
allowed at all. The only driver input would be the destination. Level 5 driving
encompasses all of the systems necessary for the vehicle to perform automatically
and independently all driving tasks in all driving scenarios.

2.5.3 Similarities Between Level of Car and Train

Automation

Table 2.11 shows how similar the principle of automation level for cars and trains
are.

2.6 Personal Rapid Transit (PRT)

Before being accused by Nay-Sayers of being over-optimistic about the future of
unmanned vehicles, let’s present a car technology which is already completely
driverless: the Personal Rapid Transit system.

PRT is a public transport mode based on small automated vehicles operating on
a network of specially built and segregated guideway, arranged around a network of
small stations. The principle of a PRT is very similar to the concept of a network of

100

2 Risk Adverse Society

taxis running on dedicated and exclusive lanes. Like taxis, they offer relative pri-
vacy, though one could expect to share the PRT car with a few other passengers.
They also allow for relative fast access to the speciﬁc ﬁnal destination station.

2.6.1 PRT References

PRT technology has been around for a few years but isn’t well known from the
general public. The main reason is that the industry has a record of failure due to
various project problems, such as ﬁnancing issues, cost overrun, regulatory con-
ﬂicts, ﬂawed designs, etc (Fig. 2.15).

As of 2014, two PRT systems were already operational.
– Since 2010, 13 pod cars continue to shuttle students along an 800 m
the
stretch between a station and the university in Masdar, UAE;
air-conditioned vehicles have a maximum speed of 40 km/h. The entire
system was originally designed to run up to 5000 trips per day, with each
of the 810 vehicles.

– Since May 2011, a 21-vehicle Ultra PRT system at London Heathrow
Airport links the business car park, by a 3.8 km route to the terminal. The
driverless cars can reach speed of 40 km/h and carry up to four passengers
and their luggage. Since its opening, the PRT system has carried in around
2 years more than 700,000 passengers from the Terminal 5 Business Car
Park across to Terminal 5 itself.

Unfortunately, it is true that there is still today no city-wide deployment, but this
is due more to the fact that no Public authorities (except for Masdar city) have
already committed to building PRT, because of the risks associated with being the
guinea pig. But these two applications have shown that PRT can work. With the
right political support for ﬁnancing the project and provided a large technological
railway or car manufacturer would embrace such market, things could be very
different. In the mean time, the small PRT developers are facing a bleak future as
they don’t have the ﬁnancial strength required to sustain the R&D and marketing
costs to build such a market.

However, if this market were to integrate technologies being developed for
driverless cars, this market could pick up and grow tremendously. The funda-
mentals are there. To use an image, PRT is the convergence of smart infrastructure
with smart cars (which could become much smarter with the integration of driv-
erless car technology), as well as the convergence of automotive and railway
technologies and concepts.

2.6 Personal Rapid Transit (PRT)

101

Fig. 2.15 Heathrow Airport car park operational PRT system. Source Picture of ULTra PRT POD
at Heathrow Airport car park During a trip to the airport 2012-02-16; Author: Moshrunners; ﬁle is
licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported license

2.6.2 Smart Infrastructure

All PRT suppliers have been highly inﬂuenced by rail transit technologies and
concepts. For instance, technologies like fare systems, guideway, track and station
design, as well as concepts of system safety, reliability, operations, and mainte-
nance are originated mainly from the railway environment.

PRT station PRT stations are similar in many aspects to subway stations. The
fundamental difference is scale. Indeed, PRT stations must have the same func-
tionality than mass transit but must be designed for only a small numbers of
passengers. In order to make the PRT network attractive, the system usually
positioned stations close together. However, and unlike metro stations, the station’s
vehicle access isn’t positioned directly on the main lane. The station uses one- or
two-way section connected to the main lane by the same junction (vehicles come
back and forth through the same junction) or by two junctions positioned in parallel
to the main lane. Each station might have multiple berths, for several passengers
drop-off or hop on, or for vehicles storage. When user demand is low, surplus

102

2 Risk Adverse Society

vehicles can be conﬁgured to stop at empty stations at strategically placed points
around the network. This enables an empty vehicle to quickly be dispatched to
wherever it is required, with minimal waiting time for passengers.

Switching As mentioned, many concepts from the railway industry have been
adopted by the PRT system designers. Switching, which is one of the main railway
features, has been used to ensure guideway clearance for most PRT systems.
However, and as we will see on the section dedicated to self-driving cars, con-
ventional steering technology with mounted sensors could become an interesting
alternative to switching. There are two PRT switching concepts:
(cid:129) Track switching like in railway system; and
(cid:129) Vehicle mounted switching.

Each approach has its advantage and inconvenient.

Track switching increases the vehicle reliability by reducing the number of
small moving parts in each car and weight. It also increases the overall system
safety using successful tested rules from the metro industry. On the other
hand, vehicle switching allows faster switching, reducing the headway time
and distance between vehicles, as well as obviously simplifying the guideway
infrastructure. Because of differences in switch setting between two cars, it
increases the minimum distances required between consecutive junctions.

Dedicated guideway As for trains, the notion of dedicated lanes is extremely
important in PRTs. It allows control of the environment like in the railway industry,
eliminating potential hazardous situation, resulting from mixed trafﬁc.

Furthermore, all PRT systems use segregated lanes with no possibility for
pedestrian or other cars to cross the guideway. Many use over-pass to avoid this
potential conﬂict with pedestrians, animals or car crossing. Masdar’s system
ambition has been limited because it attempted to dedicate ground-level to its
PRT system, which led to expensive buildings and roads. Many guideways have
a loop shape for easier reinjection of cars into the system.

Power and telecom equipment Most designs use the guideway to distribute power
and data communications, including the vehicles.
Signaling system Unlike railway signaling system, which uses ﬁxed traveling
concept, PRTs use a unique ﬂexible signaling concept. In most metro operations,
the vehicle rides from the ﬁrst station on one side of the city to the last station,
stopping at all operating stations on the way. Even when there are exceptions, such

2.6 Personal Rapid Transit (PRT)

103

as when metro cars make shorter shuttle trips between two intermediate stations of
the more busy section of the metro, all the cars deﬁned as such will have the same
ﬁxed sequence of stopping.

On the following (Fig. 2.16) railway design, a metro vehicle would usually go
from station 1–7 and back from station from 7 to 1. In case of shorter carousel
(planned trip), the metro could in principle use the switch situated at the end
of station 3 and 5 to short circuit stations at the extremities of the line. We say
in principle, because this conﬁguration would create operational problems
and not be favored by operators and passengers.

PRT systems apply an operational principle based on point-to-multipoint travel.
For instance, passengers might decide to go directly from the ﬁrst to the last station,
by passing all intermediary stations (Fig. 2.17).

On the design here above we show two conﬁgurations where the vehicles can
use 3 park lanes either with no parallel line to the main guideway or with a
parallel line to inject more easily the parked cars (at station 3 and 5).

Thus in theory, if there was a network with sufﬁcient guideway length and
closely spaced stations, passengers could easily board in a station and take rela-
tively direct routes to their destination without stops. Once again, this is only

Train direction

station 1

station 2

station 3

station 4

station 5

station 6

station 7

station 1

station 2

station 3

station 4

station 5

station 6

station 7

Train direction

Fig. 2.16 Train carousel with intermediary switching possibility. Source Author

station 1

station 2

station 3

station 4

station 5

station 6

station 7

PRT direction

station 1

station 2

station 3

station 4

station 5

station 6

station 7

PRT direction

Fig. 2.17 PRT carousel with intermediary and station switching possibility. Source Author

104

2 Risk Adverse Society

possible because the stations aren’t directly on the main lane, thus vehicles are
never blocked by other vehicles stopped on the main guideway at stations.

Running gear Most designs enclose the running gear in the guideway to prevent
derailments.

Fare system As for trains, PRT would be working with reliable ticketing system.

Supervision and monitoring system Onboard computers communicating with the
control center main computers eliminate the need for human control. Errors from
human drivers are eliminated increasing the public’s safety. Other public transit
safety engineering approaches, such as redundancy and self-diagnosis of critical
systems, are also included in PRT designs. The monitoring PRT system places the
cars in moving Slots (block) that go around the guideway loops. Real vehicles are
allocated a slot by the trackside controllers. Trafﬁc jams are prevented by placing
north/south cars in even slots and east/west vehicles in odd slots. At intersections,
trafﬁc in the systems can interpenetrate without slowing.

2.6.3

(Reasonably) Smart Cars

PRTs have adapted automobile technology to carry comfortably from 2 to 4 pas-
sengers. Using many standard components of automobiles such as electric motors,
batteries, tires, axles, wheels, and body components, the automotive sector pos-
sesses all of the needed competencies to efﬁciently design and manufacture these
types of vehicles.

Most PRT vehicle designs are based on electric cars. Some systems adapted
the concept from the metro of wayside conductors rather than batteries.
However, with the increase in battery capacity, future PRTs are likely to use
that technology. For instance, Ultra the Heathrow PRT uses batteries which
are recharged when at stops.

2.6.4 PRT Operational Characteristics

Headway distance It is the space between two vehicles running on the guideway
and inﬂuences directly the system’s capacity. Existing rail regulations usually apply
to PRT systems. Thus, railway safety principles are typically applied and headways
are calculated in terms of absolute stopping distances. This stopping distance is the

2.6 Personal Rapid Transit (PRT)

105

Table 2.12 Braking distance in meters of PRT cars (with 0.5 s perception and reaction time),
according to speed

10

20

30

40

50

60

With 0.5 s
perception + Reaction

2.0

5.0

9.2

14.5

21.0

28.6

Speed in
km/h

Braking
distance
Source Author

sum of the distance a car will run due to the driver’s perception and reaction time
and the distance necessary for stopping the car (Table 2.12).

The braking distance is one of two principal components of the total stopping
distance and is deﬁned as the distance a vehicle will travel from the point
when its brakes to when it comes to a complete stop. As we’ve seen in an
earlier section, it is primarily affected by the vehicle’s speed, the coefﬁcient of
friction between tires and road surface and negligibly by the tires’ rolling
resistance and vehicle’s air drag.

The second element is the perception-reaction time required to hit the
brake. In cars involving a driver, 1.5 s is considered for legal purposes.
In PRT system 0.5 s can be used, as this process is linked to communication
between control centers and cars and don’t
involve human beings.
A coefﬁcient of kinetic friction of 0.7 can be used to calculate such distance,
but this is under normal condition (under rain it would need to be lowered).
The following table gives the braking distance in meters required for different
speeds under normal road conditions.

The minimum safe headway measured tip-to-tail deﬁned by the braking per-

formance is as follows:

T min ¼ L=V þ tr þ kV=2 1=af (cid:2) 1=al

ð

Þ

where
Tmin minimum safe headway time in minute;
L
V
tr
af
al
k

length of the vehicle;
speed of the vehicle;
reaction time in minutes;
maximum braking deceleration of the follower;
maximum braking deceleration of the leader; and
arbitrary safety factor superior or equal to 1.

However, using an absolute stopping distance (also called brick wall stopping)
for safety reasons and thus not taking into consideration the speed of the leading

106

2 Risk Adverse Society

Table 2.13 Safety time PRT cars (with 0.5 s perception and reaction time and safety factor of
1.5), according to speed

Speed in km/h

Braking
distance
Safety time in
second

With 0.5 s
perception + Reaction
With safety factor of 1

10

2.0

20

5.0

30

9.2

40

14.5

50

21.0

60

28.6

2.8

3.0

3.6

4.3

5.1

5.9

vehicle, as well as considering a safety factor of 1 for a 4 m car, we would have the
following minimum safe headway in seconds (Table 2.13).

PRT system engineers have calculated that two-second headway is sufﬁcient. It
is true that computerized control theoretically allows for simultaneously multiple
vehicles braking. However, such short headway is controversial, because it would
consider the following:
(cid:129) A system reaction time of around only 0.01 s without any perception time;
(cid:129) A brake failure of around 1 m/s of the lead vehicle; and
(cid:129) An average speed of 30 km/h.

The problem from a safety perspective of this approach is that usually, the
authorities making the safety case use the most pessimistic scenario. This
pessimistic scenario would need to consider rainy conditions, a leading car or
object at complete stop at full speed of around 60 km/h (and not the average
speed of 30 km/h). Indeed most PRTs’ speeds are in the range of 40–70 km/h
though a few PRT designs have operating speeds of 100 km/h. Having said
that, the UK Railway regulating body has evaluated the Heathrow design and
accepted in principle one-second headways, pending successful completion
of initial operational tests at more than 2 s. The jury is out there to conclude
on this required safety time.

PRT system Capacity This headway calculation is fundamental because system
capacity is inversely proportional to headway. System capacity in terms of vehicle
and in terms of passenger is, respectively,

Nveh ¼ 3600=T min

and Npas ¼ P (cid:4) 3600=T min

where
Nveh
P
Tmin minimum headway

the number of vehicles per hour;
the maximum passenger capacity per vehicle; and

2.6 Personal Rapid Transit (PRT)

107

Using a four-passenger per car vehicle capacity and 2 s of headway, the theo-
retical PRT capacity with one lane would be 1800 vehicles and 7200 passenger/car.
However, most estimates assume that vehicles will not generally be ﬁlled to
capacity, due to the point-to-multipoint nature of PRT. At more typical average car
occupancy of 1.5 persons per vehicle, the maximum capacity is 2700 passengers
per hour (see Chap. 4 on megacities for more information on capacity calculation).

PRT promoters argue that the theoretical minimum PRT headways should be
based on the mechanical time to engage brakes, and these are much less than
half a second. Moving from two to one-second headways or half a second
would respectively double and quadruple PRT capacity, making it more
attractive and ﬁnancially interesting. However, one shouldn’t forget that in
simulations of rush hour or high-trafﬁc events, about one-third of vehicles on
the guideway need to travel empty to resupply stations with vehicles in order
to minimize response time. This would obviously reduce capacity
proportionally.

Travel speed PRTs have an advantage in terms of journey time in regards to normal
buses or metros. Given their point-to-multipoint travel nature, nonstop journeys are
about three times as fast as those with intermediate stops. This is not just due to
time savings for accelerating and stopping. Scheduled vehicles are also slowed by
boarding and exiting.

2.6.5 Cost Characteristics

Most of the PRT initial investment is in the guideway, with most estimates falling
in the $10–$15 m range per kilometer line, excluding rights of way or system
infrastructure, such as storage and maintenance yards and control centers.

A design with many modular components, mass production, driverless
operation and redundant systems should in theory result in low operating
costs and high reliability. However, this isn’t the case currently and will only
be known once a full scale PRT is in operation. According to Ultra, the
Heathrow pod integrator, it took six years to develop this PRT and costed
£30 m (50 M US$), which at a little over 13 M US$ per kilometer corroborate
this costs per kilometer.

108

2 Risk Adverse Society

2.6.6 PRT Versus Unmanned Cab

In chap. 6, we will see the new business model of hailing companies such as Uber
against which most European taxi drivers were protesting in June 2014.
Furthermore, we describe a future where there will be no taxi drivers left but where
PRTs will become predominant. Will
it be through unmanned taxis with a
multipoint-to-multipoint model (current taxi model) or point-to-multipoint model
(current PRT model) is still a question mark. What is also sure is that because of the
investments made by the big IT players and car manufacturers, unmanned cabs are
likely to have more intelligence on board the car than on the wayside. The main
reason for this is that unmanned cars need to ride in non-segregated lanes and PRTs
don’t have this capacity today, as they rely on switching technology just like the
train industry. We believe that the automotive industry cannot reduce this driving
ﬂexibility if unmanned cars are to prevail in the future.

2.7 E-Mobility Technologies Reducing Fatalities

The human factor is the main cause of accidents; drunk driving, seat belt wearing,
speeding, fatigue, in-car distraction (eating, not ﬁxing the road, phone, and e-mail),
and wrong perception or judgment are a few of these causes. The human factor
isn’t, however, the only cause. Bad weather conditions (i.e., rain, fog, and ice) and
poor road states (pot holes, dirt) also kill several people and injure many more. We
will analyze the e-mobility technologies that are being developed to try to reduce
such problems. Let’s start by presenting a technology that actually allows recording
of all bad driving behaviors or equipment malfunctions—the black box—that has
been already installed in our cars for a few years.

2.7.1 Black Box

People are mostly familiar with black boxes in airplane. In the last decade, event
data recorders (EDRs), as they are called in the railway industry, have been
introduced and are now recording safety-related information such as speed,
acceleration, braking, door closing, etc. Black boxes are now gaining momentum in
the automotive market as well. Despite obvious privacy issues, black boxes have
been used by car accident investigators and insurance companies to reconstruct the
events before accidents occurred. Countries such as Canada have used, as early as
October 2003, black box information to charge drivers responsible of dangerous
driving, involved in-car crashes with fatalities. The reality is, and although most
people aren’t aware of their onboard presence, event recorders are already installed
on around 80 % of all new cars. Originally, car black boxes were installed to

2.7 E-Mobility Technologies Reducing Fatalities

109

determine the cause of airbags activation, but now their use has changed to enable
recording of metadata such as speed, acceleration, braking events, and other
safety-related measures. Fortunately, they can also identify if a malfunction hap-
pened and caused an accident.

Lately, new types of black boxes coupled with video cameras installed on the
windshield have made their market introduction. These digital video recorders
(DVRs) can associate image, with positioning through GPS, as well as performance
of the car through the event recorder. Thus on top of the safety-related measure of
the event recorder, these DVRs also record the car’s time, location, and direction, as
well as the driver’s view which makes it helpful for a number of hard-to-prove
situation involving accidents (i.e., someone crossing a lane on a red light).

How does DVRs work? It basically records constantly images on which
metadata (I.e.: speed, positioning, braking data, etc.) is inserted for a speciﬁc
period of time. There is yet no rule for how much time they can record but for
instance in the Public Transport a rule of 20–32 days is usually applied to
maintain some kind of privacy protection. Video footing isn’t destroyed but
overwritten by newer video and sound streams and metadata on a First In
First Out basis. If a car hit is felt by the system, the last 30 s are tagged and
secured in a safe area where it cannot be erased.

If cars have already been equipped for so long with black box under the form of
EDR with limited information recording, why do people suddenly want to add more
information? There are several reasons to this.

The obvious reason is that DVR technology has evolved tremendously and
prices have gone down allowing its diffusion on the mass market. Digital
technology has allowed camera miniaturization as well as a signiﬁcant
reduction in mechanical parts always prone to problems linked to vibration.
Being cheap, easy to install and use is a great argument for potential
consumers.

Secondly, GPS have now become generalized in many new cars. Thus

adding such information is simple.

The third reason is legal. In litigation society, having information that the
other party doesn’t have is clearly an advantage and a powerful motive to
install such DVR. In the USA especially this is a strong selling argument. In
Russia, where law enforcement
is more fragile, DVRs have also been
extremely popular as they enable ﬁghting false accident claims. Even coun-
tries like France or Belgium, where black box video information can’t be used
as element of proof in courts are changing their views and starting to follow
countries like America or Russia.

110

2 Risk Adverse Society

The fourth reason is ﬁnancial. Many insurance companies are pushing for
car black box installation. In many countries insurers are still imposing their
own black box system, as there isn’t yet a global standard.

Though DVR technology might be different, all motivations are identical:
reward the good driving behaviors by reducing the insurance costs. These
new insurance policies are still at an early stage with big insurance companies
like AXA still testing their own black box and deciding on its commercial
policy.

The last reason, which also explains greatly why insurance companies are
reducing their insurance premium, is that it works. In the United States,
studies on the use of black box have shown a reduction of more than 50 % in
the accident rates of cars equipped with such systems.

For all these reasons and considering that car fatalities are under scrutiny of an
increasingly risk adverse and pro-litigation society, the question isn’t if these DVRs
will be installed on each car but when. Civil right privacy concerns will be again a
big issue.

Privacy advocates need to be wary, though they won’t be able to impede, in
our view, such inevitable trend. By installing black boxes, insurance com-
panies will be entitled to have access to many details of the car owner’s
private life and will be able to use this information against their clients. But
things will get worst for privacy advocates, the day DVRs become manda-
tory. Indeed today this information is used as forensic evidence. The justice
uses it in case of accidents involving fatalities. People use it in court when it
suits them. However with the event of more powerful telecommunication
network such as 4G, any car will become a supplier of real time information
about the driver’s behavior. Ford’s CEO Alan Mulally said in 2013:
“We have GPS in your car, so we know what you’re doing”.
Navigational systems can now transmit real time information about a car’s
location, as well as details about the vehicle’s performance, such as speed,
acceleration, etc. The US Government Accountability Ofﬁce reported in 2011
that all carmakers collected location data and shared it with third parties that
provide services to the car owner. Many automobilists are happy to provide
such information to service tracking providers such as General Motors’
OnStarTM system.

But the question is how long it will be before the companies that own such
system decide granting access to advertising companies selling geo-positioned
promotions? As we will see in the connected city chapter, companies such as
Google aren’t investigate in driverless technologies for the sake of it because they

2.7 E-Mobility Technologies Reducing Fatalities

111

see a huge market opportunity for ads. Furthermore, how long will it be before
vehicles’ speed is fed to local law enforcement?

In our view, in a couple of years, all car speed and safety-related driving patterns
will be fed back into central systems. This is the only way that driverless cars can
dominate the road, and dominate they will.

2.7.2 Drink Driving: Alcohol Ignition Interlock

More than 10,000 people die in the US each year in alcohol-impaired driving
crashes, accounting for about a third of all deaths.

An alcohol ignition interlock is an equipment, which measures the level of
alcohol in the body. It requires a driver to blow into the device and register a
blood alcohol reading that is below a predetermined level. If the driver exceeds
the level, the vehicle will not start. In some countries such as the US, such
equipment must be installed on frequent drunk driver’s car. In case of offense,
the data recorded by the device can be uploaded to the driver’s Department of
Motor Vehicles or even to a court system, depending on the State’s law. Some
groups, such as (MADD) support ignition locks for ﬁrst-time offenders.

2.7.3 Seat Belt Wearing

In 95 % of accidents, wearing your seat belt will save your life. All newer cars are
equipped with alarms that indicate when front drivers don’t buckle up.

A Seat Belt reminder system, which is based on weight sensed by the front
seats, usually sends a noise signal but doesn’t stop the car. This system is
usually not connected to back seat belts and rear passengers can still decide to
buckle or not, even if legally they are obliged to do so. In the UK, one third or
rear passengers don’t wear their seat belt. The problem with backseat pas-
sengers is that backseats are also used to carry things. Thus alarms for
unbuckled passengers are more complicated to manage.

Would it be reasonable to envision as for drunk driving, locking the ignition if not
wearing your seat belt? From a technical perspective, this would be extremely simple.
The same alarm could be used to stop the ignition, though the issue for back seat
passengers would still remain. As we’ve seen, air bags are connected to the EDR, which
records all safety-related measures. Thus using this information to stop ignition would

112

2 Risk Adverse Society

be simple. An alternative choice would be to send the information through the EDR to
the police force to inform them that car occupants haven’t buckled up.

However, sending this information would be in most cases useless. Indeed, not
wearing seat belts is a choice. People can always buckle up their seat belt without
actually being secured by it. No technical solution could solve this problem easily.

2.7.4 Real-Time Limitation on Over-Speeding

Newer GPS give more than geo-positioning and time information. They can cal-
culate speed and overlay this speed on a map where legal upper limits can be
dispelled. Integrating a physical speed restrainer in the car, which would auto-
matically be triggered after an acceptable over passing tolerance of let’s say 20 %,
would be extremely easy to do.

2.7.5 Real-Time Information on Over-Speeding

As we’ve just seen, it would be extremely easy for car manufacturers to supply
through GPS all speeding information with an acceptable level of accuracy to the
nearby police radio receiver. Integrating the acceptable tolerance of 20 % for over
passing, any driver could be ﬁned at the control center directly without even having
to be arrested.

2.7.6 Automatic Car Parking

Some cars already have systems that assist with parking, but these are not com-
pletely autonomous. These systems can identify empty parking space and steer into
it, while the driver uses the brakes. The Volvo system, however, lets the driver get
out and uses a smart phone application to instruct the vehicle to park. The car then
drives off, maneuvers into a parking place, and sends an information message to the
driver on where it is. The driver can collect the car in person or use his phone to call
it back to where he dropped it off.

In the past, designs for automatic car parking relied on car parks being ﬁtted
with buried guide wires that vehicle needed to follow. That, though, creates a
chicken-and-egg problem: car park operators will not invest in such infra-
structure until there is a sufﬁcient number of suitably equipped cars and
conversely drivers will not want to buy self-parking cars if there is nowhere to
use them. This means that for autonomous parking to work most of the
technology will have to be in the car itself.

2.7 E-Mobility Technologies Reducing Fatalities

113

2.7.7 Fatigue

Some of the luxury brands newest safety systems try to address each of the four D
problems that cause most accidents, especially trying to keep the driver alert.

Volvo uses cameras, lasers, and radar to monitor the car’s progress. If the car
crosses a lane line without a signal from the blinker, an alarm sounds. If a
pattern of tiredness emerges, an icon on the dashboard ﬂashes and the words
“Time for a break” is showed. To instill better habits, the car rates the driver’s
attentiveness as it goes, with bars like those on a cell phone. Mercedes goes a
step further: its advanced cruise control won’t work unless at least one of the
driver’s hands is on the wheel.

2.7.8 Wrong Perception or Judgment

With all of the distractions inside of a car today, rear-end collisions have become far
too common. Nearly, a third of all car accidents where someone was killed or
injured in the United States involved a rear-end collision. Most often, the driver in
the rear is at fault for tailgating, following too closely, or not paying enough
attention to see that the driver in the front car has stopped or is slowing. Most of
these accidents could be avoided if drivers would systematically respect the min-
imum inter car distance. This distance which we transform into time is around 2 s
under normal weather conditions. Unfortunately, many drivers don’t use such
precautionary measures nor do they add the recommended additional 20 %
reduction under rainy or misty conditions. Without such measures, drivers are often
caught hitting the brakes at the last moment, creating a possible chain of accidents
with nearby cars. Companies are working on technology which would alert other
drivers and prevent most of these accidents.

For instance, Ford in 2013 tested equipment that could provide early warning
to other motorists when brakes were applied hard. The broadcast signal
illuminated a warning light in the dashboard of following vehicles, even if
they were out of sight or not directly behind the braking vehicle.

Obviously, receiving in advance an alarm informing us of a nearby potentially
dangerous situation such as hitting the brakes or abruptly changing lanes would
signiﬁcantly reduce this cause of accidents.

114

2 Risk Adverse Society

2.8 The Advent of Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communication

Technology

In a move that signals a great technological leap forward for the automotive
industry, the US Government announced in February 2014 that it will take steps to
require all new cars to communicate with each other. New regulation is expected
before President Obama leaves ofﬁce in 2017. This is the ﬁrst step on a series of
automotive evolution that will ultimately lead to unmanned vehicles, resulting from
internal electronics integration with external infrastructure, communications, and
database systems.

Similar to trains with radio technology, cars that would communicate with each
other need some basic wireless technology. The communication blends multiple
networking technologies including dedicated short-range communication (DSRC),
4G/LTE cellular wireless
accurate
broadband, mesh
geo-positioning. All these technologies that we will describe in more detail later on
form a system that goes under the name of VANET (for vehicular ad hoc network).

networking,

and

2.8.1 VANET

As the word VANET describes it, this system is composed of elements (nodes) that
spontaneously join and self-organize to form a network in an Ad Hoc mode. These
trafﬁc lights, security
elements can be vehicles, communication base stations,
panels, etc. This system is characterized by rapid but predictable network topology
changes, one-time interactions between these elements, and partially available
connectivity. Intermittent communication can be a real concern, especially in rural
areas, where economical reality won’t allow for the systematic implementation of
telecom access points. Because of this connectivity issue, several telecom tech-
nologies are likely to be involved and integrated within the cars: 4G, GSM, UMT,
WI-MAX, and a speciﬁc technology to VANET called WAVE (Wireless Access in
Vehicular Environments) also known under its standard name: IEEE 802.11p.

We will only describe in more details this WAVE technology, as the other ones
are already well known and not speciﬁc to transportation (check study12 for more
information on WAVE technology). We will also introduce the draft standards
being introduced to ensure that all these heterogeneous technologies work together.

12Smart Vehicles, Technologies, and Main Applications in Vehicular Ad hoc Networks; Author
Anna Maria Vegni, Mauro Biagi and Roberto Cusani.

2.8 The Advent of Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communication Technology

115

2.8.2 Wave Technology

For those familiar with wireless technology, the WAVE technology is derived from
the IEEE standard 802.11 (i.e., similar to the wireless technology people use in their
home). The IEEE 802.11p standard uses channels of 10 MHz bandwidth in the 5.9
Gigahertz (GHz) band in the USA. In Europe, the EU has allocated the 30 MHz of
spectrum in also the 5.9 GHz band to road safety applications. Unfortunately, these
European and American (but also Japanese) dedicated short-range radio (DSRC)
networks aren’t compatible.

IEEE 802.11p requirements:
Communication distance: These radio emitters need to be able to commu-
nicate over a distance allowing for sufﬁcient safety braking distance, pre-
venting dangerous events. The IEEE 802.11p range can reach up to 300 m,
which gives around 10 s of go-ahead at highway speed (sufﬁcient as we’ve
seen in the section on PRT headway).
Communication connections: between cars themselves or with the roadside
infrastructure, communication must be extremely short. Thus, the technology
must work without lengthy association and authentication procedures. IEEE
802.11p amendment deﬁnes a way to exchange data through that link without
the need to establish a basic service set, such as an access point and associated
stations. For that purpose, IEEE 802.11p enabled telecom stations may start
sending and receiving data frames as soon as they arrive on the communi-
cation channel.

As several technologies will need to work together seamlessly, an international
body working group (ISO TC204/WG16) produced a series of draft standards,
known as CALM (continuous air-interface, long and medium range).

2.8.3 CALM Technology

The objective of the CALM standards is to develop a network terminal ensuring
seamless connectivity between cars and roadside systems for several of these
technologies we’ve already mentioned. This is an EU initiative. The USA has its
own initiative known as vehicle infrastructure integration (VII).

116

2 Risk Adverse Society

2.8.4 LTE Technology in VANET

LTE or 4G is a standard for wireless communication of high-speed data for mobile
phones and data terminals. LTE’s would be well suited for periodical communi-
cation with cloud computing servers to store information from cars and their
environment.

Indeed, 4G provides downlink peak rates of 300 Mbit/s, uplink peak rates of
75 Mbit/s and Quality Of Service provisions permitting a transfer latency of
less than 5 ms in the radio access network. Furthermore, LTE has the ability
to manage fast-moving mobiles and supports multi-cast and broadcast
streams as well as scalable carrier bandwidth from 1.4 to 20 MHz.

Many experts believe that when driverless cars start hitting the road, 5G will also
be implemented (around 2020). With 5G communication will come 100 times faster
than 4G with much lower latency and ability to connect 10 bn devices around the
world.

2.8.5 Mesh Network Infrastructure

Network infrastructure will need to sustain various mobile communications
between information sources and transaction stations on the roadside and mobile
radio units, as well as between portable and mobile units. The envisioned network
is based on mesh technology (for more information see Chap. 5). Wireless mesh
architecture infrastructure is, in effect, a router network minus the cabling between
nodes. It’s built of peer radio devices that don’t have to be cabled to a wired port,
like traditional WLAN access points do. Mesh architecture sustains signal strength
by breaking long distances into a series of shorter hops. Every mesh node (small
radio transmitters that function in the same way as a wireless router) can send,
capture, and retransmit signals to intermediate nodes (other cars, smart trafﬁc signal,
etc.) that not only boost the signal, but cooperatively make forwarding decisions
based on their knowledge of the network, thus performing routing functionalities
(Figs. 2.18and 2.19).

Such architecture may provide high bandwidth, spectral efﬁciency, and
economic advantage over the coverage area. Mesh network is important
because, most access points would be in locations with no easy cable/ﬁber
access. Moreover, fast deployment in rapidly changing urban landscape is
desirable and mesh structure can easily be ﬁxed on trafﬁc lights, light poles,
highway bridge structures, without the needed physical interconnections.

2.8 The Advent of Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communication Technology

117

Fig. 2.18 A mesh network routing architecture. Source Author

Mesh manager
RCMS based

V2I

Internet

Mesh 
gateway

Mesh
Node

Fig. 2.19 Vehicle Ad Hoc Network composed of mesh nodes communicating through the
802.11p standard and interfacing through a mesh gateway with managing system in the cloud.
Source Author

118

2 Risk Adverse Society

– By-pass functionalities: Cars need to be able to communicate even when
intermittently blocked by passing vehicles. Mesh networks can use the
hundreds of other nodes around to adjust to ﬁnd a clear signal.

– Fallback options and robust message networks: If one network is
down, alternatives need to be identiﬁed and strengthened to reliably
propagate messages between networks. For example, if an accident were
to cause V2C communications to be broken, a car may still have access to
a V2V communication network. An emergency signal message could
potentially be sent through V2V to a vehicle nearby, and then between
cars and infrastructures until reaching its destination.

2.8.6 Vehicular Application

There are typically three types of application that can be regrouped within the
VANET systems:
(cid:129) Infotainment: Though this isn’t the real objective of VANET, it should bring

commercial opportunities and higher comfort levels for passengers;

(cid:129) Trafﬁc management: These applications will focus on optimizing the car ﬂow
by reducing trafﬁc jams. Such applications would include enhanced navigation
and mapping system, trafﬁc light ﬂow regulation, lane merging information,
accident real-time information, speed regulation, etc.; and

(cid:129) Road safety: These applications have the objective to reduce fatalities (NHTSA
reports say that it would reduce vehicle crashes by 81 %) by providing drivers
with information about road hazards and dangerous driving behavior or situa-
tions. The most obvious application is the anti-collision system.

2.8.7 Anti-collision System

Since V2V is still a concept with several
description of how V2V will work is uncertain.

thousand working prototypes, all

Most likely the anti-collision systems will integrate a visual interface included
within the front board, forewarning the driver of a potential dangerous situ-
ation. V2V warnings might come to the driver as an alert, perhaps a red light
that ﬂashes in the instrument panel, or a combination of orange and red alerts
for escalating problems? The direction of the risk might also be identiﬁed on
the front board. In a second generation, for which prototypes already exist,
cars are likely to brake or even steer around hazards. All the basic information

2.8 The Advent of Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communication Technology

119

required for providing this anti-collision system with the required input
already exists in most cars.

As seen for trains, cars will need to provide other cars with basic safety infor-
mation. The EDR, though much simpler than a Train Control Unit, can already
provide most of the mandatory information, such as speed, position, direction of
travel, car steering angle, car weight, braking conditions, and even loss of stability.
All this information will be provided by the onboard equipment except one: the
position of the car.

2.8.8 Accurate Geo-Positioning

Everyone has already been aboard a car with GPS. The GPS is a satellite navigation
system that gives geo-localization and indicates time. In order to work properly, it
needs a direct access to at least four satellites. Three satellites can work but data
isn’t accurate enough for precise 3-D location (latitude and longitude are still
available).

How do GPS work?
Using information from satellites, it basically triangulates its position in
regards to the satellites. The satellites transmit a signal of their own location
in orbit, with a time signature. The receiver compares the time a signal was
transmitted by the different satellites with the time it was received, which
gives its location. The receiver uses the signals overlap to do this triangula-
tion. However, as the size of the waves transmitting the signal can be large,
their overlap can be several meters, thus limiting geo-positioning accuracy.
Furthermore and as most drivers have experienced, GPS can stop emitting
geo-positioning information. In fact, GPS satellites transmit a low-powered
radio signal that travels by line-of-sight. This means it will pass through
clouds, glass or plastic but will not go through most solid objects such as
buildings or trees. Furthermore, it can be impacted by atmospheric turbu-
lences or electrical interferences. This is especially problematic during storms
and when passing through tunnels.

So there are two fundamental issues to solve with GPS for V2V communication

to work properly: geo-localization precision and satellite losses.

Geo-localization precision GPS accuracy was on average around 15 m. While this
could be sufﬁcient to indicate where you are in relation to a road junction, it isn’t
accurate enough to tell you to stop especially if you are in a trafﬁc jam, 3 m apart

120

2 Risk Adverse Society

from the neighboring car’s bumper. Furthermore, certain atmospheric factors and
other sources of error can also affect the GPS receiver’s accuracy. This is why GPS
haven’t really been used for signaling by railway industry so far. Less than 5 m can
separate two tracks and thus, with this level of accuracy, it was impossible to detect
if the train was on the same track heading toward a collision or if the trains were just
passing by normally.

GPS receivers with WAAS Newer generation of GPS and new safety concept can
solve most of these problems. Newer GPS receivers with Wide Area Augmentation
System (WAAS) capability can improve accuracy to less than 3 m on average,
though the nominal value is 7.6 m. In North America, measurements of the system
at speciﬁc locations have shown that GPS can provide accuracy level of 1.0 m
laterally and 1.5 m vertically. Similar correcting systems exist in Europe (EGNOS)
and Japan (MSAS).

PTC initiatives: In order to see how this problem could be solved for cars,
let’s look at the GPS based railway initiatives. The American signaling
program called (PTC) manages to overcome these limitations by using the
Nationwide Differential GPS (NDGPS), which comprises of a network of
ground-based reference stations, in order to serve as a closer point of refer-
ence. The concept behind PTC works by the train receiving information about
its location and along which lines it can safely travel. Onboard computers
receive the GPS data and can control the movement of the train automatically,
preventing any movement
is unsafe according to up-to-date travel
information. Using the NDGPS also prevents areas of poor signal, such as
tunnels, from signiﬁcantly impacting the system.

that

Galileo GPS Europe’s answer to the American GPS is called Galileo. When
completed by 2019, 30 satellites will be able to give an accuracy level of around
4 m for horizontal and 8 m for vertical positioning. Furthermore, GPS and Galileo
will be interoperable.

DGPS Users can also get better accuracy with Differential GPS (DGPS), which
corrects GPS signals within an average of 3 to 5 m.

When looking at initiatives in the railway industry, we can conclude that the
GPS level of accuracy will enable in the future (around 2017 -2018) a sufﬁcient
level of precision for V2V communication to work.
Satellite loss As we’ve all experienced, GPS can lose satellite signal. In a V2V
system, this can be complicated as the exact car’s position in regards to the other
cars is geo-located. However, in such case, an alarm is likely to indicate the driver
that her car’s position isn’t accurate enough and should be more careful. This loss
will, however, be more complicated in an unmanned vehicle environment.

2.8 The Advent of Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communication Technology

121

Dead reckoning It is a GPS feature available on many high-end GPS models that
help cars keep track of their position after losing their satellite signal. It works by
still being able to monitor a vehicle’s speed and course of direction, though less
accurately than through true satellite guidance. Some systems measure the average
speed for a stretch of road based on recent car data and calculate the position based
on projections. Other systems may use a digital compass and a connection to the
car’s sensors to help deﬁne the car’s speed and direction.
Active markers We’ve seen that these tools are often used in railways to give basic
information about geo-positioning. Most likely in critical area such as tunnels, they
will be used to compensate for the absence of satellite access.

2.8.9 V2V Operational Mode

V2V operational mode relies on trust. For experienced drivers, putting their life into
the hands of their car’s onboard computer won’t be easy. They should. After all,
millions already do with unmanned trains and as we’ve seen reducing the human
error factor in transportation can only increase safety. However, it is true that
passengers will need to trust their car but also the nearby vehicles in a few different
ways:
(cid:129) Firstly, the driver must trust that the received signal comes from the car directly

(cid:129) Secondly, he is trusting that this car is accurately reporting its state, and not

in front or on its side;

sending wrong messages; and

(cid:129) Thirdly, she is trusting that the received signal isn’t trying to hack into the car’s

system or being sent by malicious people.

Operationally, the following six components that would be deployed in vehicles

equipped with V2V would need to be working together:

1. An appropriate blend of telecom technologies, such as DSRC that receives and
transmits data through antenna, other telecommunication technology, and a
mesh network;

2. GPS receivers providing vehicle position and time to DSRC radio and supplying
timekeeping signal for applications, as well as accurate and updated maps;
3. An onboard communication network that incorporates the existing network that

interconnects components in the vehicle;

4. An electronic control unit that runs safety applications;
5. A driver–vehicle interface that generates warning issued to driver; and
6. A memory that stores security certiﬁcates, application data, and other

information.

122

2 Risk Adverse Society

A ruggedized communication security system, which will check the proper
functioning of these six components, will need to provide and verify V2V security
certiﬁcates to ensure this trust between vehicles.

2.9

Intelligent Wayside Technologies

Infrastructure may sound boring in regards to smart cars, but these new e-mobility
technologies will demand that Public Authorities decide how to promote such
technologies and deﬁne the role they should play in their
implementation.
Unfortunately, and as we will see in Chap. 6, there is a huge deﬁcit in public
spending for infrastructure. In many countries, Governments, States, and munici-
palities are broke and can barely afford to maintain the transportation infrastructure
they already have. No public authorities will look favorably at having to invest in
new infrastructure and pay the maintenance of such new equipment. However,
without clever infrastructure, the concept of V2V and unmanned cars can run into
trouble. In fact, we could probably say that smart vehicles are only as intelligent as
the infrastructure that surrounds them is.

In this section, we will look at which key infrastructure should be made more
intelligent and who could pay for it. However, in the last instance, if no one can pay
for it, there is always the possibility to ensure that the required functionality be
performed directly by the car and paid by the owners themselves.

additional

In order to make complex concepts easy to remember, marketers have come up
indicate
with
Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) and V2C communication, respectively. Under V2C,
we include all the telecommunication backbone and network. Under V2I, we
include all the road equipments that will provide real-time information.

and V2C are

acronyms. V2I

used

to

2.9.1 Vehicle-to-Cloud (V2C)

We’ve just seen that continuous wireless component is a key success factor of V2V.
V2C, which incorporates this wireless system, includes two elements:
(cid:129) Cloud computing: This portion can be hosted by servers from big IT providers.
As we all know, this hosting capacity is growing exponentially and this is now a
service which can be sold easily; and

(cid:129) Wireless communication link: We’ve seen that V2C will be based on a mesh
network with base stations or LTE tower positioned in key areas of cities or
roads (i.e., junctions).

2.9 Intelligent Wayside Technologies

123

The interesting aspect of mesh networks that we’ve seen is their ability to
reassemble themselves to ﬁt changing environments. Moreover, the more
connection points, the better. Indeed, one of the driving forces behind mesh
technology is Metcalfe’s Law, (quote from Bob Metcalfe one of the Ethernet
inventor) that says that the value of a network grows as its number of con-
nection points increases. Imagine wireless trafﬁc relaying information from
car to car until reaching its destination. More cars would just mean more
capacity to transmit data. It should also be noted that some network com-
panies such as Cisco are working on newer network technology, which would
allow for decentralized data processing, directly within the networks,
increasing reaction responses.

Some infrastructure providers would also need to support this V2V initiative.

One area which will be critical is parking lots.

2.9.2

Intelligent Parking

Some companies have already developed small wireless sensors that can indicate if
a parking space is occupied or not. Like balises for the railway industry, these
magnetometers that are glued to the road or buried a few millimeters under the
pavement can detect when a car arrives or leaves.

In 2014, San Francisco will implement the largest mesh network for moni-
toring 6,000 parking spaces. The city hopes that displaying information from
the sensors on Web maps, smart phones, and signs on the street will reduce
the trafﬁc and pollution caused by circling cars.

2.9.3

Intelligent Trafﬁc Systems

Intelligent lighting systems based on sensors or cameras as well as centralized
computer making adjustment to help car ﬂow can be found throughout the world.
V2I, however, will enhance this capacity by giving additional information that
ordinary sensors cannot.

By leveraging and installing wireless transponders and smart embedded sensors,
cars will feed safety information into highways and roads. Such information would
include static road hazards like curvy roads, ﬂooding areas, low bridges, changing
road conditions such as construction, minimum and maximum speed, as well as

124

2 Risk Adverse Society

trafﬁc input such as density, ﬂow, volume, and speed. Furthermore, information at
cross sections will also be available under V2I, such as average car speed and time
wasted at such junction. However, the main advantage of such technology is that
the information ﬂowing from the lighting system to the car could synchronize
automatically the vehicle’s speed to reduce the braking needs.

One could also imagine that in areas with low car density, information ﬂow
from the car could reduce the lighting’s stopping period, enabling the vehicle
to avoid stopping altogether. It could even eliminate altogether the need for
lighting systems, in areas with no pedestrian. As a matter of fact since 2012,
computer scientists from the University of Texas have been developing smart
intersections designed for self-driving cars. If successfully applied, their
technology will insure that onboard and intersection computers communicate
directly and synchronize safely the required car speed at intersections without
the use of any trafﬁc lights or stop signs.

2.9.4 Distributed Intelligence

How many people have been stuck for hours in a trafﬁc jam, wishing someone or
something would have given it an advanced warning of an accident or works lying
ahead? On many toll highways of this world, dedicated radio services now give
such information. However, not everyone wants to listen to elevator music or to
what happens 300 km from their current car location. Furthermore, getting alter-
native route information is often difﬁcult. With new GPS technology, things have
improved as they often provide real-time road status and alternative roads.
However, such services are often limited and alternative routes often end up taking
more time than just staying on the road.

V2V intelligent trafﬁc management should help. Trafﬁc information already
exists on many highways and main city arteries, centralized in control centers.
Often trafﬁc reports are relayed to radios or to GPS real-time service provider, and
even sometimes, displayed simple electric panels on the road. However, V2C
technology will extend these services to all types of road. Cars will be able to send
the road condition and
messages to cloud servers informing everyone about
they’ve encountered,
potential hazardous
through the means of
situations
geo-localized messages (giving a latitude, longitude, and vertical position). Any
cars passing by will be able to get such information in quasi real-time and intel-
ligent mapping will then be able to select and display the best alternative route.

2.10 Driverless Cars

2.10 Driverless Cars

125

Marketers have come up with several names to characterize cars that can run
without the need of a driver: self-driving, driverless, unmanned, autonomous, robot
car, etc. All these names describe the level 4 or 5 of automated cars. Independently
from how we name them, these cars rely on four basic principles: Data acquisition
through sensors, data treatment through onboard computers and software programs,
two-way communication, and interface with the car’s drive train equipment.

2.10.1 Data Acquisition

Unmanned cars need to sense their environment in all potential conditions:
(cid:129) Exterior and interior environments, such as tunnel;
(cid:129) In all spectrum of light, from daylight to night; and
(cid:129) In all weather conditions, be it fog, rain, snow, or even sand in the desert.

In order to sense all these conditions, a mix of several technologies will be
required. These are a few of the technologies currently used by Google and that
could equip these cars, if their unit cost can be reduced signiﬁcantly.

Lidar It is a laser radar system, which measures the distance by illuminating ele-
ments positioned in front of the laser beams. Lidar uses a spectrum of ultraviolet,
visible, or near infrared lights, to picture objects in all conditions. It can target a
wide range of materials, including metallic and non-metallic objects, rocks, rain,
human beings, etc. In fact everything that can be found on a road can be picked up
by a lidar.

Google driverless car used till 2014 for testing a 64-beam laser mounted on
the top of a car, which unit price was $70,000. The laser provided
three-dimensional depth. Each beam ﬂashed around ten times per second,
scanning more than 1 million points in concentric waves. This laser could
detect a 30 cm long object crossing a road 50 m ahead of the car.

Radar Google’s car integrates also radar technology, which is an object-detection
system that uses radio waves to determine the range, altitude, direction, or speed of
objects. The radar has twice the range of the lidar but doesn’t have the same
precision.

Cameras Finally, it also integrates vision through cameras. Cameras are used for
identifying road signs, signals, colors, and lights.

126

2 Risk Adverse Society

Data fusion All views from these three technologies are then integrated, combined,
and overlaid by the digital maps and Street ViewsTM that Google collects
throughout the world. The result is a clear 3 D model of the road.

Once the system gets a clear view of its environment, it still needs to understand
what it is seeing. The difﬁculty is that roads, unlike metro lines, aren’t controlled
environments. Kids, animals, and other cars can rush from the side or run in front of
the car. Luckily, driving is mostly simple: follow the front car within the two
delimitating lines, with a deﬁned interspacing. This is especially true on highways.
The complication is managing the remaining stuff, especially in urban
environments.

2.10.2 Data Treatment

How can computer treat such complicated stuff? The answer is by writing appro-
priate algorithms. The difﬁculty is what is an appropriate algorithm and how do you
make sure you aren’t missing any critical set of rules or interpreting it erroneously?
To illustrate such risk, let’s take an example from the science ﬁction writer Isaac
Asimov, who set the three laws of robotic13, a very appropriate example for a robot
car:
(cid:129) A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human

being to come to harm;

(cid:129) A robot must obey any orders given to it by human beings, except where such

orders would conﬂict with the First Law; and

(cid:129) A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not

conﬂict with the First or Second Law.

Mr. Asimov described in his book Robots and Empire, a 0 law created by a robot

which modiﬁes the three ﬁrst laws:
(cid:129) A robot may not harm humanity, or by inaction, allow humanity to come to

harm.
Obviously, this is pure science ﬁction but it shows that if software engineers rely
too much on self-learning programs, it can create rules that are difﬁcult to validate
through scenarios or testing.

Let’s take a more practical example to illustrate how testing and self-learning
engines can be useful. Anyone who has accelerated with a rear wheel drive
car, when hitting an icy patch may have experienced its car rear end trying to

13The novel Robots and Empire from Isaac Asimov; published by Doubleday Books in 1985.

2.10 Driverless Cars

127

come around. In order to redirect the car in the road axle, one must turn the
wheels in the direction of the spin. This move is counter-intuitive and any-
body who hasn’t gone through this experience will turn the wheel in the
opposite direction of the spin, ending crashing in snow banks, hopefully
without injury. A self learning system would do the error once but would
either deﬁne its action plan or identify the issue for the software engineer to
solve.

If we take the example of the spinning car rule, we could create an

algorithm replicating the following scenario: “if”
– the car is rear wheel drive (x1);
– Sensors have identiﬁed a quick spin (x2);
– ice has been detected by vision (x3);
– temperature is lower than 0°C (x4); etc.,
“than do”:
– turn the driver’s wheel in the same direction as the spin(y1) if there is any

wheel;

– use engine braking to decelerate (y2);
– if using ABS brakes, maintain a steady pressure on the brakes (y3);
– if not using ABS brakes, do not maintain steady pressure, apply light

stabs, hold, release and press again (y4);

– Brake at speed under 10 km (y3);
– etc.

After setting such rules and the necessary interface with sensors and drivetrain,
one needs to drive the car and test by trial and error that the rules don’t make the car
crash. This is a slow and demanding process. Luckily, software engineers can take
advantage of self-learning software programs. Other logic models can be used, such
as fuzzy logic to integrate and understand uncertainty. In other words, software
engineers can combine learning and rule setting to come up with the best
algorithms.

Many set of rules can be tested according to several scenarios. For instance,
simulations based on accidents documented by the US National Highway
Trafﬁc Safety Administration can be applied. Many accidents in rural areas
are due to collision with wild life. If a dear crosses in front of the car what
rules should be applied? Should the car try to avoid it or hit it? Is the previous
rule true in all conditions or it needs to integrate speed? How much advance
warning does it need?

128

2 Risk Adverse Society

As we see, driving hours and experience with self-teaching systems will opti-
mize these algorithms. Having worked on these rules and having been able to
ﬁne-tune them will give companies with an early start, a clear advantage. For
instance, we all heard that the IT company Google’s unmanned cars have been
accident-free for a few years now. This proves that their algorithms are working. It
also proves that they are safer than normal vehicles, as statistically after more than
830,000 km, and human drivers would have already had an average of two crashes.

2.10.3 Financial Barrier to Adoption

One of the barriers to adoption is cost. In 2010, the cost of Google’s self-driving
technology was $150,000, of which as we’ve seen $70,000 was just for the lidar.
Obviously, such price is dissuasive but some suppliers believe that mass production
could reduce quickly the lidar to less than 1000$. Computational processing, which
is still another large component of the overall price, will experience the usual
exponential cost reduction.

Many specialists in the automobile industry believe that Google’s idealistic
approach to the driverless cars won’t bring the price of all these technologies down
far enough to make it attractive to the mass market. So many car manufacturers
together with their OEMs are looking at ways to consolidate and simplify the
hardware. Miniaturization, sensor fusion, and integration of controllers are a few
approaches considered. Better optical systems that could replace Lidar and radar
technologies are also envisioned.

Whatever the solutions that will prevail, one thing is certain, cost will go down.
How quickly is still a question mark, but according to a recent study14, price for the
self-driving technology will add between $7000 and $10,000 to a car’s price in
2025, a ﬁgure that will drop to around $5000 in 2030 and about $3000 in 2035, the
year when the report says most self-driving vehicles will be operated completely
independent from a human occupant’s control. Some other reports suggest that by
2030, the price of the additional technologies will fall under $1000, at which point
the autonomous option will cost probably less than the annual savings in insurance.

If costs come down, the next most important barrier is legal. In our opinion,
and though these legal issues are real, they will be tackled in time to allow the
advent of unmanned cars. The fact is that some US States such as Nevada,
Florida, California and Michigan have already legalized self-driving cars.
The UK has also legalized their use on public roads in 2013. As economical
interest and proof of safety will prevail, more and more countries and States

14Emerging Technologies: Autonomous Cars—Not If, But When; Source IHS Automotive fore-
casts; Date January 2, 2014. http://press.ihs.com/press-release/automotive/self-driving-cars-
moving-industrys-drivers-seat.

2.10 Driverless Cars

129

will legalize self-driving cars. Though legal concerns are legitimate, we see
them more as a resistance to change than a road blocker. After all, the railway
industry as gone unmanned and this is a market with stringent standards and
heavily regulated. In our view, legal issues won’t stay in the way of all the
forces advocating for autonomous vehicles, such as:
– Fewer accidents, reducing overall risk and liability, which will cause

insurance companies to favor self-driving cars;

– Signiﬁcant reduction in the number of deaths and injuries, bringing

undeniable social beneﬁts;

– Greater convenience and possibility for elderly citizens to continue using

their cars, leading to strong consumer demand;

– Market differentiator, giving a huge incentive to manufacturers to sell

proﬁtable new options; and

– Drunk driving reduction and increase in alcohol consumption, making
alcohol companies, bars and restaurants strong supporters, especially in
country with 0 alcohol tolerance for drivers.

Simply put, the money is with the forces for autonomous vehicles. Insurance
companies, liquor companies, vehicle manufacturers, customers, and governments
will all want the beneﬁts of self-driving cars.

2.10.4 Legal Barrier to Adoption

As mentioned, a few states and countries have accepted the principle of driverless
cars. Unfortunately, this is more a permission to test vehicles rather than the real
legal foundation for a society composed of a ﬂeet of driverless vehicles. In fact, the
efforts by the Nevada State to pass the ﬁrst law authorizing the use of autonomous
cars in June 2011 were reported to be highly supported by Google, in order to
legally conduct further testing of its driverless technology. However, this law still
limits the use of unmanned systems. Although the law acknowledges that the
vehicle “operator” (this will replace world driver, at least till there is no operator at
all) doesn’t need to pay attention during operation, he/she must not have disturbing
activities such as sending text messages and requires a person behind the wheel at
all time. In California, the law demands for a car operator behind the steering wheel
to take over in case of sudden car failure.

130

2 Risk Adverse Society

2.10.5 Legal Responsibilities

With all these legal limitations, what is required for the advent of unmanned sys-
tem? First, let’s look at what are the implications of a car crash for ordinary car
drivers.

Current liabilities There are three potential causes to an accident: issues linked to
cars, problems with the infrastructure, or an act of God. Let’s focus on the two ﬁrst
causes, as the latest is actually invoked in cases where there can’t be any proven
liability. In case of car accidents, there are ﬁve potential liable Parties:
(cid:129) One or both drivers;
(cid:129) Car owner of one of the cars who didn’t maintain the car’s physical integrity;
(cid:129) A mechanic who had recently serviced one of the vehicles badly;
(cid:129) One of the car dealers; or
(cid:129) One of the car manufacturers.

According to David Chung, a partner of an American law ﬁrm (April 201315).

There are numerous factors which would be taken into account in order for the Court to
determine who is liable. Depending on circumstances, multiple parties may be liable where
more than one party is found to have materially contributed to the incident resulting in the
injury or damage. Where multiple parties are culpable, they would share the liability in the
proportions determined by the Court… Who is liable is a question of fact.

People or entities can also be liable for infrastructure issues. Bad road conditions
due to failure to maintain decent driving conditions, or unexpected events causing
fatalities, such as construction work not being properly announced and trucks or
people being where they shouldn’t be, are also potential liable parties. Obviously, in
an era without drivers, one of the most frequent liable parties—the driver—will
disappear, but new actors will be introduced.
Liability for Driverless Cars According to Mr. Chung’s view on principle of law:
“relationships of trust give rise to duties of care.”

In unmanned trains, passengers trust that the system will perform correctly.
Similarly, passengers using self-driving cars will trust that all elements will operate
ﬂawlessly to avoid any accidents. Thus, in this e-mobility era, passengers will be off
the hook for any liability, as they would trust that someone or something else is in
control.

Once again comparison with trains will be useful to understand litigation
changes brought by e-mobility technologies. The segmentation, we’ve used
between, cars, infrastructure and even act of God isn’t appropriate anymore.

15David Chung, Driverless cars, whose liability; March 4, 2013.http://www.bennettphilp.com.au/
content/driverless-cars-whose-liability.

2.10 Driverless Cars

131

We need to think in terms of system integration and the different elements
that are likely to be part of this system.

Using an analogy with railways, we will have potentially six subsystems that

could be subject to liabilities:

1. Manufactured vehicle;
2. Onboard signaling system, which will include the ﬁve or six elements (the
drivers interface might be made redundant) that were described in the V2V
operational modes;

3. Car-to-wayside communication, including V2V, V2C, and V2I;
4. Control center, which will host network information;
5. Road infrastructure provider, which will take responsibility for infrastructure

signaling as well as road physical conditions; and

6. Car operator or owner.

2.10.6 Vehicle Manufacturer Potential Liabilities

For the sake of this exercise, we will suppose that manufacturers (i.e., Mercedes
Benz, General Motor, and Toyota) won’t be integrating the onboard signaling
system. We believe that as long as these vehicle manufacturers don’t supply the
they won’t be associated with taking over the car
onboard signaling system,
operation from the driver. Thus, car manufacturers’ overall liability will remain
more or less the same, as it is the case for train manufacturers of unmanned system.
However, there is a caveat to this, which is that train manufacturers must build
some intrinsically safe equipment. An example in the railway industry is that
whenever a pressure lost in the hydraulic braking system happens, the brake
inherently will be applied, as the pressure maintains the brake apart from the wheel.
This also most
redundancy might have to be added to
critical-related safety equipment. It also means that in case one of these intrinsically
safe equipments fails, the car will need to stop in a safe mode.

likely means that

2.10.7 Onboard Signaling System Provider Potential

Liabilities

In most unmanned railway systems, the onboard, wayside, and control center
system are integrated by the same supplier. With initiatives such as ERTMS level 3,
the EU has pushed for train interoperability between different railway systems,
showing the path for decoupling between trains and the railway infrastructure. This

132

2 Risk Adverse Society

shows that system integration of very complex systems can be achieved as long as
Governments and the major players of an industry elaborate interoperable stan-
dards. This needs to be the model followed by the automotive industry.

Let’s assume for a moment that Google decides to position itself as a signaling
system provider. This would mean that any car manufacturer (i.e., Chery from
China) could install on one of its car model Google’s signaling systems composed
of the ﬁve or six V2V operational elements we’ve already identiﬁed, plus probably
the sensors, as the signaling system wouldn’t be able to work without them. As this
system would replace the human factor from driving, it would in fact be responsible
for all wrong decisions made, as the driver is today. Currently, in most countries,
the consumer protection laws would impose obligations on the signaling supplier to
compensate any person suffering injuries or damages, as a result of such wrong
decisions. Although responsibility coming from software problems discovered after
a product is sold is less clear cut than for a faulty product, there are legal precedents,
especially with cars, as recent quality recall events have shown.

2.10.8 Telecom Provider Potential Liabilities

As we’ve seen, a critical element of self-driving cars is the possibility to commu-
nicate with other cars and the infrastructure equipment, as well as getting useful
road condition information from a hosting data center.

In signaling systems, when the system aren’t dedicated to the railway net-
work, telecom providers (i.e.: for GSM-R, a railway GSM standard) are rarely
the cause of accidents. The worst case scenario is usually that the signaling
system cannot perform according to requirements and the trains must
stop. Though not good for the train operator’s image, these events are usually
manageable.

What would happen if a complete mesh network in one of the most crowded
arteries of a megacity would fail? Could the other technologies take over without
resulting on an oversaturation of the entire telecom network? Would telecom
companies be liable for such massive trafﬁc jams? In our view, probably not, as
long as they could reestablish the networks within reasonable delays. Furthermore,
as there will be a blend of telecommunication technologies, there will probably be a
fallback telecom technology that could be used.

2.10 Driverless Cars

133

2.10.9 V2C Hosting Centers

The hosting servers would need to store real-time information coming from cars
and road operators and send it back on a geo-localized basis. What would happen in
the case that they store the wrong information, are hacked (as it recently happened),
or worst aren’t able to send an emergency geo-localized message? On the same
principle of trust, they would be most likely liable for any accidents or damages
resulting from such error or omission.

2.10.10 Road Infrastructure Provider

Today, road operators are very rarely liable for accidents. Accidents resulting from
road problems, such as potholes or bad signaling, are usually blamed on the driver
or bad weather conditions. With unmanned system, this will change.

In railway environments a derailment caused by a broken rail or a faulty
fastener cannot be invoked to avoid litigation. Even bad weather conditions
cannot provide legal protection. In fact in unmanned system, weather con-
dition monitoring will be mandatory.

Whenever a metrology equipment detects dangerous conditions, it will require

that cars automatically reduced speed or stop operation altogether.

2.10.11 Operator or Car Owner

We must make the distinction between a car owner and a ﬂeet operator of
unmanned cars. The car owner will still be responsible to ensure that the car is in
perfect working order. Thus, the owner will need to ensure that the car goes to the
garage. This means that a mechanic could still be responsible for a crashed car, if he
failed to inspect and repair all faulty parts. In cases of parking or trafﬁc tickets, the
owner of the car would most likely be held responsible for paying the ticket, even if
the car and not the owner broke the law.

Would driverless car ﬂeet operators’ legal status be similar to the taxi owners’
status? We aren’t sure that they would only be responsible for ensuring that the
provided cars are in working orders.

134

2 Risk Adverse Society

Railway operators are usually involved in accidents inquiries. Whenever
blame cannot be pinpoint to faulty manufacturer’s equipment, signaling or
infrastructure providers or to an act of God, they can be convicted.

2.10.12 Suggestions to Minimize Legal Barrier to Adoption

Even though driverless cars will be much safer than conventional cars, there will be
a time when a faulty electrical contact, a broken piece of equipment, an erroneous
piece of software, or an integration problem will generate an accident. In such case,
a lawsuit will follow or even class actions could take place if several accidents can
be associated with one of the players. Although driverless technology stakeholders
have the same basic obligations to offer safe products and may have the same set of
legal exposures if they fail to do so, it won’t be a simple problem to identify the
guilty party. How do you apportion blame between different integrated subsystems,
if there is no real system integrator?

In the article16 on liabilities published in April 23, 2014 “Who Is at Fault When a
Driverless Car Gets in an Accident?,” Mr. John Villasenor explains that current
product liability law is the fruit of decades of precedent that established responsi-
bilities whenever making or selling products. Plaintiffs in products liability lawsuits
can choose from various “theories” of liability when seeking to recover damages.
(cid:129) Negligence: it occurs when manufacturers fail to design safe products;
(cid:129) Design defects: it occurs when a characteristic of a product create hazardous

situation, due to a ﬂaw in its product design; and

(cid:129) Breach of warranty: Because marketing and selling products create explicit

and implicit warranties, products liability also involves contract law.

However, the main difference in our view is that any individual product can
work ﬂawlessly but still cause an accident when interfacing with other technologies.

This is why in railway systems, an independent entity reviews the system’s
safety case and will give its approval to operate, usually after a period of
testing. This is doable in conﬁned environments, but much more complex in
an application the size of a country. Will safety agencies need to guarantee
the safety case of all urban and rural country roads? It is unlikely.

16Who Is at Fault When a Driverless Car Gets in an Accident? Author: John Villasenor (Published
on April 23, 2014 in the Atlantic).http://m.theatlantic.com/john-villasenor/.

2.10 Driverless Cars

135

In our view, all subsystem suppliers will need to follow standards and that in the
end no entity will give a safe to operate label for the system, but will for each
individual equipment or software of this system.

As robots cannot be charged with crime, the trial lawyers will probably in the
end go after the richest company, creating a real risk that innovating companies will
shy away from developing unmanned technologies. There are solutions to avoid
such situation. One of the easiest ways to reduce barrier to adoption is to maintain
legal status quo. This means passing on risks to car owners. Manufacturers, sig-
naling, and infrastructure providers might lobby consumers and their insurers to
take on risks associated with their driverless vehicles as a purchase condition.

Would consumers agree to take on the risk? For material damages, there
would be a good case for consumers to accept such liability, especially if
insurance car companies decide to implement a no-fault policy and reduce
their policy costs proportionally. As the number of accidents would dra-
matically decrease and more importantly their severity, it would probably
make ﬁnancial sense also for insurance companies to promote such a pro-
gram. However, the issue about criminal liabilities would remain as it is
unlikely that consumers would accept such risk.

Governments should introduce laws promoting self-driving cars as it is in their
best interest to reduce signiﬁcantly their citizens’ fatalities and injuries. A law
imposing V2V to all new cars, like the US Government is contemplating, is a move
in the right direction. After a transitional period, it could even make sense for
governments to outlaw all conventional cars. Although this would create a legal
foundation for the unmanned industry, it wouldn’t be sufﬁcient to avoid litigation
risks. In fact, some entity would still need to cover potential litigation costs. In our
view, what would make the most sense would be for Governments to take over the
liability for injuries and damages. In fact in many countries, they already do.
Injuries in many countries are paid by the public health insurance. Governments
could establish a public fund to compensate the victims of accidents involving
autonomous cars. In our view, the funds would quickly be compensated by the
$billion reduction in health care costs. It would also be in the interest of insurance
companies to participate in such funds. Car accidents would still happen and thus
people would still require car insurances, but on the other hand, insurance com-
panies would see the bills for heavily injured people reduce drastically, as the
severity of accidents would diminish tremendously.

136

2 Risk Adverse Society

2.10.13 Technical Suggestions to Minimize Potential

Litigation

The best suggestion to minimize the impact of litigation is still to reduce risks of
potential accidents.

Semi-autonomous cars As seen, we are expecting car manufacturers to propose a
progressive approach to self-driving cars. Cars that still require a driver behind the
steering wheel are easier to build and potentially cheaper. However, according to
some experts, this semi-autonomy may be the worst of all worlds. Drivers pay less
attention to road conditions even though cars aren’t really built to take control.
Drivers would be likely to take over the controls only in emergency situations. How
would he or she be able to assess a critical situation in the blink of the eye? In most
cases, reﬂexes would be slow or not to say inexistent if the passenger was taking a
nap. This is why Google in May 2014 announced that they will get rid of the human
factor altogether. The new car that Google will build in around 100 units will have
no steering wheel, pedals, or controls, just a stop and go button (Fig. 2.20).

Brick wall safety concept In our view, an unmanned system cannot allow for
uncertainty to threaten passengers’ life. Unmanned train system calculates at all
time a safety time/distance that is required to ensure complete stop before hitting the
train in front of it. In order to avoid class actions (at least at the beginning of this
technology implementation), cars would need to follow this same principle. By
applying this brick wall safety concept described previously, cars will always be in
a position to avoid bumper-to-bumper accidents. To reduce the need for much
longer car interspacing, the signaling system should be in a position to shorten the

Fig. 2.20 Picture of Google unmanned car, which Google intends to manufacture. Source Picture
of the Google car; Copyright of Google Inc., which allows for the unaltered use of its content

2.10 Driverless Cars

137

necessary additional time required for this safety concept, by eliminating the human
perception and reaction time.

Safer than human being concept In order to protect entities against mass litigation,
unmanned cars should be at least safer than vehicles with drivers. This will be the
case. For instance, accidents resulting from a change of lane should be eliminated as
cars will constantly monitor the presence of other vehicle on the right or left side,
either through V2V communication or sensor detection. However, we all know that
on a non-segregated lane, some unfortunate events cannot be prevented. For
instance, someone falling on the street or deciding to jump in front of the car will
not be avoided by self-driving cars. A deer deciding to run in front of a car or a dog
running to the cars will most likely be hit. But the point is that a “driven” car
wouldn’t be better at avoiding these crashes. Most likely, humans would be worst,
as they always need longer perception and reaction time than robot cars. This
should in our view limit mass litigation, though wouldn’t avoid criminal enquiries
in case of fatalities.

2.10.14 When Will It Happened?

The Nay-Sayers probably believe that it is too complicated or people love too much
driving for it
to happen. Our belief is that, as for unmanned train systems,
self-driving cars will be a common feature of our life pretty soon. It won’t be
something that will come over night and as we’ve seen there will be a progression
in the class of automated cars.

As we don’t have a crystal ball, let’s check what the car manufacturers are
planning to sell and show what industry experts are expecting.
– BMW in its upcoming i3 electric car model, is planning to introduce
trafﬁc-jam features, which will let their car accelerate, decelerate, and steer
by itself at speeds of up to 40 km/h. It will require though that the driver
leaves at least one hand on the steering wheel.

– Mercedes S-Class cars are already equipped with a system that can drive
autonomously through city trafﬁc at
the same speed. This speed of
40 km/h is important because it allows for less regulation. Mercedes also
claims that some of its technology can detect if a driver is getting drowsy,
though it only uses sound alarms to warn the driver. In its S-Class,
Mercedes is also planning to include several sensors. A 3-D camera could
be positioned on the windshield. Short- and long-range radars would also
be installed on front, rear and side of the car. Furthermore, twelve ultra-
sonic sensors will enable close object detection.

138

2 Risk Adverse Society

– In 2011, Volvo already declared that by 2020, no one would be killed or
injured. It has recently introduced cars, which can take preemptive action,
such as tightening the seat belts, charging the brakes for maximum trac-
tion, and, even in extreme circumstances stopping the car. It is planning to
launch in 2015 technology it refers to as “driver assist”, intended for the
highway. It will utilize radar and cameras to enable the driver to sit back
and enjoy the trip. This equipment recognizes front and behind spacing,
limiting the possibility for other vehicle to get near it, as well as detecting
lane marking.

Year

2014

2015

2016

2018
2020

2025

Prediction

Volvo will feature Adaptive Cruise Control with steer assist which will automatically
follow the vehicle ahead in queues
Audi plans to market vehicles that can autonomously steer, accelerate, and brake at
lower speeds, such as in trafﬁc jams [88]
Cadillac plans vehicles with “super cruise”: autonomous steering, braking, and lane
guidance. This technology will likely spread to other GM models in following years
Nissan expects to sell vehicles with autonomous steering, braking, lane guidance,
throttle, gear shifting, and, as permitted by law, unoccupied self-parking after
passengers exit
Toyota plans to roll out near-autonomous vehicles dubbed Automated Highway
Driving Assist with Lane Trace Control and Cooperative-adaptive Cruise Control
Google expects to release their autonomous car technology
Volvo envisages having cars in which passengers would be immune from injuries
Mercedes Benz, Audi, Nissan and BMW all expect to sell autonomous cars
Daimler and Ford expect autonomous vehicles on the market

Market forecasts of research institutes vary also enormously. We’ve picked the
results of ﬁve different institutes, so that readers can decide by themselves what the
future looks like.

– In 2014, HIS Automotive a research company reported that by 2025,
self-driving cars sale would account for only 230,000 units. This ﬁrst
group of autonomous cars would most likely have Level 3 capability
(limited self-driving functionalities).The market shares of this technology
would raise to 9.2 % in 2035, as completely unmanned vehicles would
become available. 7 million of those 11.8 million self-driving vehicles
sold that year would rely on a mix of driver input and autonomous control,
with the remaining 4.8 million vehicles completely unmanned. IHS
expects that by 2050 e-drive cars will outnumber conventional cars on the

2.10 Driverless Cars

139

road. By then, the majority of cars sold will be unmanned, with con-
ventional car sales becoming increasingly rare.

– The company Navigant Research is more bullish about sales of autono-
mous vehicles. According to their 2014 report, self-driving vehicles will
grow from fewer than 8000 units sold in 2020 to 95.4 million in 2035,
representing 75 % of worldwide car sales. By that time, North America is
forecasted to account for 29 % of worldwide sales of level 4 and 5
self-driving cars. China will represent 24 %, while Western Europe will
account for 20 %.

– Strategy Analytics research company, meanwhile, expects autonomous
cars that are highly automated (but not exactly self-driving) to have a
market share of around 15–20 % in 2025–2030.

– Expert members of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) estimated that up to 75 % of all cars will be autonomous by 2040.
– ABI Research forecasts that self-driving cars would become a reality by
2020 and that 10 million such cars would be sold in the USA by 2032.

2.10.15 Self-driving Market

Predictions on how quickly unmanned vehicle technology will be adopted is
complicated and very different from one expert to the other. Estimating how much
this market will be worth is even more complex. To do so, we ﬁrst need to separate
the cost of the unmanned technology per se (what we called the signaling tech-
nology) from the car itself to assess correctly the self-driving market opportunities.
We need also to add infrastructure opportunities, be it on the wayside or in the
cloud.
Signaling price As we’ve already seen for batteries and other technologies such as
computers, incremental decreases in cost are mostly dependent on the rate of
adoption of that technology. The automotive industry being worth so much, any
signiﬁcant system sales will immediately impact costs. Thus and according to
industry experts, the price premium for this electronics technology, which should
add around $10,000 to a car’s price in 2025, will fall drastically. This amount,
which would be initially installed on premium cars, would then drop to around
$5000 by 2030 and about $3000 in 2035 when no driving feature would be required
anymore.

Two ownership models for self-driving cars Such predictions rely on the principle
that unmanned cars will continue to be bought by the passengers as they are today by
drivers. This is most likely to happen in the early development of this technology.
Self-driving cars are likely to be an important selling feature in the early years,

140

2 Risk Adverse Society

which will affect sales cars positively. The question is if the number of unmanned
cars will grow initially and then peak, due to new business models enabling pas-
sengers not to own their car but to use it whenever necessary, as a taxi.

Some industry experts are saying that sales of cars will be affected tremen-
dously by such models. For instance, Columbia University’s The Earth
Institute forecasts the reduction of United State’s ﬂeet of vehicles by a factor
of 10. Price water house Coopers forecasts a collapse in the United States of
the number of vehicles from around 245 million to just 2.4 million.

However, and as we will see in Chap. 7, younger generations tend to be less
interested in car ownership, and these estimations remain very optimistic or pes-
simistic, depending on one’s appreciation of the car role in modern society. In our
view, people will continue buying cars as this is part of the social status. People
don’t need a Ferrari nor do they need a watch anymore, but they still buy both
luxury items. Furthermore, passengers will most likely still want to feel “at home”
in their car and not share it with others. Mercedes Benz President Dieter Zetsche in
fact presented his unmanned car at the CES stating that (Fig. 2.21):

the car is growing beyond its role as a mere means of transport and will ultimately become
a mobile living space.

So how much money are we talking about for this market? If we do the math for
2035, a point in time when the market will be already reasonably mature, we would
have 95 million cars x $3000 = $285 billion. Needless to say that is probably one of

Fig. 2.21 In January 2015, Mercedes presented its version of a driverless car at the CES show in
Las Vegas (Picture of the F015 driverless concept car, Copyright of Mercedes Benz and kindly
lent for this book)

2.10 Driverless Cars

141

the biggest opportunities for any given market. Furthermore, this excludes the
infrastructure market, which would beneﬁt to telecom companies such as Erickson,
Cisco, and Huawei, as they stand to gain from the million of wireless routers and
wireless equipment that will need to be installed. In fact, Machina a consulting
ﬁrm17 suggests that this market will be worth $422 billion by 2022, a signiﬁcant
portion coming from new connected services, which don’t even exist today.

2.10.16 Testing the Driverless Application

There are already some driverless car systems being tested on both sides of the
Atlantic.

From 2014, driverless taxis will be carrying passengers during demonstration
projects in ﬁve European cities, during six to eight months. The EU project
CityMobil2 brings automated vehicles to designated roads inside the city
centre.

In the United States, the Michigan University in partnership with several
car manufacturers (Toyota, GM, Ford, Bosch, Xerox, Econolite) has started
the construction of a new city dedicated to testing unmanned vehicles on a
12 ha ﬁeld. This area called Mobility Transformation Center, will integrate
four lanes, signaling, junctions, lighting systems, buildings, pedestrians and
building areas. In fact most real life conditions will be possible to emulate.

2.11 Security

Security issues are very different from a private or public transport perspective. In
private transportation, the usual risks are having your car stolen or being high
jacked. In the future when cars will be driverless, new security threats will happen
such as hackers getting access to your car’s computer and creating malfunctions on
the vehicle’s equipment, causing a crash. In public transport, on top of the risk for
the passenger of being robbed, mobbed or even assaulted by a gang of angry
hooligans, there is the risk of people vandalizing the infrastructure as well as
terrorists putting a conventional or dirty bomb, a lethal virus or a poisonous gas in
the station or on board a train driving at 350 km/h. The answers to such threats can
vary tremendously from one risk scenario to the other but will always need to
contemplate three main factors:

17Report written by analysts Machina Research, “Connected Car Industry 2013” and commis-
sioned by Telefónica SA.

142

2 Risk Adverse Society

(cid:129) Human factors: how do staff, police, guards, dog patrols, and even passengers

react in a threatening situation;

(cid:129) Technology: there are as many technologies as threats that can be thought of.
Most technologies come from other areas with few adaptations to the trans-
portation sector. Lately, some technologies have been adapted to the speciﬁc
needs of Public transport; and

(cid:129) Procedures: what are the reactions that need to be taken in function of different

threat scenarios.

Experience has shown that it is the association of these three factors that can
achieve the best results. These factors can be applied to the main principles that
we’ve regrouped under four areas:
(cid:129) Reassure and Deter: Through police patrolling or random checks, police may
be able to deter potential thieves to organize and assault passengers. By being
visible often, law enforcement ofﬁcers can deter but also reassure passengers.
Surveys on security technologies such as CCTV have indeed shown that they
can play a reassuring role with the public and can deter people from committing
crimes, since they know that their acts can be recorded;

(cid:129) Detect, record, and alert: When a crime is committed it must be detected
(cid:129) Assess; conﬁrm; and
(cid:129) Investigate; review; identify; show evidence during trials.

2.11.1 E-Mobility Security Solution

Defense or security industry specialists might argue that the security solutions are
just an extension of existing technologies applied in buildings, casinos, airports, or
even on the battleﬁeld and shouldn’t be included within these e-mobility technol-
ogies. We believe on the contrary that the very nature of public transport networks
—characterized by many access points, frequent stops, large geographical areas,
many passengers and large ﬂeets of moving vehicles—requires speciﬁc security
solutions. In the public transport environment and unlike in airports, security
speciﬁc checkpoints.
Personnel cannot
Furthermore, unlike street, building, or large infrastructure surveillance, public
transport security systems must be designed with stringent electromechanical and
anti-vibration standards. Additionally, the integration of security systems, such as
CCTV on board the train, with the wayside communications infrastructure and
potentially into a command and control center, adds incremental complexity not
found in other systems. This complexity requires new software and telecommuni-
cation technologies, which are part of this e-mobility revolution.

search passengers

systematically at

This section is dedicated to the new IP technologies that are unique to public
transport and will not describe, access control, biometrics, baggage screening, and

2.11 Security

143

other security technologies that are either applied without any changes or rarely
used in such environment. Thus, it will mainly focus on CCTV systems and
highlight how they will evolve to better tackle the central challenge of public
transport security, which is to balance passenger security concerns with accessi-
bility, convenience, and affordability. It will argue that the integration of ﬁxed and
mobile assets can better manage security threats. Finally, it will give an insight into
how bundling digital CCTV images with other public transport system technologies
will improve both the operational performance of the public transport system and
increase the situational awareness of security decision-makers. The concepts and
ideas coming from the following section were inspired by a report18 on the beneﬁts
of CCTV within Public Transport, written by the Security and ITSI committees of
the UITP in 2010, in which the Author had the honor to participate.

2.11.2 End-to-End Security Solutions

Each public transport operator has a unique set of risks and vulnerabilities, and
security solutions for metros, commuter lines, light rail vehicles, buses, or intercity
operators will vary substantially. That said, the level of sophistication that an
operator wants for its solution will depend on its experience to date with security
systems already installed, and the likelihood of future disturbances in its system.
Although some public transport operators are still looking for simple security
solutions to implement in their existing networks, more and more operators are
looking for end-to-end solutions where all subsystems, ﬁxed or mobile CCTV,
access control, employee/visitor systems, GPS, passenger information system, etc.
are integrated into the operational control center. This fundamental trend can be
explained by the development of the e-mobility technologies as well as by the need
to align with professional security strategies being implemented to address these
various public transport risks and vulnerabilities.

2.11.3 Technological Trends in Security

As seen for safety risks, security threats are event driven. In other words, a per-
ceived risk is always linked to a location (within a bus, on a station platform, etc.) at
a given moment (when there is a crowd, after a football game, etc.), involves

18CCTV: a Tool to support Public Transport Security; Factors to consider before installing or
upgrading; UITP 2010, co-authors M. Babington, L. Barr, D. Bernard, K. Clark, G. Dunmore, B.
Hart, N. Koide, T. Kritzer, G. Lucisano, J.C. Pinero, A. Silva Neves, K. Takemoto, J.P. Van
Keymeulen, S. Van Themsche.

144

2 Risk Adverse Society

someone (criminal, bomber, suicidal person, etc.), and something harmful (bomb,
gun, toxic gas, ﬁre, knife, etc.).

There are three fundamental security strategies that can be implemented to

manage these events:
(cid:129) Proactive (Prevention): Stop the event before it occurs;
(cid:129) Reactive (Preparedness & Response): Act to limit the impact of the event, if

the previous strategy failed; and

(cid:129) Forensic (Recovery): Get information to put the system back in operation

immediately.

Obviously, from a security point of view, the proactive measures are much
better. Stopping terrorists before they explode their bomb is better than ﬁnding who
did it afterward. From a security perspective, this is the challenge technology
providers are facing: going from current forensic approach toward a reactive and
ideally proactive phase. Today’s reactive and proactive approaches are better
addressed by human beings. They can more quickly understand a situation and with
good training and adequate policies deﬁne the right action to be taken. However, as
more and more information is gathered (i.e., through CCTV, access cards, bio-
metrics), human beings have difﬁculty coping with the amount of data and need
more and more automation software for audiovisual and metadata data processing.

Railway operators are becoming aware of these human limitations and are
selecting e-mobility technologies based on their track record and cost:
– IP networks: Use of Internet Protocol networks onboard vehicles and in
ﬁxed environment networks enables the use of standardized software and
hardware technology. This quickens the passage from analogue to digital
technologies, which as a consequence will push the convergence of
images, audio and data;

– Open software platform: Open based software, such as SOA solutions,
delivers a universal mechanism to interconnect all applications from dif-
ferent systems. This distributes real-time information from disparate data
sources and provides powerful new means of unifying different databases
across networks;

– Increasing processing power: This enables the possibility to perform
demanding processing tasks such as video and audio analytics closer to
the network’s edge, such as within the train or at the camera level;
– Video analytics (intelligent/smart systems): Emergence of software
using algorithms enabling patterns detection. By enabling a computer to
search for events, the images generated by CCTV or sound detection
system can become useful input data for these algorithms and detect
events;

2.11 Security

145

– Broadband communication: The increasing ability of wireless broad-
band communications to support transmission of images with sufﬁcient
bandwidth; and

– Bundling of CCTV with other operational requirements: Another trend is
for security features to be bundled with safety, control, maintenance, and
other operational features in the system.

2.11.4 Limitations of Analog Security Systems

Security Personnel in major transport networks is not physically able to get access
to critical information quickly enough. Indeed, within a medium-size metro network
environment, there are more than 1000 ﬁxed cameras, with views centralized at one
or several operational control centers. It is thus extremely difﬁcult to detect an event
before it occurs (especially during rush hours), or react quickly upon it when it is
identiﬁed. Good training of security Personnel and scorecards of highest risk
locations usually helps detecting hazardous situations, but this is expensive and
becoming more and more complex with each new camera added to the system.

In the onboard environment, the situation is even worse where the absence of
physical connection impedes security Personnel from viewing live images. Videos
are simply stored on a hard disk caddy to be retrieved manually if needed and
reviewed usually in the days following the incident. This forensic role is further-
more supported by watermarking technology, which ensures that video sequence
can be used as evidence in court.

Having said that we will now see that IP technologies are shaping the security

solutions which are being implemented in the railway environment:
(cid:129) Digital cameras and Video Recorders;
(cid:129) Audio, video, and metadata integration;
(cid:129) Increased processing power;
(cid:129) Increased storage capacity; and
(cid:129) Emergence of new standards, especially compression technology.

2.11.5 IP Cameras

Analog cameras, which are quickly fading from the market, used digital system to
transform light into bits of information and then encoded it back into an analog

146

2 Risk Adverse Society

signal for coax transmission. However, this process created limitations, from which
IP cameras are free.

Furthermore, analog cameras at high resolution (4CIF) had a signiﬁcant
problem with interlacing. Images would become blurry whenever there were
lots of movements, which obviously is the norm in metro environment.

IP cameras (also called network camera) employ progressive scan technology
that better suits depicting moving objects clearly. This more advanced image
capture technology means that the whole image is captured at one time, thus
providing crystal clear images.

Analog cameras couldn’t either provide resolution above television standards
(NTSC/PAL speciﬁcations), which corresponds to 0.4 megapixels at 4CIF.
Operators are now requiring much higher resolution. An IP camera’s higher reso-
lution provides more detail and can cover larger areas. Furthermore, in the IP
camera system, images are digitized once and stay so with no unnecessary con-
versions and image degradation.

Network camera technology enables PTZ control over the same network that
transports the video. With a Network Dome camera, the PTZ commands are being
sent over the IP network, resulting in major cost savings and greater ﬂexibility.
What’s more, network cameras can integrate input and output signals such as
alarms and controlling locks.

2.11.6 Integrated Audio

For many public transport applications, audio has become increasingly important.
With an analog system, audio is not possible unless running separate audio lines to
the DVR. A network camera can solve this by capturing audio at the camera,
synchronizing it with the video or even integrating it into the same video stream,
and then sending it back for monitoring and recording over the network. The audio
can also be fully bidirectional to allow communication over speakers.

2.11.7 Compression Technology

Compression technology is based on the assumption that a video frame contains a
large amount of redundant information that can be eliminated without a great loss in
perceived picture quality. Compression methods are effective up to a certain point,
beyond which the image quality quickly degrades.

2.11 Security

147

The technology for compressing video pictures has evolved over time, from
its origin as a storage system of still photographs on computers (JPEG) where
the compression ratio was only 8 to 1, to the current MPEG-4 standard, where
compression technology using wavelet can ensure a compression ratio of 100
to 1. Thanks to such compression technology one day of recording requires
only 14 GB, a hard disk capacity, which could easily be found in a hardware
store.

It is foreseen that in the near future, MPEG-4 technologies will maintain their
leading position in the public transport environment, extending their reach by
integrating functions such as H.264 (or MPEG-par 10). Other compression tech-
nologies are emerging from the mass media market but at this point in time, it is
difﬁcult to say what will replace the MPEG-4 standard in the public transport
environment.

2.11.8 Wayside IP CCTV Solutions

There are several beneﬁts to installing an IP CCTV system. The most important is
that it shifts the security infrastructure responsibility from security experts to the IT
departments. In other words, the IP CCTV network becomes one subsystem of the
entire IT department. This improves operational efﬁciencies tremendously by
leveraging the IT department’s technical expertise, vendor relationships, and sup-
port processes to reduce the costs of deploying and maintaining a video system. It
also helps standardizing equipment (i.e., storage and servers) across departments
and vendors, which results in lower maintenance costs.

IP CCTV beneﬁts are:
– Infrastructure cost reduction: as it permits the use of inexpensive,
standard network cabling to power cameras and transmit video instead of
more costly coaxial cables. It also reduces the amount of cable and con-
duit required by eliminating separate power and signaling cables and
aggregating cable runs to network switches located throughout a facility.
– Ubiquitous access to video: Whether local or remote, security enforce-
ment personnel can access video from anywhere on the network, with all
the access policy controls of the organization’s other IT services.

– Leveraging established network infrastructure: Public transport oper-
ators can leverage the use of established, highly secure network infra-
structure, proven network connectivity and health monitoring tools and
robust storage systems to provide a high degree of conﬁdence that video is
available when needed.

148

2 Risk Adverse Society

– Unlimited storage capacity: Operators can allocate more storage for

video with longer retention requirements.

– Synergies with other departments: Security department can also share
video investment with operations and marketing for non-security appli-
cations thereby increasing overall return on investment.

2.11.9 Integrated Security Event Management Systems

New open software platforms will strongly inﬂuence IP CCTV network technology
development and largely inﬂuence the design of future CCTV architectures. SOA
and event-driven software platforms will create a powerful environment for
service-led event-driven networks, in a wired and wireless world. New SDP tech-
nology such as VoIP and SIP, or speciﬁcally designed for images such as IMS, will,
when integrated within the Next Generation Network, enable security suppliers to
provide any new service (i.e., any security application) deﬁning it directly at the
service layer without considering the transport layer. In other words, any security
service will become fully independent from its environment. High-level application
technology such as UPnP (Universal plug and play) will allow public transport
operators to easily and quickly integrate technology coming from different sup-
pliers. We will describe in detail these technologies in Chap. 5 Connected cities.

Reactive security strategy All these software technologies when combined enable
an integrated security event management system, which provides the shift from a
forensic approach toward a reactive security strategy.
In this strategy, key
decision-makers have a complete awareness of what is happening on their various
networks, including their mobile networks comprising each single bus, tram, or
train.
Proactive security strategy We’ve mentioned that the best security strategy was
proactive, as it is always better to detect any criminal act before it is perpetrated.
Such an integrated security platform, including the operator’s rules and policies,
will become a tool to inform security Personnel about potential threats. Not only
will they be informed about the nature of the potential threat, but also they will be
able to have a complete view of the situation through devices such as PDAs or 4G
cellular phones. The potential for video analytics in the public transport is only
limited by our imagination. The applications will be totally dedicated to the speciﬁc
reality of the public transport environment.

2.11 Security

149

2.11.10 Total Integrated Public Transport System

The convergence of voice, images, and metadata is ineluctable. Telecom and net-
work equipment providers are investing tremendous efforts and resources for this to
happen. There are few other market sectors other than public transport where these
forces will have such a strong impact on the business fundamentals of the industry.
Systems that are seen as independent today, such as security (CCTV, access con-
trol, biometrics recognition, bomb snifﬁng devices, etc.), signaling, passenger
information systems,
train control, remote control, global positioning, remote
maintenance, and more generally other applications involving operations and
marketing, will share the “services.”

People counting is a good example of how CCTV will affect public transport
operators. In the medium term, operators will be able to count how many
passengers are in their system by using cameras. Too many passengers in the
station will require a ﬂow control where, for instance, train headway could be
reduced or passenger ﬂow could be controlled at the gate. In order to do this,
the exchange of data (services) will be needed between the security system
and the signaling. Passengers on the platform could be automatically
informed of the next train arrival schedule or alternative lines. The same
application will be able to give valuable information for the operator’s
marketing department where they will be able to know statistically where
people embark and in which station they get off. Operational functions such
as train control will be informed automatically of passenger load. According
to passenger load thresholds, power would be decreased by switching off air
conditioning or auxiliary equipment, resulting in a signiﬁcant reduction of
energy consumption.

As demonstrated through the above example, Operational Control Centers
(OCC) will become even more the decision-making center of all the different
systems converging probably physically in one master room. Every potential
stakeholder involved in a crisis situation will have in the OCC all the elements to
take a coordinated decision to avoid criminal or terrorist acts or limit their impact.

2.11.11 Video Analytics

Video analytics are basically algorithms that are applied to the bits of information
coming from cameras (or microphones in the case of audio analytics). Computer
vision, speech, facial, and object recognition are some of the areas where algorithms
are being developed. It also makes heavy use of digital geometry and signal pro-
cessing. Most of these systems work on the principle of pattern recognition.

150

2 Risk Adverse Society

Pattern recognition It can be deﬁned as the act of analyzing raw data and taking an
action based on the category of this data. Pattern recognition aims to classify data
based on either a priori knowledge or on statistical information extracted from the
patterns. The patterns to be classiﬁed are usually groups of measurements or
observations, deﬁning points in an appropriate multidimensional space. This is in
contrast to pattern matching, where the pattern is rigidly speciﬁed.

The classiﬁcation or description scheme usually uses one of the two fol-
lowing approaches:
– Statistical pattern: Recognition is based on statistical characterizations of
patterns, assuming that the patterns are generated by a probabilistic sys-
tem; and

– Syntactical pattern: Recognition is based on structural interrelationships
of features and not only on simple numerical feature vectors, as used in
statistical classiﬁcation.

Although video analytics are being developed for defense and general security
purposes, software engineers are designing analytics to meet the speciﬁcities of the
railway environment. Furthermore, because of the mobile aspect of train or buses,
computational power must be considered a constraint that doesn’t really exist in
ﬁxed environment.

Indeed, applying these algorithms can require enormous computational power.
The amount of memory or computer time required can become astronomical when
the issue to identify goes beyond a certain size. To take into account memory
capacity and data power, security system designers in railway environments will
need to consider where they place the system’s intelligence: centrally or in a dis-
tributed manner.

2.11.12 Distributed Intelligence

Although some experts believe that the best strategy is centralized intelligence, we
think CCTV networks in railway environment will evolve toward distributed
intelligence. There will be for each operator a unique design on where to apply
intelligence. This means that some video analytics will be positioned within the
cameras. Most likely, every intelligent piece of software which can be affected by
the quality loss during compression or which will try to reduce noise will be put
there. Some intelligent pieces of software in the metro onboard environment will
most likely be included within the DVRs. By doing this, the operator will be able to
both register the audiovisual information (for legal reasons) and tag information

2.11 Security

151

linked to alarms. It will also be able to prioritize this information and make sure that
it is sent to the security personnel by interfacing with the train control system.

Like in any distributed architecture, there might even be some pieces of video
analytics that will be split between different devices. This strategy (that exists
in other areas such as automation) improves response time by giving the order
to process information only if a state is found in both elements of the CCTV
system.

2.11.13 Video Analytics Limitations

Video analytics’ objectives are to help security Personnel detect a risky situation or
take a set of actions based on the detected abnormal patterns judged risky. As for
any good security Personnel, detecting the real risky situation and not a false alarms
will deﬁne the quality of the analytics. In other words, the operator, whenever
assessing the quality of a piece of video analytics, will need to deﬁne his acceptable
level of false positives and false negatives (as in all statistical tests, there will be a
trade-off).

– False positive rate: It is the proportion of negative instances that were

erroneously reported as being positive; and

– False negative rate: It is the proportion of positive instances that were

erroneously reported as negative.

Threshold values within the video analytics solutions can be varied to make the
test more restrictive or more sensitive; with the more restrictive tests increasing the
risk of rejecting true positives, and the more sensitive tests increasing the risk of
accepting false positives. With these limitations in mind, new video algorithms are
being developed and deployed in public transport. On the wayside, a certain
quantity of software applications coming from the retailing and defense industries
are being deployed with an acceptable level of accuracy. In the mobile environ-
ment, suppliers are trying to cope with issues such as vibration and extreme changes
in lighting conditions.

152

2 Risk Adverse Society

Fig. 2.22 Through a mix of
solutions such as sound
analytics and anti-intrusion
detection, public transport
authorities should be able to
reduce grafﬁti and vandalism.
Source Author

2.11.14 Video Analytics Technologies

A few simple video analytics are now starting to be deployed onboard trains and
buses, which we’ve described hereafter. However, the possibilities of creating
analytics that can be applied to the public transport environment are only limited by
our imagination. For instance, gunshot detection, abnormal behavior detection, and
arm detection are a few of these technologies that could emerge in the midterm.
They will most likely be developed in the military or law enforcement environ-
ments ﬁrst and then be modiﬁed to the speciﬁcities of the public transport, we’ve
largely described previously (Fig. 2.22).

(cid:129) Camera obstruction detection: This is a major issue for railway opera-
tors, where vandals or muggers paint or break the cameras before com-
mitting their crime. In order to limit false positive and negative levels,
some manufacturers are merging two functionalities within the DVR:

– Watchdog functionality, which monitors constantly the state of the
cameras and makes sure that power is being absorbed by the cameras
(and thus make sure that the problem is not linked to camera electrical
malfunction); and

– Video analytics function that monitors variation in the quantity of light

being recorded.

2.11 Security

153

(cid:129) Area obstruction detection: This piece of software detects objects that
may interfere with the use of ﬁre exits or other user deﬁned areas intended
to be kept free and clear for health, safety or other operational reasons.
This capability allows operators to deﬁne both the area to be monitored as
well as the length of time an obstruction remains in place before triggering
an alarm.

(cid:129) Anti-intrusion detection: Cameras using infrared technology detect any
people passing by or objects moving within the set perimeter, especially
during low-light situations such as night time. New video analytics using
conventional cameras are also being developed, basically creating virtual
limits, within which any presence is automatically detected. This type of
technology is being implemented to monitor restricted areas such as
tunnels and depots.

(cid:129) Empty vehicle detection: One operational issue is to detect passengers
within a train (especially in driverless applications) before going to the
depot. Very often people hide in the train in order to grafﬁti or vandalize
the assets. Video analytics that can detect people within the trains are
being developed to cope with this problem.

(cid:129) Unattended baggage detection: This video analytics detects any unat-
tended object located in a speciﬁc area. An alarm is triggered according to
a set period of time.

(cid:129) Automatic target acquisition: This piece of software enables zoom-in on
suspicious persons or vehicles, and tracks it across the full scene in a
separate view, as if there were an additional PTZ camera trained on the
scene.

(cid:129) Automatic car plate recognition: This piece of software positioned
aboard a bus or a tram can detects plate numbers and automatically
processes cars that are running or parked irregularly, for example in a bus
lane. It uses Optical Character Recognition (OCR) in which the pixels on
the digital image of a license plate are transformed into ASCII text.
(cid:129) Facial recognition: The purpose of this video analytics is to recognize
people by comparing selected facial features from the image and a facial
is
emerging
database. A newly
three-dimensional face recognition.

recognition

facial

trend

in

(cid:129) Proﬁling: The purpose of this video analytics is to recognize a category of
population based on criteria, such as gender, race, color of the skin or hair,
etc. It can use the same type of algorithms as facial recognition but rather
than comparing it to a database of faces (personnel, convicted criminals,
missing persons, etc.), it basically compares ﬁxed patterns (color, height,
shape, etc.).

(cid:129) People counting: Designed originally for

the retail sector, people
counting video analytic capabilities are now providing marketing and
operations management with another level of storing trafﬁc intelligence

154

2 Risk Adverse Society

and reporting. Dedicated cameras mounted above entrances, exits or other
areas of the station count passengers as they enter and leave an area. The
feature provides aggregate counts from multiple points of entry. In the
onboard environment,
this function is provided by infra red sensing
technology positioned on top of the door entrance. Manufacturers are
working on video analytics that can substitute infra-red sensors.

(cid:129) Loitering detection: these analytics provide an alarm when a person or
group remains in a controlled area for a prolonged period of time. Alert
times can be adjustable according to different scenarios, such as squatting,
trespassing and soliciting.

2.11.15 Security for Cars

As we indicated before, security is mainly a public transport issue. This isn’t to say
that carjacking or car thefts aren’t important issues. It has more to do with the fact
that, besides panic buttons or hidden balise in the car emitting a geo-positioning
signal, there wasn’t much exciting security technology brought to the market.
However, with e-mobility technology, things will change.

As the e-mobility revolution will rely more and more on computers to run, they
will get hacked. In fact, some people are already able to get into car systems using
Bluetooth or other limited wireless technology. However, when V2V and later on
unmanned technologies will be in every car, a new potential security risk will
emerge: cyber terrorism. Hackers could not only take possession of someone’s car
if they were able to pass through ﬁre walls and other IT security systems, but also
they could actually send wrong signals from their own cars. Indeed, malicious
drivers could send fake signals such as wrong speed, interspacing, and braking
information.

The point is that any disruptive technological revolution will bring beneﬁts and
new risks. With e-mobility, cyber terrorism is unfortunately coming to the
headlines.

Acknowledgments and Disclaimer The use of pictures or references made to studies or com-
panies and their brand does not in any way suggest that the Authors of such studies or the
mentioned companies endorse in any way this book or its content. The author endeavors in
respecting the copyright subsisting any of the graphics, and texts that he uses, to use graphics and
texts he has himself created or to use graphics and texts not covered by copyright. All trademarks
and brand names quoted in the book including those protected by copyright of third parties are
subject unreservedly to the provisions of current copyright law and the rights of ownership of the
registered copyright holders.

Company or Brand Names Stated in the Chapter

155

Company or Brand Names Stated in the Chapter

(cid:129) UITP (Union International des Transport Publics)
(cid:129) Matra (technology later purchased by Siemens)
(cid:129) VAL now part of Siemens’ portfolio of product
(cid:129) Westinghouse Electric Corporation
(cid:129) Volvo Group/AB Volvo
(cid:129) Audi AG
(cid:129) BMW
(cid:129) Mercedes Benz is a Trademark of Daimler AG
(cid:129) Google Inc.
(cid:129) Ultra Global PRT
(cid:129) Uber Inc.
(cid:129) Axa S.A.
(cid:129) Ford Motor Company
(cid:129) OnStarTM system: trade mark of General Motors
(cid:129) Street Views a trade mark of Google
(cid:129) General Motors Company
(cid:129) Toyota Motor Corporation
(cid:129) Chery Automobile Co. Ltd
(cid:129) Model i3 brand from BMW
(cid:129) Model S-Class: Trademark of Mercedes Benz
(cid:129) HIS Automotive
(cid:129) Navigant Consulting
(cid:129) Strategy Analytics
(cid:129) ABI Research
(cid:129) PricewaterhouseCoopers
(cid:129) Ferrari S.p.A.
(cid:129) Erickson
(cid:129) Cisco System Inc.
(cid:129) Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd.
(cid:129) Robert Bosch GmbH
(cid:129) Xerox Corporation
(cid:129) Econolite

Chapter 3
Environmentally Conscious Society

Acronyms

Anti-lock braking system
Energy Protection Agency
International Energy Agency
Insulated gate bipolar transistor

ABS
EPA
IEA
IGBT
NHTSA National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration
RBS

Regenerating braking system

There is a paradox. Society as a whole is becoming more environmentally con-
scious but at the same time, every year the world uses more and more nonrenewable
energy. According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), the average energy
used per person increased from 1990 to 2008 by 10 %, while world population grew
by 27 %. As world population and consumption per capita increased, the overall
worldwide consumption growth was of 39 %! Furthermore, developing countries
consumption has increased tremendously, not quiet yet catching up the Rich World
but bridging the gap constantly. For instance, these are regional energy consump-
tion growth over that period (Table 3.1).

To make matters worse for the environment, this spectacular growth in energy
consumption was mainly CO2 driven with oil and coal (but also to a lesser degree
natural gas). In 2008, it corresponded to as much as 81 % of the overall energy
produced (Table 3.2).

Needless to say, that alarmists predicting the end of cheap and abundant petrol
have been proven wrong. With unconventional energy-schist gas or petrol, and
Canadian bituminous tar—kicking in, worldwide proven reserves have increased
drastically.

The reality is that even when petroleum reserve will end, the oil and gas
industry will be able to ﬁnd new sources of unconventional energy, such as
liqueﬁed coal or even methane recuperated from the permafrost (Japanese and
Canadian initiatives are already under way). So, why this paradox? It goes
to the principle that if given a choice people will not reduce their lifestyle.

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
S. Van Themsche, The Advent of Unmanned Electric Vehicles,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-20666-0_3

157

158

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

Table 3.1 Consumption growth (1990–2008)

Region

China

India

Africa

Middle
east

Latin
America

USA

EU-27
block

91

70

66

20

27

170

Growth
(%)
Adapted by Author from IEA data

146

Table 3.2 Energy by power
source (2008)

TWh

Oil
Coal
Gas
Nuclear
Hydro
Other renewablesb
Others
Total
Source IEA
bSolar, wind, geothermal and biofuels

48,204
38,497
30,134
8283
3208
15,284
241
143,851

%

33.5
26.8
20.9
5.8
2.2
10.6
0.2
100

As seen, the Oil industry and OPEC leaders are giving them this choice,
ﬁrstly by increasing the supply of diesel and gasoline. Secondly by allowing
the price at the pump to stay lower than 0.80 euro (the rest is only taxes added
by the various Government levels), a price attractive enough to continue
fueling demand both for gasoline and cars.

Why is energy consumption such an important issue for transportation? The
reality is that transportation is one of the main drivers of energy consumption. The
following table from the IEA shows that transportation means together accounted
for 36 % of the total energy, a number that is in constant growth (Table 3.3)!

Even more concerning for the environment, the automotive industry is likely to

experience a signiﬁcant growth in ﬂeet size.
Car ﬂeet growth All experts predict exponential growth in the number of cars
running throughout the world. The worldwide global ﬂeet size of commercial and
passenger cars was estimated in 2013 at around 1.1 billion cars. Looking ahead 20
years from now, it is likely to have more than doubled by then. BP estimated in its
2014 forecast1 that the global vehicle ﬂeet will hit the 2.3 billion car number by
2035.

1BP energy outlook 2035, January 2014.

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

Table 3.3 World energy
consumption per sector (end
use of energy)

Sector

2000
TWh

21,733
22,563
30,555

2008

27,273
26,742
35,319

2000
%

26.5
27.5
37.3

7,119
81,97

8,688
98,022

8.7
100

159

2008

27.8
27.3
36.0

8.9
100

Industry
Transport
Residential and
service
Nonenergy use
Total
Source IEA 2010

Not surprisingly, most of this growth is expected to be coming from the
developing world (86 %). BP also estimates that non-OECD’s ﬂeet will more
than triple from 0.4 to 1.5 billion over the outlook period and will overtake
the OECD ﬂeet in 2022. Between 2012 and 2035, vehicle density per 1000
population will grow from by 8.4 % p.a. in India and 6.9 % p.a. in China.

The IEA is a little less bullish about the automotive growth, but still estimates
that by 2035, there will be around 1.7 billion cars worldwide. This would still
increase tremendously the number of vehicles currently on the road. Their car ﬂeet
growth estimate is based on vehicles per capita (for comparison, the USA currently
has 660 vehicles per 1000 inhabitant):
(cid:129) 2000: 4 vehicles per 1000 people.
(cid:129) 2010: 40 per 1000 people.
(cid:129) 2035: 310 per 1000 people
Luckily for the environment, car efﬁciency improvements are likely to limit growth
in demand for petrol. Thus, non-OECD fuel demand will “only” rise by 82 %
despite having three times more cars. In the OECD, this demand is likely to fall by
15 % due to efﬁciency gains outweighing slowly the growth of vehicle ﬂeet (22 %).
These projections, don’t actually take into consideration the unmanned car factor or
car electriﬁcation, which could reduce further oil consumption in the rich countries.

3.1 Governmental Environmentally Friendly Initiatives

Public Authorities and Opinion are trying to inﬂuence the transportation choices by
imposing new measures to curb pollutants and particles emission with greenhouse
impact. Increase in taxes at the pump is one coercitive measure governments are
using. Differences in price with or without taxes can reach a staggering 200 % in
countries like Turkey and Norway, one of the main fossil fuel producers. Most
governments are using various tactics to inﬂuence this choice. Some initiatives are

160

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

coercitives—taxes and bills forcing the industry to be more environmentally efﬁ-
cient—and others are incentive-based: bonuses or price reduction of environmen-
tally friendlier technologies.

3.1.1 Tax on Combustible

In a society that is politically correct, fuel tax is seen as a fair tax that brings in lots
of money. The bigger the car and its consumption, the more one pays. By modu-
lating tax levels between fossil fuel types, governments have inﬂuenced the com-
bustible choice.

For instance, in all 28 EU Member States the overall tax rate on diesel is
lower than on gasoline. This gap in taxation has slightly narrowed in recent
years but still remained in 2012, 27 % lower. Therefore and despite being
more expensive than gasoline to produce, diesel is cheaper at the pump than
gasoline in all EU Member States (except the UK, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Hungary
and Romania). This taxation strategy was followed despite evidence to
suggest that the external costs of diesel cars are on average higher than those
of petrol vehicles (such as pollution and health consequence).

The impact of such tax policy has been extremely successful, as diesel accounted
in 2012 for 71 % of fuel consumption by weight, rising from a very low percentage
20 years ago. To understand how successful has been this strategy, we can look to
the USA. Excise taxes on diesel have been historically higher there and less than
2 % of the installed American car park is diesel-based. The following chart gives
the excise taxes on retail gasoline and diesel fuel in the USA (Table 3.4):

As we can see on the previous table, US excise taxes on gasoline are quite
low in regards to other countries, which explains why price (based on
02/2012) at the pump are much lower in North America (USA: $0.93/L and
Canada: $1.39/L) than in Europe (Italy, $2.30/L; France: $2.10/L; Germany:
$2.04/L; Norway: $2.58/L). On the other end of the spectrum, many countries
subsidize gasoline consumption, especially oil producing countries, such as
Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Angola, UAE and Russia are selling
gasoline or diesel at a lower price at the pump than what they could sell on the
international market. For instance, the price at the pump for a liter of Gasoline
in Venezuela was only 2 cents in 2010, according to the World Bank!

3.1 Governmental Environmentally Friendly Initiatives

161

Table 3.4 Data from the US
Energy Information
Administration (January 1,
2013)

In US$ cents

Federal
Average all
US states

Per US gallon
Gasoline

18.40
23.47

Diesel

24.40
24.00

Per liter
Gasoline

4.86
6.20

Diesel

6.45
6.34

Table 3.5 Price breakdown
of gasoline and diesel in
France (September 2012)

Prices at the pump
In euro

Diesel
Euro/L

Gasoline (95 %)
%/L
Euro/L

1 L of Brent
Reﬁnery
Distribution
Taxes
Total
Source Author

0.59
0.11
0.09
0.67
1.45

%/L

41
7
6
46
100

0.59
0.09
0.09
0.88
1.64

36
6
5
53
100

Table 3.6 Excise tax at the
pump

Country

USA

Canada

Germany

France

Japan

31

55

54

44

%
14
Source Author

The price at the pump is composed of several elements. The following price

breakdown is based on French 2012 prices (Table 3.5).

The following table gives an estimation of tax proportion of the gasoline price at

the pump, for that same year (Table 3.6).

With excise taxes corresponding already to around 50 % of the pump price, it
is easy to understand why European Governments don’t pursue more actively
further tax increases. The reality is that prices at the pump are already at a
level where people think twice about using their car. The price elasticity of
demand for gasoline (a measure of variation in demand of a good linked to a
change in price) is far from negligible, especially in the long term. Even if
people would need their car to go to work, see friends and enjoy life, they
would look for cheaper alternative transport means.

An old research,2 which analyzed several American studies on price elasticity,

concluded that:

2Explaining the variation in elasticity estimates of gasoline demand in the USA: A Meta-Analysis;
Author Molly Espey, publication: Energy Journal (1996).

162

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

(cid:129) On a one-year period, this price elasticity is about −0.26, meaning that a fuel

price hike of 10 % will reduce gasoline consumption by 2.6 %; and

(cid:129) After 1 year, the price elasticity of demand is −0.58; a 10 % hike in gasoline

causes quantity demanded to decline by 5.8 % in the long run.

Lately, tax hikes have been rare in the EU as indebted governments need to protect
their cash cow. For instance, the total amount generated by oil taxes in France was
34B euro in 2010, which corresponded to about 10 % of all French taxes. In
comparison, in the UK, this tax corresponded to around 7 % of all tax sources. Such
excise taxes represent a much lower proportion of income sources of the US
government.

3.1.2 Carbon Tax

A number of countries have implemented carbon taxes or energy taxes that are
related to carbon content. In the Chap. 6 new business model, we describe how the
carbon credit works and how it could help public transportation.

3.1.3 New Clean Air Regulation: California Clean Car Law

The California Clean Car’s program includes several regulations to reduce the
impact of cars on environment. It imposes:
(cid:129) Stricter ﬂeet average standards for 2015–2025 models to further reduce nitrogen

oxide and hydrocarbon emissions;

(cid:129) Increase in engine durability requirements from 120,000 to 150,000 miles, and

impose new particulate emission standards on gasoline-powered cars;
(cid:129) New greenhouse gas emission limits for 2017–2025 model year cars; and
(cid:129) Emission limit of 166 grams of carbon dioxide-equivalent per mile by 2025,

comparable to the federal standards set by the EPA.

turbochargers, cylinder deactivation, engine stop–start,

The rules rely on off-the-shelf technologies, including variable valve controls, direct
injection,
low-emitting
refrigerants for air-conditioning systems, and improvements in transmissions.
California’s zero emission vehicle program is also intended to commercialize
electric, plug-in hybrid, and fuel cell vehicles. The state has set a goal of those
technologies reaching 15 % of all new vehicle sales in California by 2025.

3.1 Governmental Environmentally Friendly Initiatives

163

3.1.4

Internalization of External Costs

Allowing drivers or passengers to pay less on the highway or on the railway
network according to the hour of the day, is a way of optimizing resources and
addressing congestion problems. Rail and aviation operators have been using
techniques such as yield management to increase their revenue. Few highway or
mass transit operators have differentiated their charges according to the time of day
and/or week. The reason for this might be that this measure, which would address
congestion issues, was difﬁcult
to monitor and apply. However, with new
e-mobility technology, this can be easily achieved. Urban parking charges that vary
with time of day and/or proximity to central business districts are also a good way
to address congestion.

3.1.5

Incentive Measures: Tax Credit or Penalties

In order to motivate people to switch to electrical means, several governments
(France, USA, etc.) have reduced the acquisition price of cleaner cars by giving
rebates. Others have penalized consumers looking for guzzling cars by adding extra
taxes on the car’s acquisition price. France’s “bonus-malus” scheme is an example
of a passenger car taxation policy which was proven successful since its imple-
mentation in 2008. The scheme aims to accelerate the market penetration of lower
emission vehicles by providing ﬁnancial
incentives for people buying lower
emission cars (bonus) whilst at the same time penalizing the purchase of vehicles
with greater CO2 emissions (malus).

In the EU, 15 governments provide tax incentives for electrically chargeable
vehicles. Examples of policies include tax reductions and exemptions, as well as
bonus payments for electric car purchasers.

Historically, the U.S. and state legislature have been kind to hybrid cars. In
fact, till 2010, anyone buying a hybrid car in the U.S. was entitled to a
maximum of US$3400 in federal tax rebates under The Energy Policy Act of
2005. Although that particular policy along with other incentives like dedi-
cated lane access for hybrids in California, have ended,
they helped
encourage the adoption of hybrids and motivated manufacturers to build more
hybrid car models. Because many European countries lacked similar incen-
tives, hybrid car prices have remained high, making many consumers buy
cheaper diesel-engine cars instead.

164

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

3.1.6 Congestion Charges

The congestion charges scheme makes use of purpose-built automatic number plate
recognition (ANPR) cameras, to record vehicles entering and exiting the zone.
Cameras can record number plates with a 90 % accuracy rate. Congestion charges
are applied during speciﬁc hours and often energy efﬁcient cars are exempted from
such charges.

London:
In February 2003, London introduced an internet based
congestion-charging scheme to improve the accessibility of the city center, air
quality and quality of life. The congestion charge is still applied on weekdays
from 07:00 a.m. to 18:00 p.m. The daily charge is around $15 with hefty
penalties (almost $300) applied to offenders. Vehicles fuelled by alternative
sources of energy (registered cars which emit 75 g/km or less of carbon
dioxide and meet the Euro 5 standard) are exempted from such charge.
Singapore: Introduced in 1975, the original congestion charge scheme started
as a manual system of color-coded paper licenses that drivers had to buy and
display at police checkpoints. In 1995 it went electronic, with onboard smart
cards. The entry to the restricted zones typically costed between $1 and $2.
Norway: In its two largest cities, Oslo and Bergen, the transport authorities
introduced tolls for ring roads in the 1980s, explicitly as a money-raising
exercise.
Sweden: Runs in the Swedish capital in 2006 had great results, cutting trafﬁc
by 20–30 %, and in 2007 a referendum approved making the scheme per-
manent. On weekdays, drivers pay around $1.60–$3.00 depending on times
of day to enter or leave the capital. Evenings and weekends are free.
Italy: In 2012, Milan implemented a congestion charging, which runs from
7:30 a.m. to 19:30 p.m. each weekday and requires a driver to purchase a
ticket for 5 Euro to enter the central city zones.

3.1.7 Public Transport Subsidies

For many decades, governments have subsidized mass transit and bus transports,
which is a way to reduce energy consumption.

3.2 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Car Technologies

165

3.2 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Car

Technologies

With the emergence of new electrical cars, one should ask himself if it makes sense
from an environmentally friendly perspective to encourage the switch from diesel or
gasoline to electric cars. Furthermore, the day all cars are electric is there any
advantage for society in favoring public over private transport? In the next para-
graphs, we will make a comparison between diesel, gasoline, and electric car
consumption as well as between public and private transports. We will then try to
compare the same topics, but from a pollution perspective.

First, let’s see what the impact of the combustion technology on energy con-
sumption is. To answer this question, we need to understand that the choice of the
motor engine technology will be affected only by one of the two factors inﬂuencing
energy consumption: the car efﬁciency, which is itself function of engine speed and
torque. The other factor—traction energy—is mostly independent from the motor
technology as it is directly function of the size (especially frontal size) and weight
of the car, as well as on the driver’s style (speed and acceleration). As we will see
when we compare private and public transports, the traction energy, which is
function of aerodynamic resistance (i.e., resistance to air), rolling resistance (i.e.,
tire friction and type of road pavement), acceleration, and slope resistance will have
a signiﬁcant impact when we compare cars with trains (bigger air drag but much
lower rolling resistance). The ﬁrst questions we will need to answer are: what are
we consuming? and how can we compare liquids with electricity?

3.2.1 Diesel, Gasoline, or Electric Cars

Conventional cars have an easy to identify source of energy: diesel or gasoline.
Understanding what the source of energy for electric car is can be trickier, as it
depends on the electrical grid characteristics of the region or country in which such
electricity is generated. This is called the electric generation matrix and considers
exclusively the energy consumed by a country or region in its power plants to
generate electricity. For instance, it doesn’t consider energy used by the industry or
the gas oil used by people to heat their home. As might be expected, this matrix
varies tremendously from one state or country to another.

3.2.2 Comparable Measuring Units

In order to compare petro-based combustion technologies with electrical cars, we
ﬁrst need to deﬁne a comparable measuring unit. Though the main measuring unit
for energy is usually the Joule, we will mainly focus on the kWh (kilo Watt/hour), a

166

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

widely used metric measure in most parts of the world (the exception being mainly
the USA), and convert other units. For convenience, other units also used such as,
calorie (cal), British Thermal Unit (BTU), ton of oil equivalent (toe), barrel of
Petrol, will be converted using the following formulas:
– 1 kWh = 3412 BTU
– 1 kWh = 860,420 cal
– 1 kWh = 3.6 × 106 J
– 1 kWh = 85.98 × 10−6 toe
– 1 toe = 7.33 barils of petrol

We will also use the Miles Per Gallon Equivalent (MPGe) measure widely used in
the USA (see next paragraph).
– 1 MPGe = 0.0470 km/kWh

In order to compare apples with apples, we need also to understand what the
characteristics for diesel, gasoline, and electric cars are, at two different locations of
energy consumption:
(cid:129) At the point of combustion, which is on the road when driving; and
(cid:129) At the point of generation, which means at the power plant site or well.
In both cases, we will try to indicate what are the inefﬁciencies and losses hap-
pening in the system.

3.2.3 Comparison at the Point of Energy Consumption

This comparison requires using the measuring unit MPGe which was deﬁned in
2010 by the American authorities NHTSA (National Highway Trafﬁc Safety
Administration) and EPA (U.S Environmental Protection Agency). EPA calculates
that 33.7 kilowatt hours of electricity is equivalent to one US gallon of gasoline
(1 US gallon = 3.785 L) and the direct conversion measure based on the quantity of
energy contained within a liter of gasoline is thus 9.85 kWh.

The MPGe can be applied to many other sources of native fuel than gasoline and

is determined by computer modeling according to the following formula:

(total miles driven) (cid:1) ðenergy of 1 gal of GasolineÞ=Total energy of all fuels consumed

The following table gives examples of other native units and values which can

be found also in transportation (Table 3.7):

EPA calls this measure at

for
petroleum-based engines and wall-to-wheel energy consumption for electric cars. In
other words, EPA measures the energy for which the car owner usually pays.
Therefore for electrical vehicles, EPA integrates the energy losses resulting from

the point of consumption tank-to-wheel

3.2 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Car Technologies

167

Table 3.7 Fuel type and
energy equivalent in BTU and
kWh per unit

Fuel

Unit

BTU/unit

kWh/unit

Gallon
Gallon
Gallon
Gallon
Gallon
100 SCF
100 SCF
Gallon
Gallon
Gallon

Gasoline
Diesel
Biodiesel
Ethanol
E85
CNG
H2-Gas
H2-Liq
LPG
Methanol
Source Wikipedia (Fuel type and energy equivalent in BTU and
KWH per unit. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miles_per_gallon_
gasoline_equivalent)

116.09
129.49
119.55
76.33
82.00
98.30
28.90
30.50
84.95
57.25

34.02
37.95
35.04
22.37
24.03
28.81
8.47
8.94

24.9
16.78

AC conversion to charge the DC battery. The EPA MPGe ratings do not account for
upstream energy consumption, which includes the energy or fuel required to gen-
erate the electricity or to extract and produce the liquid fuel, the energy losses due to
power transmission, or the energy consumed for the transportation of the fuel from
the well to the station.

3.2.4 Electrical Car Consumption Study

In 2012, the French magazine Challenge published the ranking of electrical cars
based on the EPA values (but transformed into kWh/100 km) using also EPA’s ﬁve
standard driving cycle tests to calculate the energy consumption of each vehicle.
The ﬁve driving tests are there to simulate different environments, giving a better
representation of real driving conditions. The table hereafter shows the results of
this study. We can see that most electrical cars consume between 10 and
14 kWh/100 km. To give an order of magnitude, a small electric car consuming
traveling in an entire year 16,000 km would consume the
13 kWh/100 km,
equivalent of a standard electric water heater over the same period of time. The
same test included also the plug-in hybrid category (Table 3.8).

It should be noted that this study was only based on manufacturers’ data and
did not come from independent tests. This ranking didn’t either consider
battery size, car weight (a reduction in 5 % in weight of a given car saves
around 3 % of gasoline) and power, which obviously would have made the
18 kW MiaTM Electric car from Mitsubishi not exactly comparable to the
225 kW Tesla’s RoadsterTM!

168

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

Table 3.8 Electrical car consumption August 2012

2012
Car model

Electric consumption
kWh/100 km

Equivalent L/100 km

Autonomy
km

Mia Electric
Lumeneo Neoma
Renault Zoe
Mitsubishi i-MiEV
Renault Fluence ZE
Smart Fortwo E.D
Nissan Leaf
Ford Focus EV
Tesla Roadster
Tesla S
Toyota Prius
Chevrolet Volt
Source French magazine Challenge (Electrical car consumption: the top 13 in kWh/100 km; 11
August 2012, French magazine Challenge; La vérité sur la consommation des voitures électriques;
Author Nicolas Meunier)

10
10.14
10.5
10.7
11.9
12.1
13.7
14.4
15.1
19.9
12.32
14

1.02
1.03
1.07
1.08
1.21
1.23
1.39
1.42
1.55
2.03
1.25
1.42

80
140
210
150
185
145
175
160
350
426
25
80

To compare these performances with gasoline-based cars, we have found ﬁgures
per type of conventional gasoline cars, taking into consideration the best and worst
stated fuel economy in the New Zealand market (Table 3.9).

Obviously, we cannot compare a large SUV with a MIATM Mitsubishi electric
car, but the 14 kWh/100 km of the Ford FocusTM could easily be compared to the
50.3 kWh/100 km of the light cars. However, before saying that an electric car is at
least 3.5 times more efﬁcient than a gasoline-based car, let’s analyze the inefﬁ-
ciencies of both technologies to better understand where these inefﬁciencies orig-
inate from.

Table 3.9 New Zealand fuel economy market ﬁgures (October 2009)

Best stated fuel
economy
(L/100 km)

Worst stated fuel
economy
(L/100 km)

Average fuel
economy
(L/100 km)

Average fuel
economy
(kWh/100 km)

Type of
new car

Light car
Small car
Medium
car
Large car
Compact
SUV
Medium
SUV
Large
SUV

3.70
3.80
4.60

5.70
5.80

5.80

10.80

7.60
10.50
13.40

14.90
12.50

13.20

13.50

5.65
7.15
9.00

10.30
9.15

9.50

12.15

50.31
63.66
80.13

91.71
81.47

84.58

108.18

3.2 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Car Technologies

169

3.2.5 Engine Efﬁciency

The engine efﬁciency is the relationship between the total energy contained in fuel
and the amount of energy used to propel cars. Efﬁciency of each motor is unique
and can be calculated by the following formula:

Thermal efficiency ¼ Work done/Heat absorbed

Gasoline engine About 70 % of the work done by a gasoline engine is lost in heat.
About half of this heat loss goes through the exhaust and the other half through the
cooling radiator. An extra 5 % variation can be explained by the engine’s com-
pression ratio.

This is due, in part, from the engine’s ability to convert the heat from ignition
process into work producing energy. When all this is factored in, the maxi-
mum thermal efﬁciency of a gasoline engine is only around 25 %. It is true
though that in the past 4 years, high end cars with Gasoline Direct Injection
have increased engine efﬁciency to around 30 %.

Diesel engine They are usually more efﬁcient, although this diesel cycle in itself is
less efﬁcient at equal compression ratios.

Since diesel engines use much higher compression ratios than gasoline’s, that
higher ratio more than compensates for lower intrinsic cycle efﬁciency, and
allows diesel engine to be more efﬁcient. The most efﬁcient type, direct
injection diesels, are able to reach an efﬁciency of about 40 % in the engine
speed range from idle to about 1800 rpm. Beyond this speed, efﬁciency
begins to decline due to air pumping losses within the engine. However, on
average the diesel engine efﬁciency is in the range of 30 %.

For the calculation purposes of this book, we will consider 25 and 30 % efﬁ-

ciency, respectively, for gasoline and diesel engines.

Electric engine have a much higher efﬁciency. Electric motor’s efﬁciency is
around 95 % but inverters that transform the DC power output from the battery into
AC are themselves around 95 % efﬁcient.

In electric cars there are no major transmission system and driveshaft compo-
nents. On some models, you don’t even have axles or differentials. The modern
petroleum based cars have on the other hand, much more complex drivetrain

170

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

that eats up about 5 % of the energy, against almost nothing for the electric cars.
To be fair, we will add 2 % losses due to power conversion from AC plugs on
the wall to DC power in the plug to the electric cars even though DC plugging
systems are now available. We also need to consider leakage. When a user
charges the battery, not all of the power ends up stored, some of it is used up
pushing the electrons through the battery, and we could consider a loss of 1 %.

So, an estimate of the total round-trip tank-to-wheel efﬁciency is:

– 0.95 (motor and drivetrain) × 0.95 (inverter) × 0.98 (battery) × 0.99

– This value is in line with what Tesla, an American manufacturer of electric

(cid:129) Electric car:

(charger) = 88 %

cars advertises.
(cid:129) Gasoline-propelled car:

(cid:129) Diesel-propelled car:

– 25 % (motor) × 95 % (drivetrain) = 23.7 %

– 30 % (motors) × 95 % (drivetrain) = 28.5 %

To all these numbers, one should subtract energy consumption for moving
auxiliary equipment (wipers, lighting, GPS, radio, air conditioning, heating
system), which would be in the range of 5 % for all 3 type of cars (being
lower for electricity as there is no need to burn fuel and convert it in AC
current to power these equipments). It should be noted that all these numbers
above might be considered on the high side. Literature mentions values in the
range of 16 and 22 % for petrol and diesel efﬁciency and 80 % for electric
cars with lithium battery.

3.2.6 Braking Energy Recuperation

However, our comparison cannot stop there. Indeed one of the main differences
between petroleum-based and electric cars is the possibility to recuperate and store
the energy generated by the braking system, called kinetic energy. This energy
results from transforming braking energy back into electricity, instead of heat or
noise.

3.2 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Car Technologies

171

In a regenerative braking system, the electric motor that is responsible for all or
part of an electric or hybrid’s propulsion also does most of the braking. When a
driver steps on the brake pedal, instead of activating a conventional friction-based
braking process, it sends an electronic signal to the electric motor, directing it to run
in reverse mode, which creates resistance to slow the application through a process
that is analogous to downshifting a standard transmission vehicle. The electric
motor running backward acts then as an electric energy generator that can convert
the kinetic energy of motion into electrical energy that can be stored for future use.

Everyone is familiar with the small dynamo that bikers put on their bicycle.
Well, the electric cars, equipped with regenerating braking system (RBS) and
an anti-lock braking system (ABS) can basically recycle this energy which is
stored back in the battery for a new usage. As an added bonus, regenerative
braking with an electric motor takes most of the load off mechanical brakes,
reducing brake maintenance and replacement expenses.
Theoretical recuperation: What is the maximum theoretical recuperation?
To calculate such value, we need to use the kinetic energy formula for a
rectilinear motion:

E ¼ 1=2 m v2 where energy is equal to mass mð

Þ (cid:1) squared Speed v2

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

:

Using a 1125 kg Mitsubishi MiEVTM car, running at 120 km/h, the energy
would be 0.174 kWh. This 0.174 kWh would be available if we made
abstraction of train drive friction, air drag and slope impact. An experiment
conducted in Australian’s Engineering School by Guido Wager3 showed that
the MiEVTM Regenerative Braking System was able to generate 0.105 kWh
of electricity. This is 63 % of the available kinetic energy at 120 km/h.

Driving the Mitsubishi under different drive cycles and RBS settings, this
study showed a wide range of RBS performances. The RBS from the
MiEVTM improved the energy consumption between 3 % (US Federal
Highway cycle in B-Mode) and 22 % (Federal Test Procedure 75 in
D-Mode). Such a large range shows how signiﬁcant the RBS performance
depends on driving patterns and RBS conﬁgurations (Table 3.10).

As shown in the table above, the study indicated that on average the
regenerative braking system working together with ABS brakes could make
an average saving of 18 % on non highway roads. The study showed that
there were very large variations between the different driving environments.

3Efﬁciency and performance testing of electric vehicles and the potential energy recovery of their
electrical regenerative braking system; Thesis of Australian’s School of Engineering; Author:
Guido Wager.

172

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

As one could expect, electrical cars didn’t generate huge savings on highways
with RBS, though at 4 % it was far from negligible. The reality is that though
driving on highways doesn’t require many stop and go (maybe except in
some region of Los Angeles), the braking energy recuperated is much higher
(speed at squared power). Obviously the savings made by RBS on city roads
were the highest at 22 %.

If we include regenerative braking to the overall efﬁciency of the electric cars,
which was calculated at 88 % and using a value of 18 %, we can see that all
inefﬁciencies from wall-to-wheel are more than fully compensated on urban jour-
neys. Don’t get us wrong, this doesn’t mean that electric cars generate energy, but
just that this energy which otherwise would have been lost through heat at the pad
brake level, were stored and reinjected in the car.

If we integrate the theoretical recuperation based on the study, we can now
identify the inefﬁciencies at point of consumption (without considering auxiliary
equipment consumption): for gasoline 23.7 %; diesel: 28.5 %; and electric cars
106 %. When this is factored in and comparing light cars with a Ford FocusTM for
instance, we can come back to the comparison that electric cars are 3–4 times more
efﬁcient (Figs. 3.1 and 3.2).

Table 3.10 Comparing RBS performance and energy consumptiona

Driving NEDC (New European Drive Cycle) drive cycle under different settings
Driving cycle according to NDEC Lotus Elise

Mode D

Mode C

Mode B

Wh/km without RBS
Wh/km with RBS
Improvement (%)
Driving a FTP 75 (Federal test procedure) drive cycle under different settings
Mode D
Driving cycle according to FTP 75 Lotus Elise

136
120
12

138
119
14

Mode C

Wh/km without RBS
Wh/km with RBS
Improvement (%)
Driving a US Federal HWY drive cycle in D- and B-mode
Driving cycle according to FTP 75 Lotus Elise

81
70
13

Mode D

Mode B

142
121
15

93
77
18

Mode B

117
114
3

79
62
22

143
138
4

Wh/km without RBS
Wh/km with RBS
Improvement (%)
Source Guido Wager
aSee Footenote 3

3.2 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Car Technologies

173

Fig. 3.1 Internal view of the B-class electric driven car from Mercedes Benz. Copyright of
Mercedes Benz (Picture: Internal view of the B-Class electric drive car, Copyright of Mercedes
Benz and kindly lent for this book)

Fig. 3.2 The B-class electric drive from Mercedes Benz was rated by the EPA with a range of
140 km and an energy consumption of 25 kWh/100 kms for combined city/highway driving.
Copyright of Mercedes Benz (Picture External view of the B-Class electric drive car, Copyright of
Mercedes Benz and kindly lent for this book)

174

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

3.2.7 A Comparison Done at the Point of Energy

Generation

As we’ve seen, EPA MPGe ratings do not account for upstream energy con-
sumption, which includes:
(cid:129) For electrical cars, fuel required to generate electricity or the energy losses due

to power transmission; and

(cid:129) For oil-based cars, energy required for extracting and producing the liquid fuel,
or the energy consumed for fuel transportation from the well to the gas station.

Though this can seem academic, it is important to really understand how much
more efﬁcient electric cars are vis-a-vis fuel-based cars.

3.2.8 Electric Power Generation and Distribution Efﬁciency

Power generation efﬁciency In order to compare apples with apples, we will now
identify current thermal plant efﬁciency. Combined cycle power generation (recu-
peration of electricity and heat) efﬁciency level is about 50 %, whereas single cycle
reaches only 33 %. More modern plant can reach efﬁciencies of 60 % (i.e., General
Electric H SystemTM, Siemens SGT5-8000HTM gas turbine, Mitsubishi J classTM).
However, when you factor in things like throttling and load following, these
numbers go down and most modern plants have an efﬁciency level closer to 50 %.
The other types of power plants have different efﬁciency level. The following table
shows the theoretical efﬁciency of converting energy from various types of fuels
(Table 3.11).
Electric grid efﬁciency These numbers need also to take into consideration the
inefﬁciency of the electric grid. The following table gives these losses in trans-
mission between sources of supply and points of distribution, as well as in the
distribution to consumers, including pilferage (Table 3.12).

So that means the real well-to-wheel comparison for electric cars in the USA
including a 6 % loss for its electrical network is for three different classical plants:
(cid:129) 50 % (Cogeneration plant) × 94 % (line losses) = 47 %
(cid:129) 90 % (hydroelectric plant) × 94 % (line losses) = 84.6 %
(cid:129) 35 % (nuclear plant) × 94 % (line losses) = 33.6 %

Drilling and extracting inefﬁciencies In order to have the full picture, we now need
to add the energy required for drilling and extracting the fuel of the cogeneration
plant (the same would be necessary for uranium).

3.2 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Car Technologies

175

Table 3.11 Generation
efﬁciency

Power plant type

Generation efﬁciency (%)
90–95
90
45
45
40
35
30
30
20
18
18
in

Hydro electric plant
Tidal power
Coal ﬁred plant
Oil ﬁred plant
Gas turbine
Nuclear ﬁssion
Wind turbine
Biomasse
Solar thermal
Solar photovoltaic
Geothermal
Source Eurelectric
generation;
electricity
Preservation of Resources; Working Group’s
“Upstream”
Subgroup in collaboration with VGB (July 2003) Report
drafted by: EURELECTRIC)

(Efﬁciency

Country

Losses (%)

2
Qatar, Slovak Republic
3
Korea, Israel
4
Germany, Netherlands
5
France, Canada
6
USA, China
7
UAE, Switzerland
8
UK, South Africa
16
Brazil
21
India
aElectric power
transmission and distribution losses Source
World Bank. http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.LOSS.
ZS/countries?display=default

Table 3.12 Source World
Banka: Transmission and
distribution losses (% of
output)

For comparison sake, and because of the phenomenal successes of schist gas,
let’s use the Natural Gas power plants. The drilling and extraction requires
energy equivalent to about 9 % of the fuel, and shipping it in a pipeline is
extremely efﬁcient, accounting for about 1.5 % of the energy. So that means
the total cycle end-to-end is:
– 91 % (extraction) × 98.5 % (shipping) = 89 %

176

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

For gasoline, the DOE gives a value of 83 % but this estimation doesn’t
fully account for the total energy inputs of generation and distribution. Thus,
we could probably lower this value to 75–80 %.

3.2.9 Petroleum-Equivalency Factor (PEF)

Is the measure established to calculate the well-to-wheel gasoline-equivalent energy
content of electricity (Eg) a fair measure? First, it was established in 2000 by the US
Department of Energy. Second, this methodology, which is used by carmakers to
estimate credits into their overall Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) for
manufacturing electric drive vehicles, considers an average fossil fuel electricity
generation efﬁciency of only 32.8 %. This is obviously inconsistent with the
numbers that we’ve just seen for more modern power plants.

For the appreciation of the reader, we’ve calculated the overall efﬁciency
numbers using the US DOE numbers as well as the values for the different
power plant technologies. We’ve used the equation for determining petro-
leum equivalent fuel economy of electric vehicles, which is the following:

PEF ¼ Eg (cid:3) 1=0:15 (cid:3) AF (cid:3) DPF:

For those interested in the calculation, the following table describes the

variables and the values used (Table 3.13).

Based on an estimation of the DOE values and calculation of the different power
generation technologies, the equivalent economy of fuel resulting from switching to
electric cars would be between 83 kWh/gal (22 kWh/L) according to the DOE and
229 kWh/Gal (61 kWh/L) for an hydroelectric plant analyzed separately.

3.2.10 Well-to-Wheel Energy Comparison

Now we have a number that we can really use to compare the overall efﬁciency of
petroleum and electric-based cars. So how do the results from well-to-wheel con-
ventional car compare to that of an electric car? If using a cogeneration based on
burning petrol, the electric car efﬁciency is about double the conventional gasoline
car (even more if based on natural gas). The most favorable number for electric cars

3.2 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Car Technologies

177

Table 3.13 Petroleum-equivalent fuel economy of electric vehicles

Unit

DOE

Co-gen

Hydroelec

Nuclear

%

%

Tt

94

33

94

50

90

35

Tp

33.7
8.9

33.7
8.9

33.7
8.9

33.7
8.9

kWh/gal
kWh/L

Eg = gasoline-equivalent energy
content of
electricity = (Tg * Tt * C)/Tp
Tg
US average fossil fuel
electricity generation
efﬁciency
US average electricity
transmission efﬁciency
Petroleum reﬁning and
distribution efﬁciency
Watt-hours of energy per
gallon of gasoline
conversion factor
(Tg * Tt * C)/Tp
Eg
PEF = Petroleum-equivalent
fuel
economy = Eg * 1/0.15 * AF * DPFWh/gal *AF83.469127.240229.03289.068All electric
vehicle (AF = 1)kWh/gal8312722989kWh/L22346124Electric cars with petroleum powered
accessories (AF = 90 %)kWh/gal75.1114.5206.180.2kWh/L20305421Ratio (%)
248378680264Source Author

Wh/gal

Wh/gal

34.355

33.705

33.705

19.086

33.705

12.520

94

94

83

83

83

83

%

C

33.705

13.360

is achieved with hydroelectric plants, where electric cars would be almost seven
times more efﬁcient.

The following table sums up the difference in performance weel-to-wheel
(wall-to-wheel for electric cars or tank-to-wheel for fuel cars) and well-to-wheel
integrating the different types of power plants (Table 3.14).

We’ve used values on the high end for wheel-to-wheel efﬁciency and thus these
previous values are also high. Literature will mention values of 15 and 18 % for

Unit

DOE

Co-gen

Hydroelec

Table 3.14 Performance comparison when integrating inefﬁciencies (not including powering up
of auxiliary equipment)
Efﬁciency: weel (or wall) to wheel
Gasoline cars
Diesel cars
Electric cars
Efﬁciency: well-to-wheel
Gasoline cars PEF
Diesel cars PEF
Reﬁning and distribution efﬁciency
Electric cars PEF
Reﬁning and distribution efﬁciency
Source Author

20
24
83
90
100

23.7
28.5
106

23.7
28.5
106

23.7
28.5
106

23.7
28.5
106

20
24
83
31
90

20
24
83
41
83

20
24
83
27
83

%
%
%
%
%

%
%
%

Nuclear

178

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

gasoline and diesel cars versus our 20 and 24 %. However, as there is no region that
only uses one source of energy to generate electricity we will now look at a few
electric energy matrixes.

3.2.11 Energy Efﬁciency According to the Energy Matrix

An energy matrix deﬁnes the breakdown of the country power output according to
the different types of energy. The following graph from the US Energy Information
Administration (EIA) gives a good overview of the overall energy matrix of that
country (Fig. 3.3).

It shows that 93, 3, and 4 % of the transportation fuel source was petrol, natural
gas, and renewable, respectively. The overall electric power generation matrix
included thermal power plant using 1 % of petrol, 24 % of Natural gas, and 41 % of
coal (down from 48 % in 2009), with 12 % coming from renewable energy and
21 % from nuclear power plants.

Fig. 3.3 Primary energy consumption by source and sector, 2012 (US Energy Information
Administration; Primary Energy Consumption by Source and Sector, 2012)

3.2 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Car Technologies

179

Table 3.15 Energy matrix of the USA; 2012 electrical production

Power
source

Plants

Power capacity
(GW)

Capacity
factor (%)

Annual energy
(billion kWh)

% of annual
production

55.8
33.3
86.2
40.0
32.3

557
1758
66
1426
1956

336.3
488.2
107.9
78.2
80.5

1514.04
1237.79
769.33
276.24
218.33

Coal
Nat Gas
Nuclear
Hydro
Other
renewables
Petroleum
Misc
Storage
Imp-Exp
Total
44.0
Source Wikipedia (Electric power transmission and distribution losses Source World Bank. http://
data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.LOSS.ZS/countries?display=default)

23.19
13.79
−4.95
47.26

37.0
30.2
18.8
6.8
5.3

0.6
0.3
−0.1
1.2

1129
64
41

5.6
92.6
−2.5

53.8
2
20.9

4095

6997

1168

100

The following table gives a more detailed picture of the 2012 US electrical

production (Table 3.15).

Based on this table, we can calculate the US electric matrix overall efﬁciency, to

which we’ve added drilling and shipping inefﬁciencies (Table 3.16).

Thus in the USA, comparison between the different technologies is:

(cid:129) Electric car: 106 % × 36.5 % = 38.6 % versus 21 % and 25 % for gasoline and

diesel cars.

We’ve also done the calculation for two other countries with very different elec-
trical energy matrices—France and Brazil—, which shows higher efﬁciencies.
(cid:129) France: Electric cars: 106 % × 38.9 % = 41.2 %
(cid:129) Brazil: Electric cars: 106 % × 78.6 % = 83.3 % (Table 3.17)

These numbers must also be compared to the 21 and 25 % for the gasoline and diesel
cars. Thus and to sum up, electric cars are almost twice as efﬁcient as gasoline cars in
the States and France, but as much as four times more efﬁcient in Brazil.

Table 3.16 Electric generation matrix of the United States

Breakdown (%)

Dril + ship (%)

Energy produced

Coal
Nat gas
Nuclear
Hydro
Other renewables
Petroleum

Source Author

36.97
30.23
18.79
6.75
5.33
0.57

Efﬁciency (%)
44
35
35
90
25
44

83
89
90
100
100
83
36.5

180

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

0
.
7
8

0
.
0
9

0
.
0
8

6
.
8
7

0
.
0
0
1

0
.
4
4

0
.
5
3

0
.
0
9

0
.
5
2

l
a
t
o
T

l
i
z
a
r
B

1
.
7
1

6
.
2

8
.
8
7

5
.
1

0
.
7
8

0
.
0
9

0
.
0
0
1

0
.
0
8

9
.
8
3

0
.
4
4

0
.
5
3

0
.
0
9

0
.
5
2

l
a
t
o
T

)

%

(

p
i
h
s

+

l
i
r

D

)

%

(

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
E

)

%

(

n
w
o
d
k
a
e
r
B

)

%

(

p
i
h
s

+

l
i
r

D

)

%

(

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
E

)

%

(

n
w
o
d
k
a
e
r
B

e
c
n
a
r
F

d
e
c
u
d
o
r
p

y
g
r
e
n
E

6
.
9

4
.
6
7

9
.
1
1

3
.
2

s
e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
r

r
e
h
t
O

y
t
i
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
e
o
r
d
y
H

l
e
u
f

l
i
s
s
o
F

r
a
e
l
c
u
N

r
o
h
t
u
A
e
c
r
u
o
S

l
i
z
a
r
B
d
n
a

e
c
n
a
r
F

f
o

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
n
e
g

c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

7
1
3

.

e
l
b
a
T

3.2 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Car Technologies

181

3.2.12 National Energy Savings Resulting from an All

Electric Fleet

What would be the savings at the level of a country, if it were to switch totally to an
electric car ﬂeet? For this analysis, let’s use the French consumption of gasoline for
private cars.

First, we need to introduce a new conversion measure: the MToe (or Million
tons of oil equivalent). International conventions ﬁxed the value of 1 Toe to
11,630 MWh. This means that 1 ton of petrol has as much energy as
11,630 × 103 kWh or 0.086 MToe equals 1 TWh (× 106 kWh). In France the 2013
total electricity production was 550.9 TWh, which corresponds to 47 Mtoe. The
same year, the overall French petroleum consumption was 43 Mtoe of which 69 %
went for private car usage, which is the equivalent of 29.5 Mtoe. The price of
import in 2012, for petroleum products reached the value of 54.5b euro.

Supposing that a magician would transform from one day to the other the entire
current conventional French car ﬂeet to electric, we would contemplate higher
efﬁciencies in the order of magnitude of 73 %, when including the diesel ﬂeet
proportion of 70 % versus 30 % for gasoline and integrating the higher efﬁciency of
electric cars.
(cid:129) 41.2 %/(70 % × 25 % + 30 % × 21 %) = 73 %

The total savings would thus be in the range of 12.4 Mtoe! Using the 2012 prices,
this would correspond to a saving of 15.6b euro ($19.6b) and could ﬁnance around
three new nuclear power plants each year or thousands of renewable power plants.
The American EIA released the 2012 fuel consumption numbers of ﬁnished
motor gasoline of 133,462,854,000 gal (492 billion liters). Assuming that most cars
are gasoline-based (diesel isn’t popular in the USA and represented in 2012 less
than 2 %), the overall savings would be, when we factor in the relative efﬁciencies
well–to-wheel:
(cid:129) 38.6 %/21 % = 83 % higher efﬁciency

Cars and light trucks accounted for 63 % of the US transportation petroleum use in
2012 (according to Transportation Energy Data Book) and thus the total US savings
would be 141 billion liters of gasoline. Using the Brent cost of around 0.75 US$/L
(0.60 euro), this would result in savings of $106 billion.

3.3 Evolution of the Electric Vehicle Market

We’ve seen that from a country’s economy perspective, going electric can bring
huge savings. Most trains are already electric and in Europe, electrifying the last
diesel lines is done whenever economically viable. In the USA, because freight is

182

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

the dominant market, few lines are being electriﬁed. However, all new commuter
and metro lines being added are generally electriﬁed. Many cities are considering
electrifying their bus ﬂeet or changing their combustion engines to natural gas. As
for electrical cars, the rate of adoption will depend on several conditions being
fulﬁlled. Probably, the most important is the impact of going electric on the citi-
zens’ wallet.

3.3.1 Difference in Price at the Pump

The following picture gives a good overview of the 2012 average US price of a
regular gallon of gasoline and the equivalent “electrical gallon”. According to the
American Department of Energy (DOE) the gasoline price is more than three times
the price of the equivalent electric recharging price! (Fig. 3.4)

In Europe, prices of electricity are also much cheaper than the equivalent
diesel liter. For instance, in France around 2 Euros are necessary for a journey
of 100 km with an electric car, and 6 Euros for the equivalent distance with a
diesel car consuming around 4 L/100 km. Furthermore, it is possible to
beneﬁt from price variation according to the hour of the day. Vehicles can be
charged at night when time-of-use rates can be way lower than during the day
and during peak time. In some places, prices go down by 50 %!

It is true that if suddenly all drivers were to switch to electric cars, the gov-
ernments would change their tax policies and apply heftier excise taxes on elec-
tricity at the pump.

Fig. 3.4 DOE comparison between electric and regular gasoline gallon of energy (2012)

3.3 Evolution of the Electric Vehicle Market

183

3.3.2 Total Cost of Ownership

Not all is perfect moneywise with electric cars. Acquisition, battery replacement,
and overall electric car maintenance costs are still an issue that can reduce ﬁnancial
attractiveness of this technology. These costs, which are part of the total cost of
ownership, are still unfavorable, but under massive investments of the car industry
and new technology breakthroughs, are falling quickly. But let’s look at the battery
cost and its likely evolution to apprehend the rate of adoption of electrical cars.

Battery costs Tesla, an electric car manufacturer in cooperation with Panasonic of
Japan and other partners are planning to invest $5 billion in a US plant that should
at term produce 500,000 batteries per year. With this production capacity, Tesla
believes that its battery pack including its power management unit and cooling
system could reduce by 30 % its current price of $300 per kWh of storage capacity.
According to Tesla, two-third of this saving would come from scale alone. It is true
that with 500,000 units, that would double the worldwide production of lithium-ion
battery output.

Other areas of technological improvements that could lead to further price
reduction, such as better design of the electronics that manage power, as well as
overall vehicle weight reduction will help sustain the continuous drop in electric car
price.

times more

energy than the

New technologies: Further ahead, scientists are looking at ways of increasing
the lithium battery content without starting ﬁre, improving the anode itself.
For instance, producing safe batteries with a lithium anode and a sulfur
cathode (two very high energy storing capacity materials) would allow to
hold around ﬁve
current batteries,
weight-per-weight. Students from Stanford University have in 2015 created
the buzz with an Aluminum Ion battery (a negatively charged anode made of
aluminum and a positively charged cathode made of graphite).
Battery evolution law: For the last decade, lithium-ion battery capacity has
been increasing every year by around two third. In other words and to quote
the Moore’s law (predicting successfully for almost 50 years the doubling of
transistors on integrated circuit every two years), batteries’ capacity have
doubled every three years and the trend is likely to continue, especially with
the building of this mega-factory. With that trend, it is anticipated that by
2025, the equivalent of a Nissan LeafTM battery pack will cost less than
$1800, making its propulsion system (motor and battery) cheaper than a
comparable gasoline motor. Assuming even modest increases in storage
capacity, electric cars will rank better on initial cost, range, performance,
ongoing maintenance and fuel costs. By that time, it is anticipated that electric
cars will likely overtake gasoline-powered ones.

184

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

Total cost of ownership evolution The consulting company McKinsey has elabo-
rated a bottom-up cost model, which estimated by how much such battery pack
prices could fall from its 2013 price tag of around 500$ per kWh (Tesla’s price is
said to be nearer $300). The study4 suggested that by 2025, this price could fall to
around 160$. According to McKinsey at those prices, the electric car would be
competitive from a total cost of ownership perspective. If this still
to build
mega-factory fulﬁlls its promises and brings down price to $200 per kWh, electric
cars will already be at par costwise with conventional cars. The study concluded
that three factors could accelerate the passage from petroleum-based to electric cars:
(cid:129) Scale effect and manufacturing productivity;
(cid:129) Lower component prices; and
(cid:129) Battery capacity boosting technologies, such as advances in anodes, cathodes,
and electrolytes (with potential identiﬁed technologies), which could increase
the battery capacity by as much as 80–110 %, by 2020–2025.

If electric cars can generate so much savings for society and are becoming
increasingly attractive from a ﬁnancial perspective, does it mean that suddenly
everyone will start buying them. To answer yes means, on top of reducing this total
cost of ownership gap with conventional cars, addressing four speciﬁc issues:
battery capacity, battery efﬁciency, recharging time, and charging infrastructure.

3.3.3 Battery Capacity

Car manufacturers are looking at various battery technologies with the right mixture
of anode, cathode, and electrolyte properties that can bring the following
characteristics:
(cid:129) Store as much energy as possible in the smallest possible volume;
(cid:129) Have the lowest weight possible to reduce the energy consumption;
(cid:129) Maintain the lowest self-discharge rate, causing charge to diminish over time;
(cid:129) Perform well through many charge/discharge cycles over the battery’s life;
(cid:129) Recharge rapidly and easily; and
(cid:129) Have the highest number of times the batteries can undergo a deep discharge

and still accept charge.

The following table gives information on the power and energy comparison
according to the type of technology (Table 3.18).

4Battery technology charges ahead; Mckinsey Quaterly (July 2012); Author: Russel Hensley, John
Newman and Matt Rogers.

3.3 Evolution of the Electric Vehicle Market

185

Table 3.18 Power and energy output according to battery type Web page: All about batteries

Battery type

Lead–acid
Nickel–zinc
Lithium-ion
Lithium polymer

Energy/weight
Watt-h/kg
30–40
60–70
160
130–200

Energy/volume
Watt-h/L
60–75
170
270
300

Power/weight
Watt/kg

180
900
1800
up to 2800

Energy/US$
Watt-h/$
4–10
2–3
3–5
3–5

3.3.4 Battery Efﬁciency

Car and battery manufacturers are in a race to ﬁnd the most efﬁcient material
combination. In searching for the best batteries to store energy, car makers want to
store as many kWh of energy in the smallest, lightest, and least costly package. The
minimum energy to be stored by a battery is around 35 kWh, a level of energy
sufﬁcient to drive a small car for around 150 km. Lithium-ion batteries have been
chosen by most automakers. The reason why they have done so is that such
technology can provide up to twice the power density of a NiMH battery (Fig. 3.5).
Furthermore and unlike nickel–cadmium batteries, lithium-ion cells have no
memory effect that, following repeated use, diminishes their storage capacity. They
also don’t drain themselves when the car is parked for extended periods.

Each electric car battery pack consists of multiple cells,
in the size of
160 × 225 × 7.6 mm. For instance, the LeafTM from Nissan has 192 and the
VoltTM from General Motors has 288 cells. The individual cells are wired
together to form modules. All lithium-ion cells function similarly. Inside each

Power
W / kg

10.000

1.000

Lead acid

100

10

1

0

Li-ion Very high power

Li- ion High power

Li-Ion high energy

NI MH

50

100
Energy

150

200
Wh / kg

Fig. 3.5 Battery efﬁciency comparing energy versus power output per kg; various versions of
lithium ion are also illustrated. Illustration made by Author

186

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

cell, there are multiple cathodes and anodes, sandwiched with separator
material and a conducting electrolyte gel consisting oflithium salt in an
organic solvent. In a fully charged cell, lithium ions are stored temporarily in
the anode. When the battery delivers energy to the propulsion motor, the ions
pass via the electrolyte through the separator to the cathode. That process is
reversed during charging.

New development on lithium sulfur batteries could change the car manufac-
turers’ opinion about lithium-ion battery. Indeed, sulfur has many oxidation states,
more than many other metals. This property combined with sulfur’s lightness and
relative low cost to produce means that such a battery could theoretically store up to
ﬁve times more energy per gram than conventional lithium-ion battery at a very
competitive price. A few companies have already announced that production of
such batteries should start in 2015 (e.g., Nissan).

3.3.5 Energy Charging Time

How much time does it take to recharge a battery? The correct answer is it depends
on the type of batteries, the type of outlet being used to charge, and the current that
is provided. The following table gives a view of recharging time approximation for
the Nissan LeafTM (Table 3.19):

Most recharging stations require a dedicated plug, such as the J1772 or the
Japanese plug called CHAdeMO. In the USA to get more juice, an electric car
owner can build a level-2 charging station that will allow 240 VAC with 30 amps
current (Europe is already in 240VAC) (Fig. 3.6).

If the owner adds an optional 6.6 kW onboard charger, the charging time may be
reduced to only 4 h. Finally, the fastest charging option is a DC charging station,
which takes the LeafTM from 0 to 80 % of its charge in about 30 min.

Table 3.19 Charging time according to voltage and current, possible due to speciﬁc charging
technologies

Empty car
recharging

Voltage and
current type

Equipment

Time in hour
Source Author

0.5

Level 3

Level 2

Level 1

Level 2 with
option

480VDC/125 Amps

220
VAC/40 Amps

220
VAC/40 Amps

120
VCA/15–
20 Amps
J1772 SAE
plug

6.6 kW
onboard
charger
4

J1772 SAE
plug

8

15

3.3 Evolution of the Electric Vehicle Market

187

Fig. 3.6 Picture of European home charging equipment. Source Author

These charging options are more high-tech than a simple wall outlet. The
plugs include pins for data, letting the charger communicate with the car. This
communication channel lets the car tell the charger how much electricity it
wants at any given time during the charging cycle, helping preserve battery
life and prevent overheating. For most automakers, J1772 has become an
accepted standard for Level 2 charging. Level 3 charging may be a harder
standard to create, as the CHAdeMO Japanese group has become somewhat
entrenched while other automakers seem pretty keen on J1772 Combo. This
J1772 combo plug works with a single car connector for both DC and AC
charging, and is fully compatible with the J1772 plug. The car connector adds
two pins at the bottom for the DC fast charge system (Fig. 3.7).

Electric vehicle owners can charge off AC or DC power at home as well as
ultrafast DC charging at public facilities. This fast DC should get the car to 80 %
charge in about 20 min. Tesla has developed its own plug standard. It wishes to
achieve a ﬁve-minute charge. This will require not only further improving in the

188

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

Fig. 3.7 Charging sockets on a 2012 Nissan LeafTM. The socket on the left is a CHAdeMO
connector for fast DC charging, and the socket on the right is an SAE J1772 connector for normal
AC charging (Picture from Musashi1600 (Own work) [CC BY 3.0 us) (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/3.0/us/deed.en), Licensed under [CC BY 3.0 us); via Wikimedia Commons)

charging system, but also improving the interface with the electrical grid to sustain
a 120 kW charging station (Chademo standard enables 50 kW charging and normal
plugs can only produce 10 kW). Drawing large amounts of power from the grid also
incurs demand charges from the utility, increasing the cost of the system.

3.3.6 Charging Infrastructure

Car owners need to be able to charge their car whenever necessary. Obviously, they
can do it at home or at their work place if the recharging infrastructures are
available, but may have also to do so at any other time elsewhere, if they haven’t
planned well their trip. Thus, a critical factor for successful electric car adoption is
the installation of charging infrastructure in commercial locations. Widespread
deployment of charging infrastructure at commercial locations must either:
(cid:129) Be subsidized by public authorities or even by businesses to attract clients; or
(cid:129) Generate sufﬁcient income to provide a decent return on the investment made by

the infrastructure investor.

Access fees provide one mechanism to provide this return on investment.
Three payment models can be found:

3.3 Evolution of the Electric Vehicle Market

189

Fig. 3.8 CHAdeMO
high-speed charger at
Vacaville, California Park and
Ride lot (Picture from
C-CarTom (Own work) [CC
BY-SA 3.0). http://
creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-sa/3.0) or GFDL)

– Amount of time connected to the recharging unit, factoring in an average

– The driver pays according to a set fee per kWh, the quantity of recharged

– By means of a subscription wherein all in-network charging is included in

energy transfer price;

energy; and

a monthly fee (Fig. 3.8).

3.3.7 Trolleybus

Electric buses are nothing new. They could be found all over the world under a
different name: the trolleybus. Trolleybuses draw electrical power through a pan-
tograph connected to an overhead catenary, like most trains do. This technology has
been around for many years but has seemed to never really pick up. There are
several reasons for this:

190

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

Fig. 3.9 Two section trolleybus in Genoa Italy. Source Author

(cid:129) Most bus manufacturers are as well car manufacturers, that had no real interest

in promoting electrical vehicles;

(cid:129) Catenaries are expensive to install and maintain and create visual pollution;
(cid:129) The grid to which these catenary are connected to, are usually the same as for
the residential area. They aren’t really ruggedized for public transport and thus
are prone to frequent failures. In mixed trafﬁc, this means that trolleybuses aren’t
really reliable and can block important arteries; and

(cid:129) Trolleybuses don’t have the same ﬂexibility as conventional buses, as they need
to be connected to the catenaries. In mixed trafﬁc they have problem over-
passing a stalled car (Fig. 3.9).

3.3.8 Catenary-Free Buses

The number of city buses (almost all diesel-powered) sold worldwide in 2011 was
64,000. The ﬁgure is expected to more than double to 135,000 by 2020. For
environmental reasons, many cities are contemplating replacing their diesel-based
technology, by greener solutions, such as electric, compressed natural gas, hybrid
technology (a combination or diesel and battery power), and hydrogen fuel cells.
Improvements made to car batteries can be applied to buses. However, the
advantage of electric buses in regard to cars is that space and esthetic restrictions are
much less important. A set of batteries can be integrated and positioned on the top

3.3 Evolution of the Electric Vehicle Market

191

of the roof or under the passenger seats somewhere. However, buses have a dif-
ferent problem. During acceleration, the power required to move a full bus is
extremely high and batteries are usually not good at delivering high source of power
during a small period of time. Supracapacitors (see next section) on the contrary
deliver high surge of power for a small period of time. The ideal solution would be
to have a mixed system using both technologies, but this hasn’t been done yet and
could be pretty expensive in regard to using a single solution.

That might not be necessary if a new technology called free-catenary oper-
ation can be introduced to the market. As we will see in the next section, most
of the energy consumed during trips on a segregated line happens during
acceleration. This happens at the station and during the following 80 m.
During the remaining time, energy is consumed to ﬁght mainly road tire
friction, before buses start decelerating and recuperating braking energy.

Technologies developed for the tramway market are being applied to buses. The
ﬁrst technology is based on magnetic induction. To simplify, it uses the same
principle as for an electric toothbrush. Electric cable curved to make loops create a
magnetic ﬂow which is controlled by power electronic. Whenever an energy pickup
based under the bus passes over the “charging slabs” embedded in the road
pavement, they capture the magnetic ﬂow, which is then converted back into
electrical current onboard the bus. The slabs connected to the electricity grid can
power up to 200 kilowatts. Batteries are charged as long as the bus is stopped at the
station, typically around 20 s.

A second technology based on a pantograph which is lifted at the station to get
energy from the catenary is also being tested. This more conventional connecting
technology uses also batteries to store energy.

3.4 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Private

and Public Transport Means

One of the ﬁrst questions we asked ourselves was if all cars were electric and
without a driver, does it still make sense for governments to favor public over
private transport? Identifying how much energy each transport mode consumes and
doing a comparison ﬁrst by type of vehicle and then afterwards per passenger
transported, will help answer this question. In the previous section, we wrote that
the traction energy required for moving a vehicle was function of aerodynamic
resistance, rolling resistance, acceleration, and slop resistance. To be more precise,
the traction energy is given by the following formula:

192

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

(cid:129) P = F · v or
(cid:129) P = (½ · r · Cx · A · v2 + f · m · g + k · m · a + m · g · sin J) · v
(cid:129) P = [(Aerodynamic resistance) + (Rolling resistance) + (acceleration) + (slope

resistance)] × speed;

where:
P
r
Cx aerodynamic coefﬁcient (N) (related to the “streamline” of the vehicle) (The

instantaneous power in Kw
air density: (around ρ = 1.2 kg/m3)

Toyota PriusTM has a Cx of 0.25)
frontal surface area (m2) (around 2.5 m2 for a small car such as a YarisTM)
vehicle speed (km /h)
rolling resistance coefﬁcient (around 0.012 for tires running on asphalt or
concrete)

A
v
f

m vehicle mass (kg)
g
k
a
J

gravitational deceleration (9.81 m/s2)
correction coefﬁcient on the mass to take into account rotating parts
vehicle acceleration (m/s2)
slope angle

Air drag is minimal at very low speeds but rises rapidly with increasing speed.
With good design of rolling bearings, rolling friction does not increase as rapidly
with speed as does air drag, so air drag begins to exceed rolling friction at speeds
above 60 km/h and dominates energy requirements at speeds above about 150 km/h
(Fig. 3.10).

The previous graph for a 4-car
train set Electrical multiple Unit
(EMU) illustrates these conditions. On a ﬂat road and for a car accelerating
quickly from 0 to around 100 km/h, about 15–20 % of the energy consumed
by a car is used to ﬁght this air drag force. The road to tire resistance is much
smaller and can reach no more than 5–10 %. The remaining 70–80 % is
therefore due to acceleration. However, once the acceleration is ﬁnished, the
traction effort on a ﬂat road is mainly used for ﬁghting resistance to air and
ground.

If we look at the main formula’s elements which are affected by transport type,
we can see that the difference in energy consumption between transportation means
will be generated mainly by three factors:
(cid:129) Difference in mass between the three different vehicle types;
(cid:129) Friction coefﬁcient difference between a steel wheel and rubber tire; and
(cid:129) Change in frontal surface between car, bus, and train, with its impact on air drag.

3.4 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Private and Public Transport Means

193

Rolling resistance

Mechanical drag

Aerodynamic drag

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0 
km/h

10 
km/h

20 
km/h

30 
km/h

40 
km/h

50 
km/h

60 
km/h

70 
km/h

80 
km/h

90 
km/h

100 
km/h

110 
km/h

120 
km/h

130 
km/h

140 
km/h

150 
km/h

160 
km/h

Fig. 3.10 Percentage of total resistance according to speed for of a 4-car EMU. Source Author

3.4.1 Weight Comparison

What is there in common between a 2000 kg car, a 15,000 kg bus, and a 30,000 kg
train car? Actually a lot, if we transform everything into the weight per area (in
kg/m2). In order to compare inefﬁciencies, we will use the total external dimension
(excluding mirrors’ space) and not the useful area, as is commonly calculated in
public transport.

Most cars weigh around 2000 kg. The following graph gives an average kerb
weight (also called weight at tare) according to car types. This weight can obviously
change slightly in function of options and brands (Table 3.20).

Calculating the weight of a bus isn’t as straight forward as a car, as it may have
various sections and even two decks. Buses weight can vary by as much as 7000 kg,
going from 11,500 to 18,000 kg.

The following graph gives data comparable to the previous table and in par-

ticular the weight per area, without any passengers (Table 3.21).

Trains can vary even more as there are several train sections called car-train that
might be independent or reunited by gangways. There are also major differences in
shape, size, height, and weight according to their use: metro, commuter, tramway,
double-decker, regional, and high-speed trains (Fig. 3.11).

The following table gives an overview of the different information required to

calculate weight per area (Table 3.22).

194

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

Table 3.20 Car weight per m2 and other dimension features

Category

Brands

Width
in m

Length
in m

Height
in m

Area
in m2

Weight/area
in kg/m2

Capacity
(passenger)

Kerb
weight in
kg

Ford Taurus

2300

1.66

5.13

1.54

8.51

270

Electric
car

Compact
car

Midsize
car

Full size
car

Minivans

SUV

Mitsubishi
MIeV

Honda
Civic Sedan

1200

1300

(Mercedes S
Class)

Dodge
Caravan

Porsche
Cayenne

2500

2500

2500

Source Author

1.59

3.68

1.62

5.83

206

1.75

4.50

1.44

7.88

165

1.60

5.25

1.47

8.41

297

2.00

5.13

1.72

10.26

244

1.93

4.79

1.70

9.24

270

4

5

5

5

5

5

If we now compare the average kerb weight of the three transportation modes,
we can see the following data: Cars *220 kg/m2, Buses: *400 kg/m2,
trains: *620 kg/m2, which correspond approximately to a ratio of 33, 66, and
100 %. That means that on average a car is one-third and half as light as a train and
a bus. This is important because mass impacts the energy required for acceleration,
as well as ﬁghting rolling and slope resistances.

3.4.2 Acceleration Force Comparison

Energy consumed during acceleration is extremely important in urban environment,
where drivers must stop and go. On highways or on a regional train journey,
acceleration forces don’t interfere. The acceleration force is function of mass and
gravitational deceleration (around 9.81 m/s2) as well as a small correction coefﬁ-
cient on the mass to take into account rotating parts. The following table gives
values for 3 acceleration scenarios (at tare) and the corresponding power in Newton
(N) (Table 3.23).

3.4.3 Rolling Friction Force Comparison

Metal-to-metal friction is a source of rail’s advantage in transport energy efﬁciency.
Steel wheel on steel rail generates only about 20–30 % of the rolling friction that
rubber tires running on pavement do.

3.4 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Private and Public Transport Means

195

)
r
e
g
n
e
s
s
a
p
(

y
t
i
c
a
p
a
C

n
i

a
e
r
a
/
t
h
g
i
e

W

n
i

a
e
r
A

2

m
/
g
k

2

m

t
h
g
i
e
H

m
n
i

h
t
g
n
e
L

m
n
i

n
i

h
t
d
i
W

t
h
g
i
e
w
b
r
e
K

d
n
a
r
B

e
l
c
i
h
e
V

s
e
r
u
t
a
e
f

n
o
i
s
n
e
m
i
d

r
e
h
t
o

d
n
a

r
e
p

t
h
g
i
e
w
s
u
B

1
2
3

.

e
l
b
a
T

2

m

0
7

6
7

5
7

1
0
1

1
0
1

9
4
1

9
4

9
4

1
5

8
3

5
5

5
5

5
6

5
5

5
9
2

2
8
2

5
7
3

6
4
4

9
4
4

8
7
3

9
1
4

8
3
4

5
4
4

9
1
4

3
3
4

4
3
4

6
4
4

5
5
4

0
3

1
3

0
3

6
2

6
2

5
4

0
3

0
3

0
3

4
2

0
3

1
3

6
3

4
3

5
1
.
4

5
1
.
4

5
1
.
4

0
3
.
4

0
3
.
4

5
1
.
4

5
1
.
4

5
1
.
4

5
1
.
4

5
1
.
4

5
1
.
4

5
1
.
4

5
1
.
4

5
1
.
4

0
.
2
1

5
.
2
1

0
.
2
1

5
.
0
1

5
.
0
1

0
.
8
1

0
.
2
1

0
.
2
1

0
.
2
1

4
.
9

0
.
2
1

2
.
2
1

2
.
4
1

4
.
3
1

m

5
.
2

5
.
2

5
.
2

5
.
2

5
.
2

5
.
2

5
.
2

5
.
2

5
.
2

5
.
2

5
.
2

5
.
2

5
.
2

5
.
2

0
5
8
8

0
0
8
8

0
4
2
,
1
1

0
2
7
,
1
1

6
7
7
,
1
1

0
2
0
,
7
1

g
k

n
i

/

r
e
d
n
a
x
e
l
A
D
U
N
a
i
n
a
c
S

k
c
e
d
-
e
l
b
u
o
D

d
e
t
a
l
u
c
i
t
r

A
s
e
d
e
c
r
e

M

s
u
b

y
d
n
e
B

/

e
r
a
t
p
O
D
U
N
a
i
n
a
c
S

k
c
e
d
-
e
l
b
u
o
D

o
r
a
t
i

C

o
r
a
t
i

C

s
e
d
e
c
r
e

M

k
c
e
d

e
l
g
n
i
S

0
0
3
O
R
V
N
E

k
c
e
d

e
l
g
n
i
S

0
0
3
O
R
V
N
E

k
c
e
d

e
l
g
n
i
S

0
8
5
,
2
1

l
o
o
H
n
a
V
/
4
2
1
K
a
i
n
a
c
S

0
4
1
,
3
1

s
a
l
u
e
B
/
o
c
e
v
I

0
4
3
,
3
1

f
o
h
k
r
e
B
M
0
1
B

/

o
v
l
o
V

0
5

l
a
i
x
A

0
4
8
9

h
c
a
o
C

s
e
d
e
c
r
e

M

0
0
0
,
3
1

h
c
a
o
C

s
e
d
e
c
r
e

M

0
4
2
,
3
1

h
c
a
o
C
D
H
T
G
5
1
4

a
r
t
e
S

0
4
8
,
5
1

/

f
o
h
k
r
e
B
B
E
K
a
i
n
a
c
S

0
7

l
a
i
x
A

0
4
2
,
5
1

h
c
a
o
C
D
H
T
G
6
1
4

a
r
t
e
S

2
(

h
c
a
o
C

)
e
l
x
a

2
(

h
c
a
o
C

)
e
l
x
a

2
(

h
c
a
o
C

)
e
l
x
a

2
(

h
c
a
o
C

)
e
l
x
a

2
(

h
c
a
o
C

)
e
l
x
a

2
(

h
c
a
o
C

)
e
l
x
a

3
(

h
c
a
o
C

)
e
l
x
a

3
(

h
c
a
o
C

)
e
l
x
a

r
o
h
t
u
A
e
c
r
u
o
S

196

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

Fig. 3.11 Picture of a French
regional double-deck train,
which car-trains are reunited
by gangways. Source Author

This is due to the fact that rails are much smoother than pavement or concrete
and because steel wheels are much more rigid than rubber tires that tend to
deform. The greater rubber tire deformation absorbs energy that is wasted as
heat and noise. Furthermore, the lower the tire pressure, the greater is the
deformation. The difference of contact surface between steel and rubber
wheels is huge at only 3 cm2 for the trains’ wheel compared to 283 cm2 for
the rubber tire, which explains also this difference. Rail wheel ﬂange, which
keeps trains on tracks, slightly offsets this advantage.

The following table shows that a metro weighing ten times as much as cars will
generate lower friction forces. We can also observe that friction is independent from
speed (Table 3.24).

3.4.4 Air Drag Force Comparison

Let’s now analyze in more detail the impact of train and bus’ higher frontal surface.
Using a simpliﬁed model (reality is always more complicated, as the train’s drag is
function of the number of cars, its situation in a tunnel or outdoor, wind forces,
etc.), and multiplying the height by the width to get the frontal area and using an
average coefﬁcient we would have the following data (Table 3.25):

Not surprisingly, conventional train air drag (not aerodynamic high-speed trains)

is 25 times higher than cars.

3.4 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Private and Public Transport Means

197

4
3
3

0
9
2

2
7
9

2
7
9

0
2
7

8
4
4
1

0
8
6

8
7
1

8
7
1

4
0
9

4
4
5

8
8
4

0
2
2

)

2

m
/
4

r
e
g
n
e
s
s
a
p
(

y
t
i
c
a
p
a
C

n
i

a
e
r
a
/
t
h
g
i
e

W

n
i

a
e
r
A

t
h
g
i
e
H

2

m
/
g
k

8
1
6

3
2
1

2

m

m
n
i

0
6
.
3

h
t
g
n
e
L

m
n
i

0
.
1
4

h
t
d
i
W

m
n
i

0
0
.
3

t
h
g
i
e
w
b
r
e
K

g
k

n
i

2

m

s
e
r
u
t
a
e
f

n
o
i
s
n
e
m
i
d

r
e
h
t
o

d
n
a

r
e
p

t
h
g
i
e
w
n
i
a
r
T

2
2
3

.

e
l
b
a
T

d
n
a
r
B

e
l
c
i
h
e
V

0
0
0
,
6
7

r
a
c
-
2
(

m
e
t
o
R
U
M
E

r
e
v
u
o
c
n
a
V

r
a
c

o
r
t
e

M

2
3
4

1
1
1

1
8
.
3

7
.
4
3

0
0
0
,
8
4

r
e
v
u
o
c
n
a
v

r
e
i
d
r
a
b
m
o
B

T
R
A

8
8
6

8
1
2

0
7
.
3

4
.
3
7

0
0
0
,
0
5
1

r
a
c

4
(

i
k
a
s
a
w
a
K
3
4
1
R

k
r
o
Y
w
e
N

)
r
a
c

2
(

)
I
I

k
r
a

M

(

)
t
e
s

n
i
a
r
t

)
t
e
s

8
0
7

8
1
2

0
7
.
3

4
.
3
7

0
0
4
,
4
5
1

0
6
1
R

k
r
o
Y
w
e
N

r
a
c

o
r
t
e

M

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

6
7
5

8
1
1

7
.
1
4

0
0
0
,
8
6

)
s
r
a
c

2
(

c
i
s
s
a
l
C

o
r
i
s
e
D

5
0
3
1

7
8
8

5
2
3

2
3
.
4

0
.
2
1
1

0
9
.
2

0
0
0
,
8
8
2

A
R
E
R
m
o
t
s
l
A

l
e
v
e
l
-
i
b

9
0

i

M

n
i
a
r
t

r
e
t
u
m
m
o
C

0
9
7

6
6
1

0
0
9
,
0
3
1

i
k
a
s
a
w
a
K
R
R
I
L

d
n
a
l
s
I

g
n
o
L

8
M

n
i
a
r
t

r
e
t
u
m
m
o
C

9
8
5

6
1
5

9
4
3

4
0
2

8
2
.
4

8
7
.
3

4
.
7
6

2
.
7
0
1

0
0
0
,
6
0
2

0
0
0
,
5
0
1

4
(

3
2
4

s
s
a
l
C

n
h
a
B
h
c
s
t
u
e
D

n
i
a
r
t

r
e
t
u
m
m
o
C

)
s
r
a
c

6
(

m
o
t
s
l
A
0
6
X

n
i
a
r
t

r
e
t
u
m
m
o
C

5
9
5

2
9
1

5
7
.
3

5
.
7
6

0
0
0
,
4
1
1

4
(

5
2
4

s
s
a
l
C

n
h
a
B
h
c
s
t
u
e
D

n
i
a
r
t

r
e
t
u
m
m
o
C

)
s
r
a
c

5
(

s
i
r
a
P

)
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

)
r
a
c

2
(

)
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

)
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

4
4
5

2
5
6

7
4
3

4
5
6

3
3
5

7
5
3

1
2
2

8
6

4
7

0
7
2

8
8
.
2

7
2
.
3

5
0
.
4

6
3
.
3

0
4
.
3

2
.
0
9

3
.
3
3
1

0
.
6
8

4
.
9
2

0
.
2
3

8
.
1
5

0
0
4
,
4
9
1

)
s
r
a
c

8
(

r
e
i
d
r
a
b
m
o
B
n
o
d
n
o
L
U
L
V

)
t
e
s

r
a
c

4
(

m
o
t
s
l
A

/
i
k
a
s
a
w
a
K

0
0
0
,
4
4
1

0
0
8
,
3
9

0
0
2
,
4
4

0
0
2
,
9
3

n
i
a
r
t

r
a
c
-
7

r
e
i
d
r
a
b
m
o
B
o
l
u
a
P

o
a
S

5
(

r
e
i
d
r
a
b
m
o
B

y
t
i
x
e
l
F

l
e
s
s
u
r
B

m
o
t
s
l
A
s
i
d
a
t
i

C

m
o
t
s
l
A
C
C

9
9
P
M

s
i
r
a
P

)
s
r
a
c

6
(

r
e
i
d
r
a
b
m
o
B

r
a
c

o
r
t
e

M

)
t
h
g
i
L
(

r
a
c

o
r
t
e

M

r
a
c

o
r
t
e

M

r
a
c

o
r
t
e

M

l
i
a
r
o
n
o
M

y
a
w
m
a
r
T

y
a
w
m
a
r
T

0
2
.
3

7
9
.
2

7
9
.
2

8
6
.
2

5
4
.
2

4
1
.
3

0
3
.
2

0
3
.
2

0
2
.
3

6
2
.
3

2
0
.
3

4
8
.
2

3
8
.
2

198

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

)

2

m
/
4

r
e
g
n
e
s
s
a
p
(

2

m
/
g
k

2

m

y
t
i
c
a
p
a
C

n
i

a
e
r
a
/
t
h
g
i
e

W

n
i

a
e
r
A

t
h
g
i
e
H

m
n
i

h
t
g
n
e
L

m
n
i

h
t
d
i
W

m
n
i

t
h
g
i
e
w
b
r
e
K

g
k

n
i

d
n
a
r
B

e
l
c
i
h
e
V

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

2
2
3

.

e
l
b
a
T

e
l
p
i
t
l
u
M

l
e
s
e
i
D

t
i
n
U

8
7
4

2
3
2

6
0
4

0
5
3

2
2
9

2
6
8

4
0
3

4
6
6

5
4
5

3
2
3
1

5
2
5

1
6
3
1

0
.
5
0
4

6
3
.
3

0
0
0
,
5
1
7

6
1
(

n
a
p
a
j

n
e
s
n
e
k
n
i
h
S
s
e
i
r
e
S

0
0
7
N

T
S
H

3
6
5

2
4
6

3
1
2

1
4
2

5
1
.
4

0
.
4
7

8
.
4
8

8
8
.
2

4
8
.
2

0
0
0
,
0
2
1

0
0
6
,
4
5
1

4
(

o
y
r
a
h
S

n
o
p
p
i
N
s
e
i
r
e
S

1
5
3
E

n
i
a
r
t

l
a
n
o
i
g
e
R

)
t
e
s

n
i
a
r
t

r
a
c
-
4
(

B
B
S

,

T
R
I
L
F

n
i
a
r
t

l
a
n
o
i
g
e
R

8
8
1

2
4
4

8
7
.
3

0
.
8
5
1

0
8
.
2

0
0
0
,
3
8

r
a
c
-
4
(

r
e
i
d
r
a
b
m
o
B

7
5
3

s
s
a
l
C

R
B

n
i
a
r
t

l
a
n
o
i
g
e
R

8
2
8

4
1
3

5
.
7
0
1

2
9
.
2

0
0
0
,
0
6
2

)
r
a
c

4
(

m
o
t
s
l
A
x
e
l
p
u
D
a
i
d
a
r
o
C

n
i
a
r
t

l
a
n
o
i
g
e
R

3
8
6

7
7
7

4
4
3

1
4
3

8
2
.
4

2
8
.
3

5
.
2
1
1

3
.
1
2
1

6
0
.
3

1
8
.
2

0
0
0
,
5
3
2

s
r
a
c
8
,
)
0
0
0
0
5
Z
F
C
N
S
(
n
e
i
l
i
c
n
a
r
F

n
i
a
r
t

l
a
n
o
i
g
e
R

0
0
0
,
5
6
2

r
a
c
-
6

i
h
c
a
t
i

H

)
5
9
3

R
B

(

R
S
H
K
U

n
i
a
r
t

l
a
n
o
i
g
e
R

1
3
6

2
3
7

6
1
.
4

3
.
5
1
2

0
4
.
3

0
0
0
,
2
6
4

r
e
i
d
r
a
b
m
o
B

)
s
r
a
c

8
(

0
8
3

1
8
8

1
4
6

9
.
2
0
2

6
1
.
3

0
0
0
,
5
6
5

)
s
r
a
c

8
(

s
s
e
r
p
x
E

a
l
e
c
A

m
o
t
s
l
A

r
e
i
d
r
a
b
m
o
B

T
S
H
n
a
c
i
r
e
m
A

h
t
r
o
N

T
S
H

5
5
6

0
8
5

0
.
0
0
2

0
9
.
2

0
0
0
,
0
8
3

)
s
r
a
c

0
1
(

x
e
l
p
u
D
V
G
T

l
e
v
e
l
-
i
b

T
S
H

2
2
S
-
1
2
S

)
r
a
c

)
t
e
s

n
i
a
r
t

0
0
5
3
2
Z

t
e
s

n
i
a
r
t

o
r
ﬁ
e
Z

a
n
i
h
C

F
C
N
S
-
m
o
t
s
l
A

)
t
e
s

r
a
c

r
o
h
t
u
A
e
c
r
u
o
S

3.4 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Private and Public Transport Means

199

Table 3.23 Power required to run vehicles according to acceleration scenarios

Vehicles Weight per

vehicle

Car
Bus
Train
Source Author

2,000
9,000
28,000

Power for acceleration in N
0–30 km/h in
10 s

0–60 km/h in
10 s

1,667
7,500
23,333

3,333
15,000
46,667

0–60 km/h in
20 s

1,667
7,500
23,333

Table 3.24 Rolling resistance to run vehicles

Vehicles

Wheel and
environment

Friction
coefﬁcient

Friction in N at speed of
30 km/h

%

60 km/h

Weight
per
vehicle

2,000

0.015

2,000

0.030

294

589

107

214

294

255

9,000

0.015

1,324

482

1,324

28,000

0.001

275

100

275

Car

Car

Bus
(normal)
Metro
(European)
Source Author

Ordinary car
tires on concrete
Car tires on tar
or asphalt
Ordinary bus
tires on concrete
Steel wheel on
steel rail

Table 3.25 Air drag force according to 30 and 60 km/h

Vehicles

Car
Bus
Train
Source Author

Frontal area
In m2
2.8
9
11

0.25
0.7
1.5

Cx (aerodynamic coefﬁcient)
In N

Drag forces in N at
30 km/h

60 km/h

29
263
688

117
1,050
2,750

%

4
38
100

3.4.5 Energy Consumption Comparison at Vehicle Level

Traction power can be calculated in Newton or in kW. We will use once again kW
for comparison purposes. The following table integrates all the above forces and
allows us to understand their role in energy consumption in function of three
acceleration scenarios. They give values with passengers, considering a weight of
80 kg (Table 3.26).

We could conclude from the previous table that cars consume much less power
and thus energy. However, this would be an error as we need now to factor in two
important elements: the passenger capacity and the occupancy rate. Intuitively,

200

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

Table 3.26 Power for acceleration in kW at different speed and acceleration

Vehicles Weight per

Power for acceleration in kW

vehicle
At 4
passengers/m2

Car
Bus
Train
Source Author

2,400
15,000
37,600

0–
30 km/h
in 10 s

74
473
1,034

0–
60 km/h
in 10 s

268
1,695
3,947

0–
60 km/h
in 20 s

148
945
2,067

Power at
steady speed
At 60 km/h

Capacity

Passengers

28
195
187

5
75
120

we can feel that a car that carries 5 passengers with a surface of 10 m2 cannot be
compared with a train that carries 4 passengers/m2. Even more, we are using 4
passengers/m2 as this is the standard in rich countries but for many big cities, metro
capacity is calculated at 6 or 8 passengers/m2 with real capacity reaching in some
megacities the amazing 10 passengers/m2!

3.4.6 Power Comparison at Maximum Capacity

When we factor in the passenger element, the calculated power per passenger
transported changes completely (Table 3.27).

From the above table, we can see that buses and trains are much more load
efﬁcient than cars at full capacity and maximum speed of 60 km/h. Buses need less
energy than trains during acceleration but whenever the train reaches its cruising
speed it starts consuming less energy. We’ve estimated the impact of going to 6 and

Table 3.27 Power
transported, at different speed,
acceleration and according to variation in train maximum capacity (4, 6, and 8 passengers per m2)

for acceleration in kW per passenger

Vehicles

Power for acceleration in kW

0–30 km/h
in 10 s

0–60 km/h
in 10 s

0–60 km/h
in 20 s

Power at
steady speed
At 60 km/h

Capacity

Passengers

15
Car
Bus
6
Train with 4 passengers/m2
Train
9
Train with 6 passengers/m2
Train
6
Train with 8 passengers/m2
Train
5
Source Author

54
23

33

25

20

30
13

17

13

10

6
2.6

1.6

1.2

0.9

5
75

120

160

200

3.4 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Private and Public Transport Means

201

small car
Medium car

Large car
Bus

0,40 

0,35 

0,30 

0,25 

0,20 

0,15 

0,10 

0,05 

-

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

90 

100 

110 

120 

130 

km/h

km/h

km/h

km/h

km/h

km/h

km/h

km/h

km/h

km/h

km/h

Fig. 3.12 Car and bus fuel consumption at various speeds (in kWh per passenger km) for full cars
[adapted from the World Bank HDM Model]

even 8 passengers/m2 during cruising speed, for a typical train with one-third
seating area. The results show an even higher differential, with power required to
transport passenger reduced from 1.6 to 1.2 and 0.9 kW, respectively.

The following graph, adapted from a report of the World Bank HDM Model,
visualizes the energy consumption at various speeds and at full loading for buses
and cars (Fig. 3.12).

3.4.7 Energy Consumption Comparison with Real

Occupancy Rate

The previous calculation was done without taking into consideration the occupancy
rate. Cars can transport 4–5 passengers. However, during peak hours most lanes are
full of cars with no other passengers than the driver. The result is that cars are
mostly carrying air.

For instance, in the United States the occupancy rate has hardly budged from
2000 to 2010 at around 1.55 passengers per car. Most Western European
countries (UK, Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway, Germany, Austria, Spain

202

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

and Italy) are with an occupancy rate almost identical to the USA of 1.54
passengers (2007 data). The average number of passengers per car for Eastern
European countries was slightly higher at approximately 1.8 passengers per
vehicle (i.e., Czech Republic—1.4, Slovakia—2 and Hungary—1.9).

Why is this occupancy rate so important? The point is that any additional pas-
senger has a very limited impact on energy consumption. For instance, the second
transported person in a small car weighing 1300 kg will increase the total mass by
less than 6 %, which means that during the acceleration the total impact will always
be less than 6 % per extra passenger. In fact, the bigger the car, the less impact that
second passenger has proportionally. Furthermore at full speed of 100 km/h on a
ﬂat road, the impact of an extra passenger is less than 2 %. Thus as a recom-
mendation, city planners should dedicate lanes to cars with more than one pas-
senger and encourage car pooling.

Going back to our US example, if the average car occupancy were to go from
1.55 to 2 passengers (assuming the linear replacement of other cars), the fuel
savings for the US economy and environment would be in the range of 40 %. The
following table compares various transport mode occupancy rates in the USA. It
also calculates the energy in kWh per passenger kilometer (Table 3.28).

These numbers are obviously very speciﬁc to the United States, a country which
uses little public transport. In comparing the various transport modes, we also need
to factor in two important elements: the citizen’s culture of public transport and the
peak hour capacity. Indeed, in Europe the culture of public transport is much
stronger. The following graphs give a vision of a continent with such strong public
transport culture (Figs. 3.13, 3.14 and 3.15).

Table 3.28 Energy consumption per passenger kilometer, adapted from the US Transportation
Energy Data Book (2009)

Transport mode

Average passengers per
vehicle

kWh per
passenger-km

Occupancy
in %

Cars
Cars (intercity travel)
Rail (intercity Amtrak)
Motorcycles
Rail (transit light and
heavy)
Rail (commuter)
Personal trucks
Buses (transit)
Taxi

1.55
1.2
20.9
1.16
24.5

32.7
1.84
9.2
1.55

1.67
2.00
1.15
1.16
1.19

1.33
1.73
2.00
1.67

31
24
70
58
20

14
37
12
31

3.4 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Private and Public Transport Means

203

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Czech 
Republic

Germany Denmark Spain Hungary

Italy

Norway Poland

Turkey Sweden

Fig. 3.13 European train occupancy. Source European Environment Agency (2008) (European
Environment Agency (2008). http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/ﬁgures/train-occupancy-
rates) in %

Fig. 3.14 European bus occupancy. Source European Environment Agency (2008) (European
Environment Agency (2008). http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/ﬁgures/train-occupancy-
rates) in %

The overall occupancy rate in public transport on the old continent is much
higher than in the USA, with an average of around 40 % in 2008 for trains and 30 %
for buses. With these numbers, the overall European energy savings per train looks
much more attractive (Table 3.29).

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

204

2

1,8

1,6

1,4

1,2

1

0,8

0,6

0,4

0,2

0

Fig. 3.15 European car occupancy. Source European Environment Agency (2008) (European
Environment Agency (2008). http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/ﬁgures/train-occupancy-
rates) in number of passengers

Table 3.29 Comparison between transport mode energy consumption, in kWh per passenger
kilometer

Transport mode

Cars (intercity)
Buses (transit)
Rail (transit light and
heavy)
Source Author

Occupancy in
%

kWh per
passenger-km

Comparison in
%

24
30
40

2.00
0.82
0.61

100
41
30

Furthermore, American trains weigh much more. The Federal Railway
Association regulations require higher buff strength, corner posts, collision
posts, anti-climb mechanism, and so on. All of this increases signiﬁcantly the
train’s weight: around 900 tons buff strength for locomotives and end cars
and 350 for coaches, compared to Europe’s 200. As a consequence, the North
American Acela High speed power cars weigh 90 metric tons versus 68 for
the TGV power cars they’re derived from. A 25 % decrease in weight would
reduce even further the train’s energy consumption.

The following graph compares energy efﬁciencies of tramways, Paris commuter
(RATP—SNCF) and metro, buses, as well as motorbikes, diesel, and gasoline cars.
These numbers give an idea of how more efﬁcient metro and tramway cars are in
the Paris region in relation to cars. The data is given in kWh per kilometer per

3.4 Energy Consumption Comparison Between Private and Public Transport Means

205

Tramway

Mass Transit  (RER) Metro

Motorbike

Articulated bus

minibus

Car: Diesel (2L)

Car: Gasoline (2L)

1,00

0,90

0,80

0,70

0,60

0,50

0,40

0,30

0,20

0,10

0,00

Fig. 3.16 Energy efﬁciency in kWh, Adaptation from Ademe study (January 2008)
(EFFICACITES
ENVIRONNEMENTALE DES MODES DE
TRANSPORT (January 2008); Study done by Deloitte for ADEME)

ENERGETIQUE

ET

0

passenger and thus takes into consideration efﬁciency, capacity, and occupancy
levels in the French Capital (Fig. 3.16).

3.4.8 Train Energy Losses and Recuperation

The values indicated above date already from 2008. The following graph gives the
view of the railway energy losses for such older technologies (Fig. 3.17).

Since then, technologies have enabled better energy efﬁciencies. For instance,
manufacturers have worked hard on reducing the energy use of auxiliary equipment
such as Heating, Ventilation, and Air-Conditioning (HVAC), lighting, by recu-
perating some of the heat losses and by employing LED lighting.

3.5 Greener Technology

New technical solutions will further reduce energy losses resulting from the use of
converters, brakes, and gear boxes.

3.5.1 Silicon Carbide Inverter

An inverter is an electronic equipment that changes DC to AC current. The inverter
can be designed according to the input and output voltages, frequency, and overall

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

206

30%

20%

10%

0%

-10%

-20%

-30%

Energy recovery

Driving losses converter / impedance

Driving losses motor

Braking losses converter / impedance

Braking losses motor

Braking losses gearbox

Train resistance

Auxiliary converter

heating

Fig. 3.17 Classical EMU energy recuperation and losses. Source Author

power handling. Since the beginning of this century, most inverters have integrated
high capacity insulated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT) modules, a power semicon-
IGBT combines high efﬁciency and fast
ductor used for electronic switch.
switching. Trains equipped with IGBT inverters can readily use dynamic braking,
where motors become generators and feed the resulting current into an onboard
resistance (rheostatic braking) or back into the supply system (regenerative brak-
ing). Thus depending on train system and overhead catenary receptivity, it can
regenerate as much as 30 % of the total energy consumption, as seen on the
previous graph.

In December 2013, Mitsubishi Electric Corporation announced the launch of a
railcar traction inverter system for 1500 V DC catenaries that incorporate the
world’s ﬁrst all-silicon carbide (SiC) power modules made with SiC transistors and
SiC diodes.

that

The all-SiC inverter greatly reduces power loss, size and weight compared to
conventional IGBT power modules. Mitsubishi is claiming in their press
their SiC traction inverter system’s switching loss will be
release,
approximately 55 % less than conventional inverter system incorporating
IGBT power modules. Size and weight should be reduced by about 65 %
compared to conventional inverter systems with IGBT power modules. The

3.5 Greener Technology

207

new system also increases regenerated energy through the use of regenerative
brakes in all speed ranges.

Thanks to these SiC solutions, Mitsubishi claims that total energy consumption
of railcar systems, including their motors, should be reduced by about 30 %
compared to conventional systems.

3.5.2 Permanent Magnet (PM) Motor

In modern trains, AC asynchronous traction motors have been the norm since they
took over DC-powered motors. Under the impulse of more powerful power elec-
tronic modules and advances in the area of software control, a new technology has
emerged in 2010, allowing for spectacular changes: permanent magnet motors.
Unlike for conventional asynchronous motors where the ﬂux is created within the
stator windings, the PM rotor creates its own ﬂow through the use of magnets. PM
motor consists of a permanent magnet rotor driven by a rotating magnetic ﬁeld
realized through 3-phase AC-fed coils. It is called synchronous, because the rotor
will rotate at a constant speed which is synchronous with the rotation of the
magnetic ﬁeld. In order to achieve strong permanent magnetic ﬁelds with small
light magnets, rare earth magnets are used (e.g., Nd–Fe-B). These motors save
energy as their:
(cid:129) Power/weight ratio that is greater than 1 kW/kg versus 0.8 kW/kg for previous

generations of motors;

(cid:129) Motor losses, which are mainly due to heat when current ﬂow runs through

copper wires, are about half of the conventional motors; and

(cid:129) Greater compactness (25 % smaller) for more convenient installation on the
bogies, with simpler ventilation circuits and overall simpliﬁed drive train,
reduces weight.

Furthermore, permanent magnet motors can control precisely the speed
rotation up to 0 RPM. By changing the current ﬂow and making spin the rotor
in the other direction under the action of the permanent magnet, the motor can
act as a service brake, while regenerating energy. This opens the possibility of
getting altogether rid of the service brakes in the future, reducing even further
losses as electrical braking could replace mechanical braking, even at low
speed.

208

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

3.5.3 Direct Drive Mechanism

In a conventional propulsion system the traction motors provide torque through
transmission equipment such as gear box. A direct drive mechanism is one that
takes the power coming from a motor without such reductions, avoiding losses due
to such transmission.

The choice of a direct drive with conventional motors would have required
bigger traction and heavier motors, which explains why it never really hap-
pened. Permanent magnet synchronous motor is a promising candidate for a
wheel-mounted construction, due to high speciﬁc torques.
In such a
wheel-mounted permanent magnet synchronous motor the torque of the
motor is directly transmitted to the wheel without using gears and ﬂexible
couplings. As the drive sits directly on the rim of the wheel, it provides much
higher energy efﬁciency.

3.5.4 Direct Drive with PM Motors Controlled by SiC

Inverters

Combining the three technologies together opens opportunities to reduce signiﬁ-
cantly drive and brakes losses from the motor and the converter, eliminating
altogether losses from the train drive. As we’ve just mentioned, it should also
recuperate energy lost in the form of heat coming from the service brakes, which
could be reused in the system. It is difﬁcult to assess how much energy would be
saved in the future through this, as there is no application yet. This is our guess:
(cid:129) Gearbox losses: eliminating the 5–8 % energy inefﬁciency;
(cid:129) Motor losses: a 25 % reduction in driving and braking mode, which could result

in a 2–3 % overall higher efﬁciency;

(cid:129) Converter losses: a 50 % reduction in driving and braking mode, which could

result in a 1–2 % overall higher efﬁciency;

(cid:129) Enhanced kinetic energy recuperation by eliminating mechanical braking for

service braking, even at low speed (not emergency braking): 1–3 %

Without being over optimistic, we could imagine that these new combined tech-
nologies should reduce energy consumption by around 5–10 % and enable addi-
tional energy recuperation in the range of 5–10 %.

3.5 Greener Technology

209

3.5.5 Energy Recuperation and Wayside or Onboard

Storage

We’ve seen that electric cars can recuperate braking energy. This technology
originated in the railway industry, where such energy has been recuperated for
years. Unlike cars though, electric trains have several choices for reusing braking
energy. Trains can obviously use it for onboard consumption but when a train is
braking, it usually doesn’t need such energy. In the past, there was no onboard
storage equipment and thus, the railway industry started reinjecting such energy
back into the network via system overhead wires called catenary or through third
rail for metro cars (Fig. 3.18).

The problem with this strategy is that such energy needs to be captured
immediately by accelerating nearby trains. Time is of the essence as the line cannot
accumulate too much energy without creating a risk of damaging the cables and the
equipment. Distance also is important as wire resistivity (resistance to electron,
which is function of the metal type and width of the conductor) will increase energy
losses in the network.

Fig. 3.18 Picture of third rail
in metro operation. Source
Author

210

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

How much energy are we talking about? Trains are heavy and as kinetic
energy is function of mass, the recoverable energy is considerable. We’ve
already seen that the kinetic energy formula applied to a running vehicle
(rectilinear motion) is:
– E = ½ mv2 Where m is the mass in kg and v the speed in m/s2

A 6 car train-set such as the X60 from Alstom, which weighs 206 tons at tare,
when braking at a speed of 100 km at full capacity (4 passengers/m2) would
generate almost 30 kWh (107 MJ). For a mass transit network, recuperating
such energy of an entire ﬂeet is vital. In fact, metro networks are characterized
by short distances between stations of 1–1.2 km and by operational needs for
steep acceleration to reach full speed and deceleration to come to a standstill
as soon as possible. If measured, most acceleration and deceleration forces
are applied during the ﬁrst and last 100 m respectively. During the remaining
800 m metros reach cruising speed, where energy is basically used to ﬁght
drag and rolling friction and power up the auxiliaries.
Thus optimizing the system in order to always have a train accelerating while
another one is braking, allows for signiﬁcant energy savings, which we’ve
seen for older train technologies is in the range of 30 %.

Several options have been around for using the recuperated kinetic energy and

new technologies enable even greater possibilities.
(cid:129) Auxiliary equipment consumption: Consuming directly this energy in auxiliary

equipment such as HVAC, lighting, wipers, etc.

(cid:129) Consumption by nearby trains: Reinjecting into the line this energy to be
captured by nearby accelerating metros or trains. However, if other vehicles are
not available to use this regenerated power, the voltage on the distribution
network rises to the point where the braking vehicles must stop transferring
regenerated energy to the network. In such case, the braking train will dissipate
the kinetic energy as heat either through onboard or wayside resistors. The
energy is anyhow lost in both cases.

(cid:129) Wayside storage: In the last few years, metro operators have become more
concerned about energy consumption. With the development of more powerful
electronic chips, equipment manufacturers have been able to create energy
storage equipment, which are positioned in the stations and can capture the
energy which would be lost when no accelerating metro can be found nearby.
Two types of electronic wayside technologies are available: supracapacitors and
line converters. Another technology called ﬂywheel has also been adapted for
wayside storage.

3.5 Greener Technology

211

Supercapacitors These power electronic capacitors play two key roles:
(cid:129) Delivering quick bursts of energy during peak power demands; and
(cid:129) Capturing excess power that is otherwise lost and quickly store it.

Super-capacitors’ main strength is that they discharge and recharge quickly.
Additionally, they will tolerate many more charge and discharge cycles than
batteries. They bridge the gap between conventional electrolytic capacitors
and rechargeable batteries:
– They store as much as 10,000 times more energy per volume than con-
ventional capacitors but deliver less than half as much power per unit
time; and

– Their energy density that is approximately 10 % of conventional batteries

but their power density is generally 10–100 times greater.

In the railway energy, system integrators have integrated several super capacity
units and created a bank of supercapacitors, which storing capacity can be tailored
made to the railway network. For instance, one of the energy storage system design
is scalable, with an energy storing capacity ranging from 0.25 to 5.0 kWh.

In South Korea, Metro operators in Seoul have claimed to achieve power
savings of more than 20 % using super capacitor. Several 48 V multi-cell
ultra capacitor modules were installed on 750 and 1500 VDC lines in seven
Seoul metro stations. They were also installed in the Korea Train eXpress
depot.

Flywheels They play the same role as supercapacitors but instead of using power
electronic they use a heavy, high-speed rotating metal disk lying on conventional
bearings that builds up kinetic energy as it spins. The faster the ﬂywheel spins the
more kinetic energy it stores.

We’ve used the analogy of the bicycle dynamo to explain kinetic energy. To
make an analogy, we could think about the toy cars that use friction motors
based on the principle of ﬂywheels. A ﬂywheel is a rotating disk that stores
energy as kinetic energy. The ﬂywheel rotates with a connecting rod, known
as the shaft. The shaft is where the energy moves in and out of the ﬂywheel.
Two factors control the quantity of energy ﬂywheels store: its moment of
inertia and rotational speed. Indeed according to Newton’s Second Law

212

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

(applied to rotating objects) torque is equivalent to the moment of inertia
multiplied by rotational acceleration.
– Moment of Inertia: it is deﬁned by the rotating object’s mass, radius, and
inertia constant. The inertia constant is dependent on the shape, which
usually comes as a ring with spokes (constant = 1.0) or a solid disk
(constant = 0.5).

– Rotational Speed: The energy a ﬂywheel stores is proportional to the
square of the rotational speed. The rotation itself is limited by the mate-
rial’s density and strength. This is why more modern ﬂywheels are made
of carbon ﬁber and employ magnetic bearings allowing for much faster
rotational speeds.

In wayside applications, the vehicle’s braking energy is transferred to the ﬂy-
wheel through the catenary by applying torque to it, thereby increasing its rotational
speed. Conversely, the ﬂywheel releases back to the grid its stored energy by
applying torque to the shaft. Modern materials make ﬂywheels smaller, lighter, and
able to spin more quickly, thus more capable to store more energy per occupying
space. This makes it more and more attractive for onboard applications especially
for automotive applications.
Line converters Line converters on the other hand don’t store energy. They simply
bypass the electric network of the railway system and reinject the recuperated
energy back into the main high voltage line of the energy distribution conces-
sionaire or within a different voltage line such as, for instance, the ofﬁces of a
railway station. In other words, it basically enables the recuperated braking energy
to be consumed elsewhere in the network for a completely different purpose.

Onboard storage Supercapacitors have been tested in tramway and metro appli-
cation as far as 2005. However, so far, onboard supercapacitors success has been
extremely limited. One of the main reasons is that they are heavy and bulky, as
many 3VDC cells must be put in series together to achieve the typical 24VDC
railway requirement. Furthermore, investment made in battery research by the
automotive industry is likely to improve much faster battery performance.
A combination of supercapacitors and batteries is also possible but in our view it is
unlikely that supercapacitor can compete in the future with batteries, as they cannot
provide energy for enough time to get rid of catenary wires.

Free catenary operation The advances in battery performance we referred to, have
pushed the railway industry to come up with onboard banks of batteries that can
store energy for non-catenary operations and by the same token recuperate the
kinetic energy. Introduction of catenary-free applications are popping up in places
such as France, Qatar, Dubai, and Brazil encouraging the production of even more
efﬁcient battery systems. As we’ve seen, the peak of energy demand is at the station

3.5 Greener Technology

213

when starting acceleration and during the ﬁrst 80 m. After that most metro will only
consume energy to ﬁght air drag and rolling resistance. If overhead catenaries are
available at the station and during this ﬁrst 80 m and the dwell time is sufﬁcient for
restoring energy, then tramways should be able to run without any catenary.

Energy optimization software Modern signaling technology has integrated the need
for metro and mass transit operators to reduce energy consumption. As seen, the
cheapest way to recuperate the energy of a braking vehicle is to send it back into the
grid via the catenary or third rail for other nearby trains to use. This is now possible
through train regulation whereby the signaling software controls the arrivals and
departures of nearby trains to maximize the energy transfer. In other words, when a
metro starts braking the signaling software ensures that nearby metro cars start
accelerating.

3.6 Final Energy Consumption Comparison

At full load (4 passengers/m2) and constant speed (i.e., 60 km/h), buses and metros
require around the same power: 190 kW. Cars on the other hand because of their
lower weight only consume 28 kW (see Table 3.26). These results calculated on the
basis of European technologies, with 80 kg per passenger weight and for an average
cruising speed of 60 km/h, are representative of urban travels. However, such
values are meaningless unless we consider the transportation’s average occupancy
rate (as well as energy recuperation when braking).

When we factor in these elements, we get very different results for Europe and
the USA, as occupancy is signiﬁcantly impacted by culture of public versus private
transport (i.e., American bus occupancy is only 12 %). As a consequence, buses and
cars in the US consume more or less the same energy per kilometer and passenger
transported, while in Europe, buses consume half the energy (Table 3.30).

In Europe, conventional cars consume around seven times more energy than rail
and twice as much in the USA, wheel–to-wheel. When comparing on a well-to-wheel
basis, integrating the countries’ generation matrix, rail transit vehicles and buses
would still consume four and two times less than conventional cars, respectively.
Furthermore, these numbers don’t take into consideration for railway mass transit:
(cid:129) Newer energy efﬁcient technologies which could still improve mass transit

results by up to 20 %

(cid:129) Higher occupancy rates at 6 passengers/m2 or even 8 passengers/m2 which could
increase even further the railway energy efﬁciency by around 20 and 40 %,
respectively.

We saw also in this chapter that electric cars are far more energy efﬁcient than
conventional diesel and gasoline automobiles. The energy efﬁciency well-to-wheel
in the USA and France is, respectively, 39 and 41 % versus gasoline (21 %) and
diesel (25 %) energy efﬁciency.

214

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

Table 3.30 Comparison between car, bus, and train of energy consumption, adapted from the
Ademe study and the US BTU information

Transport mode

Efﬁciency

Well-to-wheel

Real kWh per passenger-
km
Wheel-to-
wheel
Paris (%) USA (%) Paris USA Paris USA

Well-to-
wheel

21
25
41.2

21
25
38.6

0.78
0.39
0.11

1.66
1.66
0.71

0.88
0.44
0.20

2.00
2.00
1.19

Wheel-to-
wheel
Global (%)

26
28.5
106

Vehicle type

Cars petroleum-based
Buses (transit) diesel
Rail (transit light
and heavy)
Source Author

When we factor this in, we could say that in the USA, electric cars would be
around 80 % more energy efﬁcient than buses and as energy friendly as mass
transit. This could come as a surprise, but we shouldn’t forget that the US occu-
pancy rate of buses and metro cars is low and most buses run on diesel, which
cannot recuperate energy. If we were to consider only big cities like New York with
a culture of public transit, these numbers would probably change.

This is why the numbers we’ve presented for Paris are intuitively less surprising.
When considering well-to-wheel energy consumption in Paris between mass transit
and private vehicles, buses and metros are much more energy efﬁcient than electric
cars. Buses are around 25 % more energy efﬁcient than electric cars. Metros and
commuters are a little over three times more energy efﬁcient. This once again
doesn’t consider the newer greener technologies, the fact that buses will also
become electric, or the extra capacity that could be brought by increased occupancy
levels in buses and trains.

On the other hand, it doesn’t consider also the impact of “unmanned taxi ser-
vices” as seen in Chap. 2, which could reduce signiﬁcantly the consumption per
passenger km, as it would allow for much higher average occupancy rate.
Increasing average occupancy rate to around four passengers would mean that these
services would be almost as environmentally friendly as metro operation and more
than buses.

3.7 Pollution Comparison Between Car Technology

Public authorities must deﬁne different transportation and social policies, which can
have a huge impact on the environment. From an environmental perspective, the
best strategy is to avoid consumption in the ﬁrst place.

3.7 Pollution Comparison Between Car Technology

215

For instance, policies to incentivize companies to allow people working from
home is a good way of reducing pollution. Creating pedestrian areas for
people to walk or dedicating bicycle lanes for people to go to work isn’t only
good for the environment, it is also good for the citizen’s health. However, we
all know that in many cities, people live too far from their main activities and
must use transportation means. Thus, encouraging the spread of industries
and commerce throughout the cities is a way of making sure that all citizens
can ﬁnd work or goods in their neighborhood without having to use trans-
portation means. Correlating the deliverance of construction permits to the
number of additional jobs is also a way to impose restriction on commuting
needs.

The second best solution for public authorities is to insure that policies or
investments are made to ensure that the system is used to its full operating capacity.

Policies encouraging companies to provide their employees with ﬂexible
working hours are positive because they allow people to avoid morning and
evening rushes, thus reducing trafﬁc jams or the necessity for additional
public transport capacity. On the other hand, drastic measures such as for-
bidding people to use their cars according to their plate number will generate
immediate beneﬁts. From a society perspective, the policy will have a short
term impact on all citizens, but in the long term will affect mainly the less
fortunate. Rich people will buy a second or third car, usually second-hand,
with less energy efﬁcient technology. From an environmental perspective, the
remedy is than worse than the initial disease.

Operating all transportation systems at full capacity is an additional way of being
environmentally savvy. Working at 6 or even 8 passengers/m2 during peak hours
makes sense from an environmental perspective rather than duplicating the ﬂeet size
and staying with loads of idle equipment for most of the remaining hours.

Obviously it makes much less sense from a passenger’s point of view, but
ﬁnding the right balance between comfort and efﬁciency is important. Any
avoided purchase of an extra car, bus or train will enable material economies
and bring additionally the following beneﬁts:
– Avoided unnecessary maintenance: What isn’t built doesn’t need to be
maintained or recycled, thus reducing consumables and spare parts.
– Reduced energy consumption: 90 % of overall energy consumption is
linked to operations, over the vehicles life. However, by right-sizing the
ﬂeet, energy used for manufacturing, which can represent for a train

216

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

around 4.5 % can be avoided, as well as the 0.5 % needed at the end of life
for the equipment’s recyclability. The remaining 5 % which are used
during maintenance can also be reduced by rightsizing the ﬂeet.

Another selection strategy is to consider recyclability needs. Choosing trans-
portation modes with equipment that last longer, will reduce the recycling needs.

Railway technology is built for 30 years whereas the average bus and car life
is 10 year. This means that when comparing transportation means, two extra
buses must be ordered and recycled over the same period of 30 years.
Furthermore, the railway equipment and components are usually built to last
longer. Most modern vehicles can be Designed for Environment (DfE), taking
into consideration the most stringent international norms. Using recyclable
equipment or being able to de-construct easily the parts for recyclability
should be part of the vehicle selection criteria.

The ﬁfth strategy is to reduce the energy to be consumed when driving the

vehicles.

the air drag,

We’ve seen that the physical forces that are running against any moving
vehicle are the friction coming from the contact of wheels on the road or
tracks,
the acceleration forces and forces to climb ramps.
Reducing tire friction, improving the coefﬁcient of air penetration, reducing
weight and speed can reduce signiﬁcantly the energy consumption of the
vehicles. Improving also the efﬁciency of all the different equipment as we’ve
seen in the previous section are all initiatives that will reduce the environ-
mental footprint of these transportation means.

In the following section, we will calculate the impact of the various transpor-
tation means in terms of pollution based on the result from the previous sections.
The focus will be on air pollution, as water pollution would be a consequence of
pollutants emission reaching lakes or river through rainfalls.

3.7.1 Air Pollution

As for energy consumption, air pollution can be calculated in two different ways:
wheel-to-wheel and well-to-wheel. However, the place of pollution isn’t neutral for

3.7 Pollution Comparison Between Car Technology

217

calculation of the impact, as pollution within cities has consequences on the health
of the citizens. In other words, where we pollute is almost as important as how
much we pollute.

Indeed, fumes cause pulmonary diseases and premature deaths. Children are
particularly vulnerable, as poor air quality triggers asthma which is the
number one cause of hospitalization among children and has a major impact
on healthcare system. When we know that around 7 million people die every
year worldwide because of pollution (according to the World Health
Organization), we can measure how important city pollution is.

Let’s ﬁrst explain what the factors that produce air contaminants are.

Conventional petrol-based pollution Air pollution happens during the combustion
phase. This physical reaction uses the air’s oxygen content to combine with the
fuel, which is a mixture of several hydrocarbons.

the oxygen and the hydrocarbons will

During this phase,
interact and
recombine, giving a mix of water vapor, carbon dioxide (CO2), and some-
times carbon monoxide (CO) and partially burned hydrocarbons. In addition,
at high temperatures the oxygen tends to combine with nitrogen present in the
air, forming oxides of nitrogen (usually referred to as NOx). This mixture,
along with the unused nitrogen and other trace atmospheric elements, is what
we see in the exhaust.

Vehicle fuel usage and its tailpipe emissions are the single largest human-made
source of carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, and methane. Additionally, vehicles that
are stationary, idle, or traveling at reduced speeds due to congestion pollutes more.
Therefore, technologies that reduce fuel consumption and idling could play a sig-
niﬁcant role in reducing greenhouse gas emissions, particularly in major cities.

3.7.2 Carbon Dioxide (CO2)

During combustion, two molecules of oxygen and one of carbon recombine to form
carbon dioxide. The level of CO2 produced is function of the fuel’s origin, as well
as the proportion of the different other elements mixed with these liquids.

In the USA bout 2.68 kg of CO2 are produced from burning a conventional
liter of gasoline (for instance, not containing any ethanol) and around 2.4

218

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

using gasoline with 10 % ethanol. For diesel, around 2.95 kg of CO2 are
produced from burning a conventional liter and 2.6 kg with 10 % ethanol. In
Europe the value that are usually considered are respectively 2.3 kg for
gasoline and 2.63 kg for diesel. Adding ethanol helps reduce CO2 emission
but on the other hand reduces energy efﬁciency. Indeed, ethanol efﬁciency is
only 2/3 of gasoline. Adding 10 % ethanol would reduce mileage by about
3 % during summer and reduce it even further during cold winter days.

The EIA estimated in 2012 that gasoline and diesel burned during transport
resulted in the emission of 1511 billion metric tons of CO2. This total was
equivalent to 83 % of total US CO2 emissions by the transportation sector and 29 %
of total US energy-related CO2 emissions.

CO2 generated per person Each country has its own environmental footprint. In
the UK, calculation gives 3.67 tons of CO2 emissions per person. Almost all of this
is used in internal combustion engines. Adding 0.14 tons of CO2 for oil extraction
and 0.43 tons lost in oil reﬁning gives a total energy wasted in oil exploration and
reﬁning of 0.57 tons, which means that only 3.10 tons of the total 3.67 tons is
actually used in internal combustion engines (15 % pollution inefﬁciency).
Allowing for an extra 0.43 CO2 tons arising from fossil fuel used in motor vehicle
manufacturing, each UK citizen produces 4.1 tons during transport per year.

Car owners of bigger cars, pollute obviously more than others. Vehicle
emission data is available for new car registrations and can help identify by
how much. To take into consideration real life conditions (driving style,
passengers, luggage, poor maintenance, weather, under-inﬂated tires, use of
air-conditioning) we added an extra 15 % to DEFRA values (Table 3.31).

The ﬁgures above show that larger cars pollute one-third more than smaller ones.

Table 3.31 Emission of CO2
per car typea

Size

Engine size (L)

km/L

g of CO2 per km
624
688

15.73
14.03

<1.5
1.5–2.0

Small car
Medium
car
Large car
aEuropean Environment Agency (2008). http://www.eea.europa.
eu/data-and-maps/ﬁgures/train-occupancy-rates

10.20

>2.0

960

3.7 Pollution Comparison Between Car Technology

219

3.7.3 Nitrogen Oxide: NOx

Nitrogen oxide can refer to a compound of oxygen and nitrogen (NO), or a mixture
of such compounds (NOx). NOx compounds play several negative roles. For
instance, production of nitric acid originating from NOx transformation is one of the
main causes of acid rains. A similar transformation process can happen at the level
of human mucosa, which irritates the respiratory system. This gas plays also an
important role in smog appearance and creates problems at the ozone layer. Their
role in PM formation is also important (NO2 and SO2 can combine to form PM).

3.7.4 Nitrous Oxide: N2O

At room temperature, N2O is a colorless nonﬂammable gas, with a slightly sweet
odor and taste. It is a major greenhouse gas and air pollutant. Considered over a
100-year period, it has almost 300 times more impact per unit mass on global
warming than carbon dioxide.

3.7.5 Particulate Matter: PM10 and PM2,5

PMs are very thin solid or liquid particles that remain in the air, and have a diameter
smaller than 10 (PM10) or 2.5 micrometer (PM2.5). Some particles are naturally
produced (i.e., pollen and ﬁre). However, a great proportion is man-made. In cities,
it is estimated that around 20 % of all PMs are due to transport. PMs are bad for the
human health. The toxicity of these particles is linked both to their size and their
composition. Because of their very small size, these particles can penetrate very
deeply into the lungs alveolus or even in the blood vessels.

3.7.6 Volatile Organic Compound (VOC)

These elements are organic matter, which evaporate easily and are present in their
gas state at ambient temperatures. These compounds play a fundamental role in the
production of smog. Furthermore, some of these compounds (i.e., benzene) induce
cancer.

220

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

3.7.7 Health Impact of Pollution

The following details about the impact of air pollution on human health were
inspired from an article published5 in January 2014.

Cardiovascular disease Many molecules produced by transport have a direct
impact on human health. Of all these molecules, PMs are the ones causing the most
concern. Any particle smaller than 10 micrometers, can enter the lungs and for
every increase of 10 μg/m3 in PM10, lung cancer rate can rise by 22 %. The smaller
PM2.5 is worst as they pass into the bloodstream and as a result can damage blood
vessels.

The likely explanation is that pollutants may trigger inﬂammation in the
body, activating chemicals that are toxic to the heart and cause people to
breathe faster, increasing heart rate and blood pressure. A University of
Michigan study6 found that higher concentrations of PM2.5 were linked to
faster thickening of the inner two layers of the common carotid artery.

Lung disease Air pollution not only triggers asthma attacks but increases their
severity and frequency and may even cause the condition. A 2013 European study7
concluded that 14 % of chronic childhood asthma is due to exposure to trafﬁc
pollution near busy roads. Jo Waters states in the article8 that:

Pollution is also thought
to worsen symptoms in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, which includes emphysema, chronic bron-
chitis and cystic ﬁbrosis. Vehicle exhaust gases, including ozone, nitrous
oxide and sulfur dioxide, can also act as irritants, making lung tubes tighten
and narrow, causing wheezing and breathlessness.

5Can car exhaust fumes cause dementia? Asthma. Heart attacks. Cancer. Even diabetes. Why
trafﬁc pollution may be linked to a list of health problems. Author: JO
experts fear
WATERS; PUBLISHED on 27 January 2014. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-2547008/
Can-car-exhaust-fumes-cause-dementia-Asthma-Heart-attacks-Cancer-Even-diabetes-Why-
experts-fear-trafﬁc-pollution-linked-list-health-problems.html
6A University of Michigan study found that higher Air pollution linked to hardening of the arteries
Apr 24, 2013 Laurel Thomas Gnagey. http://www.ns.umich.edu/new/releases/21420-air-pollution-
linked-to-hardening-of-the-arteries
7Road trafﬁc pollution as serious as passive smoke in the development of childhood asthma
(March 21, 2013); Source European Lung Foundation.
8See Footnote 5.

3.7 Pollution Comparison Between Car Technology

221

Diabetes A study9 published in 2013 concluded that children’s exposure to trafﬁc
pollution was associated with an increased risk of developing insulin resistance,
which can lead to type-2 diabetes. The study showed that the higher the PM
concentration is, the more important the risks are.

Premature birth According to a study10 published by Californian Universities,
women living in polluted urban areas have a 30 % increased risk of giving birth
prematurely.

Cancer The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), part of the
World Health Organization, has classiﬁed outdoor air pollution as an agent causing
cancer. In its 2013 warning, it concluded that air pollution causes lung and bladder
cancer. Furthermore, not only did it classify air pollution as carcinogen. The PM
alone was classiﬁed as carcinogen. The IARC reported that out of the 3.2 million
people who died worldwide from air pollution in 2010, 223,000 succumbed from
lung cancer.

to inﬂuence dementia sickness such as
Dementia Air pollution is thought
Alzheimer. A 201211 study of postmortem brain examinations following accidents
in the very polluted city of Mexico, builds on a growing body of research sug-
gesting that air pollution exposure can cause changes in the brain similar to those
seen in Alzheimer’s patients. More than half the brains of urban fatalities showed
signs of amyloid- B plaques, against none for rural fatalities. Forty percent of the
urban fatalities had pretangle material (material also associated with Alzheimer)
compared to close to nil for the rural people studied.

3.7.8 Greenhouse Gas Effect

Pollution emission from petrol-based engines also has a direct impact on the
environment.

Climate change Despite compelling evidence of climate change, governments from
many countries have avoided taking harsh and unpopular measures to reduce

9Air pollution increases risk of insulin resistance in children; Published in 2013 in Diabetologia,
the journal of the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD), and is by Elisabeth
Thiering and Joachim Heinrich, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, and
colleagues.
10Trafﬁc-related air toxics and preterm birth: a population-based case-control study in Los Angeles
County; study published by Californian Universities, Author: M.Wilhelm, J.K. Ghosh, J. Su, M.
Cockburn, M. Jerrett and B. Ritz.
11Alzheimer's-like brain changes seen in young who breathed polluted air. (Jan 30, 2012); Source:
Calderon-Garciduenas, L, M Kavanaugh, M Block, AD Angiulli, R Delgado-Chavez, R
Torres-Jardon, A Gonzalez-Maciel, R Reynoso-Robles, N Osnaya, R Villarreal-Calderon, R Guo,
H Zhaowei, Z Hongtu, G Perry and P Diaz.

222

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

greenhouse gas emission. For instance, the US federal government, Canada, China,
and other countries have not committed to CO2 stringent reduction.

How does CO2 emission impact the environment? Firstly it affects a speciﬁc
region of the atmosphere called the troposphere. Indeed, the greenhouse effect
issue concerns the warming of this lower part of the atmosphere (it is about
10–15 km thick, varying with latitude and season). In this zone, greenhouse
gas molecules such as CO2, methane (CH4), Nitrous oxide (N2O), and N2O
are caught. Warming will occur because these greenhouse gases, while they
are transparent to incoming solar radiation, absorb infrared (heat) radiation
from the Earth that would otherwise escape from the atmosphere into space.
The greenhouse gases then reradiate some of this heat back towards the
surface of the Earth.

Effect on ozone layer Substances that contribute to ozone depletion usually have
high concentrations of chlorine or bromine atoms and include chloroﬂuorocarbons
(CFCs). Vehicle emissions contain few of these substances and therefore have little
effect on ozone depletion. Hydrocarbons are recognized by EPA as having no ozone
depletion impact.

3.7.9 Wheel-to-Wheel Pollution of Different Transport

Modes

The following table shows the different gas emission at the point of energy con-
sumption (in g/L) (Table 3.32).

The EPA provides also the average pollutant emission and fuel (Table 3.33)
The EPA gives also the pollutant emission per type of vehicle in teragram

equivalent (Table 3.34)

3.7.10 Well-to-Wheel Pollution of Different Transport

Modes

We’ve seen that polluting outside of cities is critical for human’s health, even more
so when we acknowledge a worldwide massive shift of population from rural to
urban areas. However, we cannot forget that many inhabitants still live in rural
areas. Furthermore, pollution has also a huge impact on wildlife and the environ-
ment through global warming.

3.7 Pollution Comparison Between Car Technology

223

Table 3.32 Web pagea environment Canada gas emission factors for energy mobile combustion
sources, in g/L

CH4

N2O

0.14
0.23
0.32
0.52
0.46

2289
2289
2289
2289
2289

0.022
0.47
0.66
0.20
0.028

Emission factor for transportation
CO2

Mobile combustion
Transport mode
Gasoline vehicles
Light-duty gasoline vehicles (LDGVs)
Tier 2
Tier 1
Tier 0
Oxidation catalyst
Non-catalytic controlled
Diesel vehicles
Light-duty diesel vehicles (LDDVs)
Advance control
Moderate control
Uncontrolled
Natural gas vehicles
Propane vehicles
Motorcycles
Non-catalytic controlled
Uncontrolled
Railways
Diesel train
aFuel Combustion Environment Canada (Web page); Date Modiﬁed: 2013-06-21. http://www.ec.
gc.ca/ges-ghg/default.asp?lang=En&n=AC2B7641-1

0.22
0.21
0.16
6 × 10−5
0.028

0.051
0.068
0.10
9 × 10
0.64

2663
2663
2663
1.89
1510

0.041
0.048

2289
2289

0.77
2.3

2663

0.15

1.1

−3

Table 3.33 EPA average emissions and fuel consumption for passenger cars, based on average
mileage of 12.000 and 0.0419 gal per mile (October 2008)a

Pollutant/fuel

Emission in g/km driven

Annual emission in kg

VOC
THC
CO
NOx
PM10
PM2.5
CO2
Gasoline consumption in L
Adapted by Author
aAverage Annual emission and fuel consumption for gasoline fuel passenger cars and light trucks;
Source EPA Ofﬁce of Transportation and Air quality EPA420-F-08-024

1.668
1.737
15.161
1.118
0.0071
0.0066
594.194
0.156

12
13
113
8
0
0
4,421
1,885

224

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

Table 3.34 Total US
pollutant emission per type of
vehicle and fuel typea

2012

In teragram
equivalent

Gasoline

Total
Passenger cars
Light trucks
Buses
Motorcycle
Total
Passenger cars
Light trucks
Buses
Rail
aSee Footnote 12

Diesel

CO2

CH4

N2O

1100
755.7
286.6
0.8
4.2
435.4
4.2
13.2
16.3
40.2

1.1
0.8
0.3
0.1
+
+
+
+
+
+

12
8
3.5
0.5
+
0.4
+
+
+
+

Table 3.35 Total pollutant emission per activity and power plant type; EPA 2012a

2012

In teragram equivalent

Electricity generation

CH4
0.5

N2O
18.3

Total
Coal power plant
Natural gas
Petroleum
Petroleum

CO2
2042.2
1512.2
492
18.8
1735.4

Transportation
aNorth American Power Plant Air Emissions; Source: the Secretariat of the Commission for
Environmental Cooperation (CEC) of North America. http://www3.cec.org/islandora/en/item/
10236-north-american-power-plant-air-emissions-en.pdf

16.5

1.7

In order to calculate the impact of transport modes, we must analyze the impact

of the different types of power plant on CO2 emission.

The EPA, provided the pollutant emission in teragram of equivalent CO2

(Million metric tons) for their electrical generation matrix (Table 3.35).

These numbers per se don’t mean much but if we cross the values of this table
with the previous one, we can deduct that proportionally, the electric generation
matrix in the USA emits:
(cid:129) More CO2 than the vehicles (around 17 % more);
(cid:129) Much less methane (less than one-third); and
(cid:129) More N2O (around 10 % more).

These results are obviously linked to the importance of coal in the American
generation matrix. The following graph gives additional
information on other
pollutants. It shows a North American direct comparison between coal, petrol, and
natural gas power plants for level of emission of NOx, SOx (Sulfur Dioxide), CO2,
PM10, and Hg (mercury) (Fig. 3.19 and Table 3.36).

A newer study from the American National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration concluded that Natural gas power plants in the USA emit 40 % less
CO2 than coal power plants. Their study performed exclusively at the level of the

3.7 Pollution Comparison Between Car Technology

225

Coal Oil Nat Gas

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

CO2

NOX

SOX

PM10

Hg

Fig. 3.19 Emission of pollutants in % of Coal (Average Annual emission and fuel consumption
for gasoline fuel passenger cars and light trucks; Source EPA Ofﬁce of Transportation and Air
quality EPA420-F-08-024)

Table 3.36 Typical emission
of pollutants

Pollutants

Emission rates in kg/MWh
Coal

Oil

Nat gas

759.09
5.45
1.82

1021.04
5.9
2.72

CO2
SO2
NOx
aNorth American Power Plant Air Emissions; Source:
the
Secretariat of the Commission for Environmental Cooperation
(CEC) of North America. http://www3.cec.org/islandora/en/item/
10236-north-american-power-plant-air-emissions-en.pdf

515.29
0.05
0.77

power plant and based on measurements collected between 1997 and 2012, con-
cluded that the average emission of:
(cid:129) Coal-based power plants: 915 g of CO2/kWh of electricity produced;
(cid:129) Natural gas power plants: 549 g of CO2/kWh produced; and
(cid:129) Combined cycle natural gas plants: 436 g of CO2/kWh produced.

Reduction of CO2 emission In 2012, the EPA set new standards to reduce CO2
emission. New large plants (> 100 MW) fueled by natural gas could emit no more
than 450 kg of CO2/MWh of electricity produced. Smaller natural gas plants would
have to achieve a less stringent rate of 500 kg/MWh. Coal plants would have two
options, either of which would require Carbone Capture and Storage technology
(CCS).

226

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

CSS technology: New large coal plant would need to meet 500 kg/MWh,
which they couldn’t through efﬁciency alone. Indeed, the most efﬁcient type
of coal plants, using ultra-supercritical boilers or integrated gasiﬁcation
combined cycle technology, can currently achieve a CO2 emission rate of
around 770 kg/MWh. Thus new coal plants could only meet the standard
through the use of CCS technology, which traps CO2 exiting the plant,
transports it, and injects it into an underground geological formation for
permanent storage. Newer plants could either begin using CCS soon after
startup, or begin using it later to reach a seven-year average emission rate
around 500 kg of CO2/MWh. CSS is however still in its early phase. Only
two commercial-scale CCS power plants are under construction in the USA
and Canada and were expected to be completed in 2015.

3.7.11 Electric Generation Matrix

The following graph (values from 2008) shows the impact of the electrical gen-
eration matrix (in gram of CO2 per passenger × km traveled) for the Paris region.
For instance in France, most of the energy used by the metro and commuter lines
comes from the French utility EDF, whose primary energy source is nuclear
(Fig. 3.20).

This graph shows the impact of not using fossil fuel to produce electricity. If
Paris metro and commuter lines were to use the average European 2008 values, the
emission of CO2 per passenger km traveled would still show that electric public

Tramway

Mass Transit  (RER) Metro

Motorbike

Articulated bus

minibus

Car: gasoline (<1,4L) Car: Gasoline (>2L)

300,00

250,00

200,00

150,00

100,00

50,00

0,00

Fig. 3.20 Emission of CO2 per passenger
[Transportation Energy Data Book; (2009)]; expressed in gep (gram of equivalent petrol)

traveled in the Paris region (Ademe 2008)

1

3.7 Pollution Comparison Between Car Technology

227

transport means are much cleaner than conventional gasoline technology, but less
so (Fig. 3.21).

3.7.12 Emission of CO2 Per kWh

If we go back to the electrical generation matrix of France, Brazil, and the USA,
and use values of 915 g of CO2/kWh for coal and 549 g of CO2/kWh for Natural
gas per kWh of electricity produced, we ﬁnd that each kWh generates 70, 130, and
500 g of CO2, respectively (Table 3.37).

Tramway

Mass Transit  (RER) Metro

Motorbike

Articulated bus

minibus

Car: gasoline (<1,4L) Car: Gasoline (>2L)

300,00

250,00

200,00

150,00

100,00

50,00

0,00

Fig. 3.21 Emission of CO2 per passenger traveled in the Paris region if using European values
(adapted from Ademe 2008) [Transportation Energy Data Book; (2009)] expressed in gep (gram of
equivalent petrol)

1

Table 3.37 Emission of Co2
according to different
generation matrix

Electrical matrix
Energy produced

Fossil fuel total
Coal
Nat Gas
Petroleum
Nuclear
Hydroelectricity
Other renewables
g of CO2/kWh
Source Author

France
in %

9.6
5.9
2.8
0.9
76.4
11.9
2.3
70.0

Brazil
in %

17.1
11.9
3.5
0.3
2.6
78.8
1.5
130.0

USA
in %

67.8
37.0
30.2
0.6
18.8
6.8
5.3
500.0

228

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

When we compare these numbers for instance with EDF announced values of
56 g of CO2 per kWh of electricity produced, we can say that this approxi-
mation is pretty accurate. The EPA calculates that on average the American
electricity grid emits 550 g of CO2 per kWh (1222 lbs per kWh) or 10 %
more, which isn’t that bad either.

Now if we compare these numbers with the 2289 and 2668 kg/L generated by
gasoline and diesel, we need to calculate how many kWh a liter of gasoline and
diesel generates. We’ve seen in previous section that 1 L of gasoline and diesel is
equivalent to 9.85 and 10.98 kWh, which translates into 208 and 232 g of CO2 per
kWh, respectively. We’ve seen in the previous section that an electric car would
require about 11 kWh to run 100 km, while a medium gasoline car would consume
80 kWh for the same distance. Thus, we can easily compare electric and conven-
tional cars on a well-to-wheel basis (Table 3.38).

It is important to emphasize that these values don’t even consider recuperated

braking energy, which would improve electric cars results by around 18 %.

Table 3.38 Emission of CO2
in kg for a trip of 100 km

Vehicle type

Electric cars
Diesel cars
Gasoline cars
kg of CO2/kWh
Source Author

France

0.77
18.56
16.64
0.07

Brazil

1.43
18.56
16.64
0.13

USA

5.5
18.56
16.64
0.50

Tramway

Mass Transit  (RER) Metro

Motorbike

Articulated bus

minibus

Car: gasoline (<1,4L) Car: Gasoline (>2L)

300,00

250,00

200,00

150,00

100,00

50,00

0,00

Fig. 3.22 Transport mode energy efﬁciency expressed in gep (gram equivalent petrol). Source
Ademe 2008

1

3.7 Pollution Comparison Between Car Technology

229

3.7.13 Emission of CO2 Per Transportation Means

In order to make an accurate comparison, we would need to take into account the
occupancy rates as we did for the energy calculation. We can also just use the
values calculated by EPA that give values for passenger per km traveled. In the
USA, commuter rail, subway trains, long distance trains (i.e., intercity rail) emit on
average 108, 100, and 116 g of CO2 per passenger km, respectively.12 According to
the same source, on average, a bus trip emits 66 g of CO2 per passenger km. If we
assume the average occupancy rate of 1.5 passengers per car (1.1 at peak hour), a
gasoline and diesel car would emit 110 and 123 g of CO2 per passenger kilometer
on average and around 150 and 170 g of CO2 at peak hour. The emission of CO2
per passenger km traveled of mass transit systems in Paris is extremely different
than the numbers for the USA, as we can see in the following chart. This is caused
by the higher occupancy rate as well as to the characteristic as of the French energy
matrix that relies almost exclusively on nuclear power plants (Fig. 3.22).

3.7.14 Conclusion About Pollutant Emission

We’ve analyzed the pollutant emission at the point of energy consumption and
generation. Wheel-to-wheel
(wall-to-wheel) pollutant emission is exclusively
linked to conventional petroleum-based vehicles. Electrical vehicles don’t pollute in
cities. This is extremely important because that’s where the pollution problems are
the most acute. Thus, forcing urban citizen to adopt electric transport, be it private
or public, is an extremely sound policy, which would reduce signiﬁcantly health
costs.
Health costs We’ve seen that pollutant emission can generate cardiovascular and
lung diseases, diabetes, cancer, premature birth and dementia. According to the
World Health Organization in 2012 around 7 million people died—one in eight of
total global deaths—as a result of air pollution exposure. According to the US EPA,
Ofﬁce of Air and Radiation, (March 2011), total combustion emissions in the US
accounted for about 200,000 premature deaths per year due to changes in partic-
ulate matter concentrations. The largest contributors for both pollutant-related
mortalities are road transportation, causing a total of approximately 58,000 early
deaths per year, and power generation, causing approximately 54,000 premature
mortalities per year.

12Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990–2012; Source American EPA;
(2014).
http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/pdfs/usinventoryreport/US-GHG-Inventory-2015-
Chapter-3-Energy.pdf

230

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

The Ontario Medical Association calculated that in 2005 the total cost of
illness due to air pollution was US$6.43 Billion and that mortality represented
82 % of the cost, while pain and suffering represented 7 %. Health care cost
in productivity only accounted for 6.5 and 5 % respectively.
and lost
Furthermore, in the UK, an old study (1999) found that at that time, the cost
of lung disease linked to air pollution was in the range of 6 % of the National
Health Hospital System, in line with the Canadian values.

Health cost in % of GDP Now if we want to put a global value to air pollution
costs, we must try to calculate the impact on a country’s economy. A 2011 study13
by Muller and Mendelson estimated the cost of air pollution at 0.7 % of the
US GDP. We don’t have these same values for 2014, but as unfortunately the
quality of air in most big cities hasn’t improved we could use the same values to
assess the worldwide cost of pollution. Based on an estimated negative impact on
the economy of between 1 and 4 % of the world countries’ GNP, air pollution could
account for a total yearly cost for society of over $600 billion.

It pays to invest in air pollution remedies According to a 2012 study14 since 2001,
every increase in PM2.5 (10 µg/m3) in six US observed cities was associated with an
adjusted increased risk of all-cause mortality of 14 %, and with 26 % and 37 %
increases in cardiovascular and lung cancer mortality,
respectively. Another
American study found that a decrease of 10 μg/m3 in the concentration of PM2.5
was associated with an increase in mean life expectancy of 0.35 years. According to
a report published in the magazine Nature,15 aggressive cuts in greenhouse gas
emissions could prevent 300,000–700,000 premature deaths annually by 2030;
800,000 to 1.8 million by 2050; and between 1.4 million to 3 million by 2100. The
authors of this report estimate the value of the health beneﬁts derived from cutting
one ton of CO2 at between $50 and $380, or more than the projected costs of cutting
one ton of CO2 within the next several decades for global warming purposes.

Global warming costs The impact of global warming can already be felt.
Temperatures are being more extreme and causing destruction coming from
stronger storms and hurricanes, with the impact of wind and ﬂooding. For instance,
the typhoon Haiyan that hit the Philippines in 2013, was the strongest ever, with

13Environmental Accounting for Pollution in the United States; Author Nicholas Z. Muller, Robert
Mendelsohn, and William Nordhaus; Economy American Economic Review 101 (August 2011).
14Chronic Exposure to Fine Particles and Mortality: An Extended Follow-Up of the Harvard Six
Cities Study from 1974 to 2009; Authors Lepeule, Johanna; Laden, Francine; Dockery, Douglas;
Schwartz, Joel. Environmental Health Perspectives (March 2012).
15Co-beneﬁts of mitigating global greenhouse gas emissions for future air quality and human
health; Published in Nature climate change; Authors: J. J. West; S. J. Smith, R.A. Silva, V. Naik,
Y. Zhang, Z. Adelman, M. Fry, S. Anenberg, L. W. Horowitz & J.F. Lamarque. http://www.
nature.com/nclimate/journal/v3/n10/full/nclimate2009.html

3.7 Pollution Comparison Between Car Technology

231

wind reported at 250 km/h. It is estimated that the number of fatalities was over
6000 and the cost of destruction on the Philippine’s economy to be somewhere
between $6 and $15 billion. The IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change) released in 2014 a report of the impact on global warming on the econ-
omy. In this report it is stated that between 0.02 and 2 % of worldwide GNP would
be reduced by an increase of 2 °C. This report also states that without deep cuts in
CO2 emission, the world is on its way to pass that value. Unfortunately, the world is
already on its way to lose that amount and without doing anything, could see further
loses.

3.8 Other Environmental Considerations

3.8.1 Battery Recycling

The opponents to electric cars will rightfully say that the batteries which weigh
between 150 and 250 kg and last on average 5 years, contains toxic components
such as lead, cadmium and lithium. As they are also much heavier than standard
lead batteries that weigh only 20 kg, they tend to require more energy to produce
and recycle. However, it should be noted that most components in the batteries can
be recycled. As the number of batteries will increase, the economics of recycling
will also improve from their current level, which are already pretty decent.
(cid:129) Lead–acid batteries: They can be 95 % recycled.
(cid:129) Reuse as storage facility: Studies of electric car batteries have shown that even
when a car battery has only 70 % of capacity left—too little to serve in a car—it
may still have around 10 years of useful life left as grid storage devices. Thus,
modern batteries could be reused for 15 extra years with the right business
model.

(cid:129) Nickel–metal hydride batteries: Found in most conventional hybrids, they are
very valuable to recycle, because nickel sells for a high price and is easily
reusable. A few companies are already running commercial nickel–metal
hydride battery recycling centers. These plants achieve a 90 % recycling level.
(cid:129) Lithium-ion batteries: They are more difﬁcult to recycle, in part because car
manufacturers use various combinations of chemical components with different
recycling values. Furthermore, their recycling is still in its infancy. Lithium–
nickel–manganese–cobalt batteries found in many modern plug-in cars, bring
high recycling value because nickel and cobalt are costly to produce. It is
anticipated that the cheaper chemical elements planned for future models, will
still be recyclable. Recycling of lithium-ion batteries is a little tricky. They must
be frozen to defuse the lithium before being sheared, shredded and separated
into their respective parts to be resold. The US has one lithium battery recycling
pilot plant under construction in Ohio and there are active commercial plants in
Europe.

232

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

3.8.2 Enabling Renewable Energy Storage

Turning wind and sun into energy isn’t costly, as long as equipment is installed at
the right location. The main problem is reliability. In many places during several
days of the year, rainfalls or wind stops blowing. Furthermore, nights fall inexo-
rably everywhere, stopping solar panels from generating energy. However this
shouldn’t impede countries which lack favorable climate for renewable energy from
becoming a “green country”. For instance, the EU has decided to invest massively
in renewable energy, which would see the current 100 GW of production capacity
in 2012 double by 2020.

Germany is one of these European countries, which isn’t especially favored
climatewise, but is committed to using large quantities of renewables. In
September 2010 the German government announced the following new
ambitious energy targets: Renewable electricity in 2011: 20.5 %; 35 % by
2020; 50 % by 2030; 65 % by 2040; and 80 % by 2050. Though this is a
positive step for the environment, this decision is likely to create huge
problems for energy utilities in the short term and may actually even generate
blackouts in some regions. For the moment the grid is holding even though
on some days, renewables output can almost top 60 % of total production. For
instance, in that country on October 3, 2013, renewable output peaked at
59 %, providing 36.4 % of the total output of that day. The grid was able to
cope but utilities had to stop production of other power stations.

In order to be able to cope with such ambitious objectives, Germany will
have to invest massively in two areas, pushing even higher the price of the
kWh, already the most expensive in Europe:
– New transmission lines linking all European parts to take advantage of
climate diversity (i.e.: wing blowing up North and sun shining down in the
South); and

– Investment in storage capacity, probably using a decentralized model,
where the energy is stored at the point of consumption rather than of
generation.

Electrical cars may help in reducing the cost of investment in storage capacity.
Indeed, one of the cheapest potential solutions to solve this issue would be to store
energy when it is produced and use it during off-peak hours. The most obvious way
to store energy is through the use of batteries. However, technically there is no
current battery technology, which could store enough energy to smoothen pro-
duction peaks. So why not imagine millions of batteries linked to a smart grid and
working together? Those parked and plugged-in electric vehicle could sell the
electricity from the battery during peak loads and recharge either at night (at home)
or during off-peak (at work).

3.8 Other Environmental Considerations

233

With new reliable vehicle-to-grid technology, each vehicle could turn its 20–50
kWh battery pack into a distributed storage facility, helping balance the network
loads, providing emergency source of power, or being used by households during
hours when rates are higher. The amount of energy stored by cars isn’t small and
could represent 2–5 days of average household consumption (typically around 10
kWh). However and in order for this strategy to work, a large disadvantage of
current battery technology would need to be improved. Indeed, currently each
storage cycle stresses the battery with one complete charge–discharge cycle and this
would need to be overcomed.

Going back to our calculation about turning the conventional car ﬂeet into an
all electrical one, we’ve seen that for a country like France, the 2013 private
car petrol consumption was 29.5 Mtoe or 343 TWh. Because of the higher
efﬁciency of electric cars, 12.4 Mtoe would be saved, which means that
17.1 Mtoe would still need to be produced in addition or almost 200 TWh.
The French energy matrix would need to be increased by 36 % to cope with
such growth in demand. Now let’s assume a realistic once per day discharge
to the grid, as well as once per day consumption of the energy, and thus two
daily recharges from the grid.

This means that a complete electrical car ﬂeet could consume and store a little
more than 50% of the newly increased energy matrix production. If applied to
Germany and all things being equal, this would solve partially that country’s
problem of renewables till 2030. However, Germany would need to invest even
more in production capacity be it in renewables or in conventional thermal plants.

3.8.3 Reduced Land Intake

Land in big cities is scarce and very often expensive. Furthermore in megacities,
green parks or just green areas are hard to ﬁnd, most of the city being covered by
dwellings or roads, impermeabilizing soil. As a consequence cities are more prone
to ﬂooding, unless huge water retention tanks are built in the most vulnerable areas.
Heavy metro systems are usually built in tunnels, and thus have a very low land
intake. Only stations occupy land but are often integrated under shopping malls or
tall buildings and thus land intake becomes negligible. Monorails using elevated
structure are well suited for being built between two sides of an avenue. Their land
intake is minimal: about two times 1 m2, every 30 m of guideway.

Tramways or buses running in mix trafﬁc will occupy no more space than the
cars’ own land intake. This space isn’t free but in most cities it already exists, as
people require a car access to their home. On the other hand, buses or tramways

234

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

running on segregated lines require vast amounts of land. As a matter of fact, two
different types of land intake are necessary for BRTs such as the Transmilenio. As
we will see in Chap. 5 on megacities, this very successful BRT occupies extremely
large areas of land (width of 16 m) that need to be asphalted and in some cases
overpasses need to be built to access the stations located in the middle of the lanes.
BRT operations in cities like Sao Paulo can occupy less space as they only use
one dedicated lane. On the other hand, tramways on segregated lines can occupy
areas where the soil is actually grass or pebble stones, enabling the soil to absorb
rain water.

3.8.4 City Integration

Visual impact Heavy metros have very low visual impact. Only metro stations can
be visible but are often integrated under shopping malls or tall buildings. Buses
running at grade have a limited visual impact, as they are already integrated within
our city landscape. Tramways on the other hand, with their catenary system have a
signiﬁcant impact on the look of a city. Catenary-free operations are now being
pursued by several manufacturers to eliminate altogether the negative visual impact
or limit it to areas where it isn’t as damaging.
Elevated structures built for light rail or BRTs need to be large (and heavy) by
nature and can have a huge visual impact. Monorail on the other hand, with their
sleek design and very light beam (690 mm wide) can easily be integrated within the
city. With very small turning radius required (46 m) and high grade capacity (up to
6 %), it can easily follow the existing building and infrastructure, integrating itself
well in the city landscape. Furthermore, monorails can actually become a city
landmark like the monorail is in Sidney, Las Vegas, or Dubai, attracting tourists to
the city (Fig. 3.23).
City separation Once again heavy metros operating in tunnels don’t create any
physical or psychological barriers within a city, as intercity highways and segre-
gated lines for buses or tramways do. These crossings become bottle necks for road
trafﬁc. Monorails with their light elevated structure create very limited city
separation.

City revitalization Public transport can play a crucial role in revitalizing urban
centers. Heavy metros can reduce the number of parking required for cars or buses
circulating in an important city area. Tramways can also play a crucial role in
revitalizing an area, especially when it is constructed with space for pedestrian and
bicycles. As a heavy transport mean, monorails can also play an important revi-
talization role, reducing parking and congestion. Using an elevated guideway it is,
however, more difﬁcult to integrate in the urban environment than a tramway.
Buses are usually not seen as part of the city revitalization solution but part of the
problem.

3.8 Other Environmental Considerations

235

Fig. 3.23 Monorail at
Dusseldorf airport Germany.
Source Author

Trafﬁc ﬂow disruption At grade transit
trafﬁc ﬂow.
Segregated lines can seriously limit the car ﬂow to a few over or underpasses.
Furthermore, in megacities buses running in shared lanes can seriously hinder
trafﬁc, as they need to jump from one lane to the other.

technology can disrupt

3.8.5 Noise Pollution

Noise emission can have various origins. For instance for buses, air impact on the
carbody, motor noise and exhausts as well as running tires all have impacts. These
different sources of noise will vary according to the speed of the rubber tire vehicle.
For speed lower than 50 km/h, the noise is mainly due to tires running on road
surface. For a speed between 50 km/h and 70 km/h the running noise is equivalent
to the motor and the exhausts. After 70 km/h the motor and exhaust noise are
predominant. Rubber tires running on a road surface will emit more or less the same
noise than steel wheel technology. For instance, buses and tramways have a noise
emission of around 80 dB, while metros and monorails emit around 85 dB.

236

3 Environmentally Conscious Society

However, the big difference is that heavy metro or monorails, for not running at
grade, have no (for metro) or very low noise impact (for monorails), when tramway
and buses have an immediate impact on environment, pedestrians and neighbors.

3.8.6 Vibration

Heavy metro can create vibrations. New rail ﬁxing technologies can improve this
nuisance but not eliminate it altogether. Elevated structure doesn’t create this type
of problem to neighboring buildings. Buses on the other hand, can create some
vibration to the neighboring residences.

Acknowledgments and disclaimer The use of pictures, or references made to studies or com-
panies and their brand does not in any way suggest that the authors of such studies or the
mentioned companies endorse in any way this book or its content. The author endeavors in
respecting the copyright subsisting any of the graphics, and texts that he uses, to use graphics and
texts he has himself created or to use graphics and texts not covered by copyright. All trademarks
and brand names quoted in the book including those protected by copyright of third parties are
subject unreservedly to the provisions of current copyright law and the rights of ownership of the
registered copyright holders.

Companies and Brands Stated in the Chapter

(cid:129) BP Plc
(cid:129) Mia is a trademark of the Mitsubishi Group
(cid:129) Roadster is a trademark of Tesla Motors Inc.
(cid:129) Focus is a trademark of Ford Motor Company
(cid:129) H System is a trademark of General Electric Company
(cid:129) SGT5-8000H is a trademark of Siemens AG
(cid:129) J class is a trademark of the Mitsubishi Group
(cid:129) Mercedes Benz is a Trademark of Daimler AG
(cid:129) Tesla Motors Inc.
(cid:129) Panasonic Corporation
(cid:129) Mckinsey & Company
(cid:129) Leaf is the trademark of Nissan Motor Company Ltd.
(cid:129) Volt is the trademark from General Motors Company
(cid:129) Prius is the trademark from Toyota Motor Corporation
(cid:129) Yaris is the trademark from Toyota Motor Corporation
(cid:129) Mitsubishi Electric Corporation
(cid:129) X60 is the trademark from Alstom SA
(cid:129) EDF is a trademark of Electricite de France

Chapter 4
Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

Acronyms

Bus rapid transit

Level of services
Operational expenses

BRT
CAPEX Capital expenditure
LOS
OPEX
PPHPD Passenger per hour and per direction
PRT
V2I
V2V

Personal rapid transit
Vehicle to infrastructure
Vehicle to vehicle

The United Nation Habitat introduced the term megacity in the 1970s to describe a
metropolitan area with a total population in excess of 10 million people. This term
describes municipalities or agglomerations composed of several cities. In 1950, the
world had just one megacity: New York. By 1975, there were ﬁve and today there
are around 28 megacities on different continents. By 2025, around 630 million
inhabitants or 8 % of the world’s population will live in 37 megacities. By 2050,
this ﬁgure is projected to grow to a staggering 1.2 billion!

By itself, the urban densiﬁcation process doesn’t create a problem. Actually
having more people living in more densely populated area is more environmentally
friendly than people living in suburbs, commuting everyday to work. The issue
about megacities is that due to such high concentration of people, enormous land
consumption, as well as problems of air pollution, water scarcity, poverty, and trafﬁc
jams are ampliﬁed. Furthermore, when population doubles every 10 years, pro-
posing urban policies and planning strategies to manage the sustainable development
is almost impossible. As a result, transportation problems in megacities increase
exponentially and private transport there cannot escape being on the verge of coming
to a standstill. Two major urban expansion processes are at the heart of this problem:
(cid:129) Horizontal growth due to urban sprawl; and
(cid:129) Vertical expansion caused by higher housing densiﬁcation.

To utilize a useful image, under the combination of these two forces, megacities
aren’t really exploding, but rather imploding. As a consequence building new roads

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
S. Van Themsche, The Advent of Unmanned Electric Vehicles,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-20666-0_4

237

238

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

inhabitants is almost

to cope with additional
impossible, as it would require
expropriating thousands of inhabitants from several buildings. To improve the
situation, city developers are only left with two alternatives:
(cid:129) Build underground infrastructure, which is extremely expensive; and
(cid:129) Appropriate existing roads to build new public transport, which creates other
problems, such as new trafﬁc jams, separation of cities along these corridors,
increased noise and pollution.
Furthermore, this takes time, which politicians usually don’t have. This is why
Mayors tend to revert to drastic measures, such as restricting car use in city areas
with the worst trafﬁc jams. Gasoline price hikes, which is also an effective way of
reducing trafﬁc jams cannot be applied solely at the city level, but rather at the
country or state level. We will focus our analysis on restrictive measures that are
available to Mayors.

4.1 Private Transport Restriction Measures

In the rich megacities of this word, Mayors tend to use ﬁnancial coercive measures,
such as municipal VAT taxes, tolls, congestion charges, and high parking costs. In
the poor countries, they tend to favor car use restriction.

4.1.1 Congestion Charges

Using high congestion charges to restrict movement of citizens can be perceived as
socially unfair, as poor people have less discretionary money. However, it works
well, especially during the ﬁrst years, reducing trafﬁc and pollution.

For instance in London city, the 2003 congestion charges reduced trafﬁc
signiﬁcantly (i.e.: by 30 % after one year). As a result, travel patterns changed
with a huge transfer to public transport, particularly buses. Some motorists
who would otherwise drive through the inner city during peak periods shifted
their route, travel time or destination. Others changed their transport mode to
taxis, motorcycles, bicycles or walking. Average trafﬁc speeds within the
zone during charging days increased 37 %, from 13 km/h before to 17 km/h
after congestion charges were introduced. Peak period congestion delays
declined about 30 %, and bus congestion delays declined 50 %. Bus ridership
increased 14 % and subway ridership about 1 %.

4.1 Private Transport Restriction Measures

239

Table 4.1 Net projected
costs and revenues of London
Congestion charges; 2011
study (see footnote 1)

Costs and revenues

NPV in M$

NPV in million pounds

Start up costs
Operating costs
Total cost
Charges revenue
Penalty revenues
Total revenues
Proﬁts

280
500
780
1080
170
1250
470

180
320
500
690
110
800
300

To add to this virtuous cycle, congestion charges usually bring extra proﬁts. The
following ﬁgures extracted from a 2011 UK study1 shows the beneﬁts of this
measure (Table 4.1).

Furthermore, more than ten years after its introduction, reductions in the number
of cars are still signiﬁcant. Other price restriction measures have also a positive
impact on reducing the need to build new road infrastructure. Initiatives usually
implemented in smaller cities (i.e., electronic road pricing and time-of-day-based
tolls) are also efﬁcient at reducing trafﬁc jams during peak hours.

4.1.2 Private Car Restriction

In 1989, Mexico City mayor city introduced the program “Hoy No Circula” (“today
it doesn’t circulate”). The program bans most drivers from using their cars one day
per week, based on the last digit of the vehicle’s license plate. Other South
American cities such as Bogota, Santiago, and Sao Paolo have followed suit and
copied the Mexican program. These programs were aimed at reducing trafﬁc jams
and as consequence air pollution, but have largely failed. In fact, research by Lucas
Davis (2008)2 showed that despite the program’s high costs, this program failed to
produce any improvement in Mexico City’s air quality and trafﬁc. What happened
is that many Mexico City residents, who could afford it, bought a second car with a
license plate that didn’t match the same day or used taxis. Worst they usually
bought a second-hand car which polluted more, making air quality worst. In fact,
such measures ended up being worst for poor citizens.

1London Congestion Pricing Implications for Other Cities; Author Todd Litman from the Victoria
Transport Policy Institute, (24/11/2014).
2The effect of driving restrictions on air quality in Mexico City. Author: Lucas W. Davis
(University of Michigan 2008).

240

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

Fig. 4.1 Example of vehicle capacity: monorail and bus. Source Author

4.1.3 Promoting Car Pooling and Financial Restrictions

Many studies have shown that higher gasoline prices and electronic pricing of road
usage have a much better track record on reducing trafﬁc jams and lowering pol-
lutant emission than driving restriction. One other measure that can be taken by
mayors to postpone the investment in new transport infrastructure is to promote car
pooling. As we will see, new social media and e-mobility technologies can increase
car pooling’s attractiveness and efﬁciency. As a consequence, dedicating an express
lane for cars with four passengers can basically quadruple the existing road
capacity, at almost no extra cost. However, in megacities all these measures cannot
postpone for long the need for massive increase in transport capacity (Fig. 4.1).

4.2 System Capacity

4.2.1 Holistic Approach to System Capacity

In big cities, residents are asking for more public transport and want their city
ofﬁcials to dedicate more resources to it. Unfortunately, many of these megacities
can be found in the Third World or Developing Countries, which have few existing
public transport infrastructures on which they could rely as the backbone of their
future transport network. Furthermore, transport authorities are confronted to a
shortage of investment money for such big infrastructure projects. When the money
is there, city planners still need to convince angry neighborhoods hit by the not in
my backyard syndrome, ﬁght righteous green lobbyists who tend to be against any

4.2 System Capacity

241

tree cutting project even if society and the environment as a whole can beneﬁt from
such initiative, and deal with the various transportation industries, which will
always push for their own technical solution.

As we’ve seen, one of our premises is that all transportation means are in
competition between them. Thus, it is extremely important to understand two
fundamental aspects: the capacity and real cost of each transportation means. As we
are working with cities on the verge of breaking down because of trafﬁc jams, we
will calculate the maximum capacity of the different motorized systems with and
without newer driverless technology. We will exclude from this analysis the impact
of creating bicycle lanes and pedestrian areas, which can bring many beneﬁts but
are outside of the boundary of this book’s analysis.

When we consider the maximum capacity, we need obviously to consider the
transportation means capacity per se but not only. Other factors must also be added
to avoid penalizing metro and monorail technologies that occupy almost no land and
thus don’t block the existing road capacity. In other words, a tramway or a BRT that
occupies land will obviously retire many cars, but by occupying the roads, these
systems will by the same token, block trafﬁc at junctions creating further reduction in
road capacity. Don’t get us wrong, it could be politically and socially sound to favor
public over private transport, but we cannot forget that land is scarce and expensive
in megacities. The concept of appropriation that we are defending isn’t usually
considered by city planners. Instead of building a BRT or a tramway line, houses or
even better, parks with bicycle lanes could be envisioned. Instead of replacing roads
by BRTs or tramways, monorails, and metros could be running over or under a
private express road lane with wireless prepayment cards ﬁnancing the same project.

4.2.2

Increasing Capacity of Existing Infrastructure

To avoid fundamental changes to existing roads or train networks or having to
invest in new systems all together, transport authorities have a few cards in their
sleeve: they can improve the vehicle and increase the network throughput. For
instance, larger and longer vehicles, running faster and closer to each other can
make better use of existing infrastructure. Thus, they can play with four variables:
the capacity of the vehicles, the number of vehicles running on the system, their
average speed, and the headway. Though train, bus, and car obey to these same four
variables, the way they are impacted can differ.

4.2.3 Vehicle Capacity

Vehicle capacity is a function of the number of passengers that can be carried by the
vehicle. This is also deﬁned by four elements: physical characteristics, safety
standard, comfort level, and occupancy rate.

242

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

Physical characteristics We need to consider two types of physical characteristics
of the vehicles:
(cid:129) Envelop, which basically considers the vehicle’s height, width and length; and
(cid:129) Useful area, which considers strictly the area passengers can use.

To solve capacity issues, vehicles can be bought larger, longer or even with two
storeys, as long as their envelop can ﬁt within the networks’ own physical char-
acteristics. For railways and metros, there are many network physical limitations
such as station clearance and length, tunnel envelop calculated with jerking, type of
electric grid connection, etc. The environment of cars and buses is much more
standardized. Roads always have a minimum width that doesn’t really impact
manufacturers. Buses’ maximum length is affected mainly by the number of sec-
tions, which can be restricted by tight curves. Cities envisioning running
double-deck bus ﬂeets must also check overpass height constraints.

Capacity can also be increased by improving the useful area of each vehicle.
Manufacturers can improve their vehicle’s design by for instance, putting equip-
ment on the roof or adding gangways between metro cars. Transport Authorities
might as well decide to change the train or bus comfort level, by reducing the
number of seats or inner space dedicated to seating area. They can also take a more
drastic attitude, which is to buy trains or buses that can withstand higher volume of
standees per area, affecting directly the level of passenger comfort.

4.2.4 Maximum Number of Vehicles

There are a maximum number of vehicles that can run on a track or lane at any
given time. However, till this number is reached there is always a possibility to add
extra capacity. Once this number is reached, there is no point in adding more
vehicles, as the extra vehicles would only stay idle or would need to slow down to
maintain the same safety spacing.

4.2.5 Average Speed

Line or lane speed is a function of the vehicle’s inherent characteristics, the safety
and comfort of passengers, as well as the limiting factors of the network operation.
For instance, vehicle’s acceleration, maximum speed, and deceleration are key
factors inﬂuencing the overall system speed. In most metro applications, because
distances between two stations are short, trains are almost always accelerating and
decelerating. Metro car motorization is adapted for those speciﬁc conditions.
However, metro operators must also take into consideration, the passengers’ safety
and comfort when accelerating and decelerating. After all they don’t want when

4.2 System Capacity

243

braking, their clients to ﬂy through the windshield. Another limiting factor to speed
is the network operation. The duration for opening doors and getting people out and
in, called dwell time, is an important speed limitation. Other factors, such as bus or
train injection on the line or crossings will also impact time. Average speed clearly
changes according to railway application type. For instance, metro average speed
will be in the range of 30 km/h, while intercity trains may reach 250–380 km/h
depending on technology.

Though car acceleration or speed possibilities are usually more a function of the
driver’s wealth and his willingness to show it off, in most countries even the
cheapest automobiles aren’t limited by their inherent motorization characteristics
(Germany’s autobahn is obviously an exception).
Infrastructure speciﬁcities,
weather conditions, or legal speed limitation are the main speed restricting factors.
Slope steepness, curves, state of the asphalt, rainy, or icy conditions are some of
these factors that will affect car speed. Trafﬁc light and potentially any people, cars,
or objects blocking the road access will also inﬂuence speed.

Bus speed will be inﬂuenced by a mixture of all these, which explains why in

general buses running in urban areas have problem going over 20 km/h.

4.2.6 Headway

The distance between two vehicles moving in the same direction is important for
network capacity because it limits the number of vehicles you can add to this
system without reducing the overall speed.

4.3 Road Capacity with Drived Cars

There is a lot of literature on road capacity concept, as this is both something
everyone is familiar with and at the same time complicated to calculate. Many
models exist based on various mathematical formulas. We will focus on two
essential data to explain how to calculate simply a road’s capacity at a cross section:
headway and trafﬁc volumes. Additional information such as trafﬁc ﬂow conditions,
density, intensity, and mean speed will also come in handy. For ease of compre-
hension we will avoid using the word capacity to express the number of cars per
hour, as many specialists do (i.e., pipeline capacity, road capacity), and instead use
the word intensity or ﬂow rate. Capacity will be dedicated to passengers and
expressed in PPHPD.

244

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

4.3.1 One-Lane Highway Intensity

Headway is deﬁned by the time between successive cars measured by rear-to-rear
bumpers. As we’ve seen in the section on PRTs, space between two vehicles
running on the guideway, inﬂuences directly the system’s capacity. The spacing
inﬂuenced by the stopping distance, is the sum of the distance a car will run due to
the driver’s perception and reaction time and the distance necessary for stopping the
car (for more precise information, see formula in that section) (Fig. 4.2).

In the PRT section, we’ve calculated the capacity taking into consideration the
“safety brick wall” principle. However, in the day-to-day life, the relationship
between spacing and speed on regular highways is set by human driving habits.
Studies have shown that drivers running on modern and good road infrastructure
will tend to maintain a minimum following distance, which can be transformed into
a roughly constant average time gap between 1.5 and 2 s. This exact time gap will
vary depending on the driver’s behavior and experience.

Highway trafﬁc studies have measured ﬂow rates as high as 2000 vehicles per
lane per hour. Doing the math, this comes to 1.8 s between cars (including car
length). However, observing 1.8 s between cars is rare. Indeed drivers tend to
calculate their safety distance from bumper to bumper, not considering their car
length. This obviously doesn’t change anything at high speed, but when cars are
almost at a stop, it can double space and time. So if we use a 2 s gap, the overall
ﬂow rate will be 1800 vehicles per hour. This is usually considered by transport
authority as the bare minimum and educational campaigns have been pushing for
3-s headway in many countries. The lines that anyone can see on autoroutes are
there to remind drivers of this safe headway requirement. Though we won’t mea-
sure maximum headway taking into consideration weather conditions, it should be
noted that bad weather will reduce ﬂow rates by around 15 %, as driver need longer
braking distance and increased perception time under heavy rain.

There are various other models to deﬁne road intensity but we will focus on ﬂow
rates measured over a period, which gives a realistic value. Using such model and

Fig. 4.2 Factors integrated in the stopping distance calculation. Source Author

4.3 Road Capacity with Drived Cars

245

under normal trafﬁc conditions, the intensity is function of speed and density of
vehicles on the road.

I ¼ Nv (cid:2) X (cid:2) V

where
(cid:129) Intensity or service volume: the number of vehicles passing a road section

(Ncs) in a unit of time (T); I = Ncs/T (i.e., 1 vehicle/s)

(cid:129) Density: the number of vehicles (Nv) present on a unit of road length (X i.e.,

km) at a given moment; D = Nv/X (i.e., 100 vehicles/km)

(cid:129) And mean speed: V (i.e., km/h)

4.3.2 Level of Service (LOS)

The following table gives trafﬁc ﬂow ﬁgures and LOS-based of American highways
(Table 4.2).

A LOS means that less than 20 cars/km can run at more than 100 km/h, which
allows for 700 vehicles to be counted on the highway during 1 h. Roads will
experience over the day several LOS levels. For example, a highway might be at
LOS D for the morning and evening peak hours, but have trafﬁc consistent with
LOS C outside peak hours, and come to a halt once every Friday evening when
people leave for the countryside.

The LOS in North America, as per Highway Capacity Manual are:
(a) Free ﬂow: Motorists have complete mobility between lanes. The average

spacing between vehicles is about 170 m;

(b) Reasonably free ﬂow: LOS A speed is maintained and maneuverability
within the trafﬁc stream is slightly restricted. The lowest average vehicle
spacing is about 100 m.

Table 4.2 LOS based on American highway with a 70 km/h design and 3.5 m lane width

LOS

Flow conditions

v/c limit

Service volume
Veh/h/lane

Speed
km/h

Density
Veh/km

Free
Stable
Stable
High density
Near capacity
Breakdown

A
B
C
D
E
F
Source Adaptation by author of information from Highway Capacity Manual (2000) [Published by
Transport Research Board; National Research Council (HCM 2000)]

0.35
0.54
0.77
0.93
1
Unstable

<20
<33
<50
=67
=112
>112

>100
>95
>90
>75
>50
<50

700
1100
1550
1850
2000

246

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

(c) Stable ﬂow, at or near free ﬂow: Ability to maneuver through lanes is
noticeably restricted and lane changes require more driver awareness.
Minimum vehicle spacing is about 67 m.

(d) High density: Speeds slightly decrease as trafﬁc volume increases.
Freedom to maneuver within the trafﬁc stream is much more limited and
driver comfort levels decrease. Vehicles are spaced at 50 m. Minor inci-
dents are expected to create delays.

(e) Near capacity: Flow becomes irregular and speed varies rapidly because
there are virtually no usable gaps to maneuver in the trafﬁc stream and
speeds rarely reach the posted limit. Vehicle spacing is around 30 m, but
speed is still at around 80 km/h. Any incident will create serious delays.
(f) Breakdown: Every vehicle moves in lockstep with the vehicle in front of
it, with frequent slowing required. Travel time cannot be predicted, with
generally more demand than capacity.

At low lane intensity, drivers can go as fast as the upper legal speed limit allows
them to. As intensity increases, so does the ﬂow rate. However, speed starts
decreasing as drivers try to maintain their following distance. At a certain point,
when intensity becomes high enough, the speed falls to a point where drivers are
unable to maintain their minimum following distance, and then the ﬂow rate
decreases drastically.

The following graph shows a simpliﬁed correlation between ﬂow rate and

It shows that the maximum highway trafﬁc throughput is achieved around 20–

intensity (Fig. 4.3):

25 cars/km.

Fig. 4.3 Relation between
ﬂow rate and intensity in
number of cars. Source
Author

)
r
u
o
h
 
r
e
p
 
e
n
a
l
 
r
e
p
 
s
e
l
c
i
h
e
v
(
 
e
t
a
r
 
w
o
F

l

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

Intensity for 1 highway lane

50

100

150

200

Intensity (vehicles per km)

4.3 Road Capacity with Drived Cars

247

Table 4.3 Impact of lane width on US highway intensity; 2004 study (see footnote 3)

Lane width

Fw heavy vehicle
Fw cars

2.6 m

0.88
0.93

3.0 m

0.94
1

3.5 m

0.99
1.02

4 m

1.03
1.03

Table 4.4 Impact of heavy vehicle on US highway intensity; 2004 study (see footnote 3)

Percentage of heavy
vehicle (%)
FW heavy vehicle

0

1

2

4

6

8

10

15

20

25

0.99

0.98

0.97

0.96

0.95

0.93

0.91

0.8

Table 4.5 Bus stop
adjustment factor table: 2004
study (see footnote 3)

Number of lanes

Number of stopping buses per hour
0

10

30

20

1.00
1.00
1.00

0.96
0.98
0.99

0.92
0.96
0.97

0.88
0.94
0.96

40

0.83
0.92
0.94

1
2
3

4.3.3 Highway Intensity

The total highway capacity is inﬂuenced by many factors:
(cid:129) I ¼ IoNL fðw þ HV þ pÞ; where I is the intensity function
(cid:129) Io = optimal lane intensity (as seen above);
(cid:129) NL = number of lanes
(cid:129) F (w + Hv + p) = function of lane width and lateral clearance factor, heavy

vehicle factor, and driver population factor;

The relation between number of lanes and intensity isn’t linear. Other factors such
as lane width and lateral clearance will reduce the overall intensity. Furthermore,
heavier vehicles such as buses and trucks have a much higher safety braking
distance to respect, reducing the highway intensity. Finally, the human factor will
also impact this overall intensity, by as much as 15 % (i.e., if drivers don’t know the
road or are older).

The following tables show the impact of these factors for US highways taken

from a 2004 road capacity study by John Van Rijn3 (Tables 4.3 and 4.4):

In urban environments, there are also other factors than the one described here
above that inﬂuence the saturation ﬂow. The additional adjustment factors are: road
crossing signalization, bus blockage, urban area type, radius of the turning move-
ment, percentage of turning trafﬁc, parking facilities, giving way to pedestrians and
bicycles. Each element has its own adjustment factors (Table 4.5).

3Road capacities; Author John Van Rijn; In development; (2004).

248

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

For instance the following table gives an adjustment factor linked to bus stops
according to 1, 2 and 3 lanes. According to studies, a single lane road with a
typical 40 stop bus line would reduce the overall intensity by 17 %.

So if we subtract from the maximum theoretical road intensity of 1.800 vehicles
per lane, the negative impact of all adjustment factors, we can see that the normal
capacity is seriously reduced during peak hours, especially in urban environments.
Among all factors identiﬁed above, light crossing is likely to have the highest
impact on intensity (Fig. 4.4).

4.3.4 Road Crossing and Intersection Lights Impact

on Intensity

Signaling lights are installed to manage road crossing. Under normal trafﬁc con-
ditions (other formula exists for optimal and extremely low trafﬁc density), the
average delay formula is:
(cid:129) Dav = I * (1 − Z)2/(2 * (1 − Y)); where:
(cid:129) I = Intensity

Inter space distance transformed into 2 second 
headway

Fig. 4.4 Trafﬁc ﬂow on highway will be inﬂuenced by lane width and lateral clearance, the mix of
heavy and light vehicles, as well as the human factor. Source Author

4.3 Road Capacity with Drived Cars

249

(cid:129) Z = green light time (in seconds)/complete cycle (i.e., 30/60 s, if green = 30 s;

yellow = 10 s and red = 20 s)

(cid:129) Y = saturation level which can be expressed as Intensity (i.e., number of vehicles

per time period)/capacity of leg
Though waiting time per type of color lights is adapted in function of the trafﬁc
ﬂow and road characteristics, we could make a simple assumption that on average a
main artery will have half its time green and half yellow and red. On a busy road,
this would cut capacity by more than half, as in addition to waiting time per se,
extra time for car decelerating and accelerating, as well as for driver perception and
reaction would be required. With stationary lights, this time is ﬁxed and thus road
capacity is diminished independently from the road density.

4.3.5

Intelligent Lighting Systems

To adapt road crossing time to road density, city planners have come up with
basically two types of signaling lights:
(cid:129) Stationary lights: lights for which different status have ﬁxed time; and
(cid:129) Dynamic lights: lights for which the status is calculated by computers based on

models taking into consideration queuing status.

Dynamic lights combine basically three e-mobility technologies:

(cid:129) Magnetic sensors in the road that measure the trafﬁc ﬂow;
(cid:129) Hundreds of IP cameras; and
(cid:129) Centralized computer system that makes constant adjustments to keep cars

moving as smoothly as possible.

For instance, the city of Los Angeles has built over 30 years at a cost of
around $400 million and automated trafﬁc surveillance and control system.
According to the city’s Transportation Department, the average speed of
trafﬁc across the city is 16 % faster under the system, with delays at major
intersections down 12 %. With synchronization, a 5 miles (8.3 km) drive has
fallen from 20 to 17.2 min and average speed has increased from 15 mph
(25 km/h) to 17.3 mph (29 km/h).

As seen in Chap. 3, intelligent trafﬁc management could improve further trafﬁc
ﬂow. Tests are being conducted to inform in real time the trafﬁc light system and
optimize this ﬂow. University research centers are even looking into ways of getting
rid of trafﬁc lights altogether.

250

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

4.3.6 Maximum and Real Road Capacity

taking into consideration all

In order to calculate road capacity, we need to multiply the road vehicle intensity by
identiﬁed limiting factors.
the occupancy rate,
However, if we simplify and say that 100 % of the highway is used by cars
occupied by ﬁve passengers the total maximum capacity for a single lane is around
9000 PPHPD, using 2 s headways. We all know this is far from reality. The average
number of passenger is 1.5 in richer countries from Western Europe and North
America. During peak hours the occupancy rate is reduced to 1.1. Thus and based
on these values, the maximum road capacity during peak hours is around 1900
PPHPD and the average capacity around 2700 PPHPD.

4.4 Road Capacity with Unmanned Cars

We’ve seen that the maximum car intensity for any given normal lane is limited to
1800 driven cars/h. In this section, we will show that unmanned systems alone can
increase such ﬂow rate, especially if traveling in a convoy of cars under the
leadership of a ﬁrst car (or even a truck or bus, which would reduce air lags and
improve energy efﬁciency). Platooning, as it is called, can substantially increase
capacity on Automated Highway System. To show how, we need to consider two
weaker safety criteria than the “brick wall” principle.
(cid:129) If a vehicle applies maximum braking until it comes to a stop, the following
vehicle should stop without colliding with it, if the interspacing between the two
cars is sufﬁcient. Such a hard braking disturbance may arise on an automated
highway system in response to an obstacle or a vehicle malfunction.

(cid:129) If a vehicle applies maximum braking and the following vehicle collides with it,
the relative velocity at initial impact should be small. People maintain the same
safety distance of around 2 s and thus tend to use the same speed. The low
relative velocity safety criterion can be met if the vehicles are either far apart or
close enough to one another. In the former case, vehicles have time to stop
before they collide while in the latter they collide very quickly and hence the
relative velocity at impact is small.
The white paper4 “Capacity Analysis of Trafﬁc Flow over a Single-Lane
Automated Highway System,” analyzes the impact of self-driving vehicles on
highway capacity. It indicates that if we systematically apply to the leading car, a
maximum braking capacity factor lower than the following car, there should be no

4White paper: Capacity Analysis of Trafﬁc Flow over a Single-Lane Automated Highway System;
Authors: James B. Michael, Datta N. Godbole, John Lygeros, and Raja Sengupta from the
California PATH, Institute of Transportation Studies.

4.4 Road Capacity with Unmanned Cars

251

 
)
r
h

 
/
 
s
r
a
c
 
f
o

 

b
n
(
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

I

5000

4500

4000

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

Platoon

Non Uniform Spacing

High cooperation

Low cooperation (dotted line)

No cooperation

5

10

15

30

35

40

25

20
Speed m /s

Fig. 4.5 Road intensity as a function of speed for typical vehicle mix (93 % passenger vehicles,
6 % trucks, and 1 % buses) and considering aggressive spacing; data source: white paper “Capacity
Analysis of Trafﬁc Flow over a Single-Lane Automated Highway System” (see footnote 4)

intra-collision. The study calculates road intensity taking into consideration pla-
tooning, cooperation between autonomous cars with and without uniform spacing.

The graph hereafter sums up the results for several scenarios (Fig. 4.5).

4.4.1 Highway Intensity with Uniform Spacing

The study analyzes the impact of cooperation level between vehicles, with three
scenarios, for uniform spacing:
(cid:129) Autonomous: Vehicles do not communicate with each other.
(cid:129) Low cooperation: Vehicles communicate only during maneuvers and emer-

gencies (e.g., hard braking).

(cid:129) High cooperation: Vehicles continuously exchange state information such as
speed and acceleration, in addition to maneuver coordination messages and
emergency warnings.
The graph here above shows that the beneﬁts of low cooperation between
vehicles are minimal. On the other hand, when uniform spacing is maintained for
vehicles with a high level of cooperation, car ﬂow can be increased by around 10 %.
The study shows also that road intensity for highly cooperative vehicles is extre-
mely sensitive to the vehicle class mix. A high proportion of trucks will impact
negatively the results.

252

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

4.4.2 Highway Intensity with Nonuniform Spacing Design

Instead of maintaining constant safety spacing, autonomous cars may maintain
speciﬁc adapted interspacing. Through technologies such as V2V, vehicles can
know the braking capacity and distance bumper to bumper of the preceding cars
and compare it to its own braking capacity required at any given speed. It can thus,
adapt the inter-vehicle spacing values to all paired vehicles on the highway, fol-
lowing the vehicle ahead at a safe separation distance for its actual braking capa-
bility, rather than the minimum of the distribution. The Authors of the study (see
footnote 4) calculated the road intensity with nonuniform spacing design. The
results are also shown in the above Fig. 4.3 (Nonuniform spacing). Using V2V
technology on automated highway would increase intensity by around 30 %. (i.e.,
29 % at 110 km/h). This is by the way consistent, with headway reduction due to
elimination of perception and reaction time.

4.4.3 Platooning Policy

On a highway with platooning capabilities, vehicles could travel in closely spaced
groups of up to 20 vehicles. The cars within the platoon through V2V would be
able to know the braking action of the other cars and maintain an intra-platoon
separation of a few meters. Platoons would need to be isolated from each other by
larger distances, in order to avoid inter-platoon collisions.

The same study (see footnote 4) has shown that platooning could double road
intensity. The principle is very simple: all cars are running at the same speed, thus
avoiding any additional safety distance that drivers instinctively maintain for the 2 s
headway. In other words all 20 cars within the platoon can maintain the same safety
distance (i.e., 10 m). The inter-vehicle spacing for every paired vehicle is picked up
using the lowest and highest values of the distribution to obtain safety in the hard
braking sense. It should be noted that maximum intensity is achieved at different
speeds (Platooning: 70–100 km/h vs. 25–35 km/h for cooperative vehicles) (Fig. 4.6).

The following considerations should be contemplated when calculating pla-
tooning capacity:
– Trucks within the platoon (not as the leader) reduce signiﬁcantly intensity,
as it is highly sensitive to the wide variation in braking capability.
– Intra-platoon collisions may result from hard non coordinated braking in

case of mismatch between braking capabilities of the followers.

– Collisions can arise in case of unfavorable pavement conditions (e.g. oil

spills or icy patches).

4.4 Road Capacity with Unmanned Cars

253

Fig. 4.6 Platooning, using a
truck as head of convoy.
Source Author

V2I

– As the platoon size increases, the severity and number of collisions per
platoon might increase, if all vehicles in a platoon slam their brakes in
response to hard braking by the platoon leader.

Platooning is already being tested successfully. For instance, the EU funded
project called Sartre whose aims are to develop strategies and technologies to allow
vehicle platooning, conducted in January 2012, its second demonstration in Spain.
A lead truck was followed by three autonomous cars at speeds of up to 90 km/h.

254

4.5 Car Pooling

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

Carpooling has been around for some time and is probably the simplest of all
transportation alternatives to bring additional capacity without creating almost any
additional costs. It is just a matter of bringing people together in the same car to
share a similar destination and expenses involved in that commute. In order to do
so, though four elements are necessary:

(cid:129) Parking place where commuters may park for free or not much;
(cid:129) Speciﬁc lanes for cars with more than one passenger;
(cid:129) An easy transfer by foot or by minivan to the car pooling place; and
(cid:129) A mean to organize the car pooling, such as setting road, paying for such
pooling, ensuring security checks on passengers, security records of drivers, etc.

As we will see in the section about business models, carpooling programs are
designed to promote ridesharing by identifying riders with similar origins and
destinations. Using a database of interested riders, employers, or regional agencies
can promote this for an entire region.

The beauty of car pooling is that any increase in car occupancy rate will have a
linear effect on capacity. Going from an average 1.1 passenger per car to let’s say 3
will almost triplicate the road capacity (Fig. 4.7).

4.6 Bus Capacity

London 2-storey buses, greyhound buses, or even school buses are part of the
collective unconsciousness. This image of people boarding or waiting for buses on
the corner of the street is shared by many people in the rich world. However, in
many developing countries, bus rapid transit (BRT) lines have changed this image
of low capacity transport mean, used as a feeder for transporting people from the
suburbs to the main metro stations. First introduced in 1974 in the Brazilian city of

4.6 Bus Capacity

Fig. 4 7 Billboard on Italian
highway, promoting car
pooling usage. Source Author

255

Curitica, BRTs Modern BRT ﬂeets operate on dedicated one- or two-lane lines with
special stations allowing up to ﬁve buses to load and unload passengers at the same
time. For the last 40 years, the concepts have been improved and have transformed
BRTs into a direct competitor of metros in medium capacity systems. Thus,
understanding how BRTs work and what is their real capacity is fundamental in
comparing express roads, metro lines, and buses lanes.

Bus routes, lanes, and terminals capacity is limited by the ability of stops or
loading areas to pick up and discharge passengers, by the number of vehicles
operated, and the distribution of boarding and alighting along the route. Bus
capacity is calculated for three key locations:
(cid:129) Loading Area Capacity: Bus loading areas (berths) are curbside spaces where

a single bus can stop to unload and load passengers;

(cid:129) Bus Stop Capacity: Bus stops are formed from one or more loading areas,
depending on how many buses can use the stop simultaneously. Bus stop
capacity depends on the loading areas’ individual capacities; and

(cid:129) Bus Facility Capacity: Roadways used by buses may contain multiple bus
stops along their length. Bus network capacity will be constrained by capacity of
the critical stop along the facility, which is typically the stop with the highest
passenger volumes and the longest dwell time.

4.6.1 Loading Areas

Bus capacity of a loading area is dependent on the following factors:
(cid:129) Dwell time: average amount of time a bus is stopped at the curb to serve

passenger movements, including time required to open and close doors;

256

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

Table 4.6 Passenger service
times with multiple-channel
passenger movements

Available
doors

Default passenger service time (s/p)
Rear
Boarding
alighting

Front
alighting

Table 4.7 Failure rate

Failure rate (%)

Z

2.5
1.5
1.1
0.9
0.6

1
2
3
4
6
Source Transit capacity and quality of service manual—2nd
Edition

2.1
1.2
0.9
0.7
0.5

3.3
1.8
1.5
1.1
0.7

1.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
50.0
Source Transit capacity and quality of service manual—2nd
Edition

2.33
1.96
1.65
1.44
1.28
1.04
0.84
0.68
0.53
0.00

(cid:129) Clearance time: minimum time required for one bus to accelerate out of and
clear the loading area and the next bus to pull into the loading area, including
any time spent waiting for a gap in trafﬁc;

(cid:129) Dwell time variability: inconsistency of dwell times among buses using the

loading area; and

(cid:129) Failure rate: probability that one bus will arrive at a loading area, only to ﬁnd

another bus already occupying it (Tables 4.6 and 4.7).

Dwell time: Dwell time is the time required to service all the passengers
through the busiest doors. This includes people boarding and getting out, as
well as the time required for doors to open and close (from 2 to 5 s). The
previous table from the transit Capacity and Quality of Service Manual5 gives
default values according to the bus’ number of doors.

5Transit Capacity and Quality of Service Manual 2nd edition.

4.6 Bus Capacity

257

It basically considers that the persons are using pre-payment cards and that
no tickets are paid onboard the bus. It also doesn’t consider any delay due to
transporting handicapped people or passengers with bicycles. In this case,
typically wheelchair lift cycle times would take 30–60 s on low ﬂoor buses.
The process to bring onboard bicycles could take approximately 20–30 s.
Clearance Time: Part of the clearing time is ﬁxed, consisting of the time for
a bus to start up and travel its own length, clearing the stop. When buses stop
in trafﬁc lane (online), this is the only component of clearance time. However,
when bus stop ofﬂine, time required for a suitable gap in trafﬁc to allow the
bus to re-enter the street needs to be added. This re-entry delay depends on
trafﬁc volume in the lane and increases as trafﬁc volumes do as well.
Estimating Clearance Time: Various studies have examined the compo-
nents of clearance time, with total clearance times ranging from 9 to 20 s. The
time required for a bus to start up and travel its own length to clear a stop is
about 10 s. At ofﬂine stops, re-entry delay can be measured in the ﬁeld or
estimated using a 1 s delay for every 100 cars/ hour.
Dwell Time Variability: Based on ﬁeld observations of bus dwell times in
several U.S. cities, the recommended variability is around 0.6 and may vary
according to the same factors that affect dwell time.

Failure rate: Bus capacity analysis incorporates the concept of a failure rate that
sets how often a bus should arrive at a stop only to ﬁnd all loading areas occupied.
In downtown areas, design failure rates of 7.5–15 % are recommended for esti-
mating capacity. This represents a trade-off between maintaining bus travel speeds
and achieving the higher capacities required in downtown areas. The upper limit,
15 %, represents bus stop failure (queues forming behind the bus stop) for about
10 min out of the hour. It also represents the point where bus travel speeds begin to
drop rapidly.

4.6.2 Bus Stops

Capacity of a bus stop is based on the following:
(cid:129) Number of loading areas: two loading areas will be able to accommodate more

buses than a single loading area, but not necessarily twice as many;

(cid:129) Loading area design: how the loading areas are designed determines how much

extra capacity each additional loading area will provide; and

(cid:129) Trafﬁc control: trafﬁc signals may constrain the number of buses leaving or

entering a stop during a given period of time.

258

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

4.6.3 Bus Facilities

On-street bus facility, capacity is based on the following:
(cid:129) Critical bus stop capacity: bus stop with the lowest capacity along the facility
will constrain how many buses can pass through the entire line. This bus stop is
usually the stop with the longest dwell time. Heavy right-turning trafﬁc volumes
at near-side bus stops or a trafﬁc signal that provides only a short period of green
time for the bus facility can also represent the main constraints.

(cid:129) Operational procedures: bus route design that spreads bus stopping activity
over a group of stops, rather than having all buses stop at the same set of stops,
can greatly increase the capacity of an on-street facility.

4.6.4 Trafﬁc Signal Timing

Trafﬁc signal inﬂuences BRT capacity. Trafﬁc signal located in the neighborhood of
a bus stop and its loading areas will serve to measure the number of buses that can
enter or exit the stop.

Bl ¼ 3600 (cid:2) g=Cð

ð

Þ= Tc þ Td

(cid:2) g=Cð

Þ þ Z (cid:2) cv (cid:2) Td

Þ;

where
(cid:129) Bl = loading area bus capacity (bus/h);
(cid:129) 3600 = number of seconds in 1 h;
(cid:129) g/C = green time ratio (the ratio of effective green time to total trafﬁc signal

cycle length, equals 1.0 for nonsignalized streets and bus facilities);

(cid:129) Tc = clearance time;
(cid:129) Td = average (mean) dwell time;
(cid:129) Z = desired failure rate; and
(cid:129) cv = dwell time variability coefﬁcient.

4.6.5 Bus Capacity for One Loading Area

Estimating bus capacity requires incorporating the various limiting factors. To
simplify, we will use the following table, which gives the maximum bus capacity
per hour (Table 4.8).

For instance, based on it, we can see that with a dwell time of 15 s and a

clearance time of 10, 116 buses could use the loading area per hour.

4.6 Bus Capacity

Table 4.8 Bus capacity per
hour, assuming a 25 % failure
rate and 60 % coefﬁcient of
dwell time and no signaling
(= 1)

259

Dwell time (s)

10 s

15 s

116
15
69
30
49
45
38
60
31
75
26
90
23
105
120
20
Source Transit capacity and quality of service manual—2nd
Edition

100
63
46
36
30
25
22
20

Table 4.9 Efﬁciency of multiple linear loading areas at bus stops

Loading
area

Online loading areas
Random arrivals

Efﬁciency
(%)

Cumulative
# of
effective
loading
areas

Platoon arrivals

Efﬁciency
(%)

Cumulative
# of
effective
loading
areas

Ofﬂine areas
All
arrivals
Efﬁciency
(%)

Cumulative
# of
effective
loading
areas

1
2
3
4
5
Source Transit capacity and quality of service manual—2nd Edition

1.00
1.85
2.65
2.90
3.00

1.00
1.75
2.45
2.65
2.75

100
85
80
25
10

100
75
70
20
10

100
85
80
65
50

1.00
1.85
2.65
3.25
3.75

4.6.6 Bus Capacity for Several Loading Areas

When estimating a bus network capacity with several loading areas, we need to take
into consideration the inefﬁciency resulting from bus loading and unloading.
Table 4.9 deﬁnes the impact of load area numbers in online and ofﬂine areas, with
random and platoon arrivals, based on American studies.

It shows that with the increasing number of loading area, the global efﬁciency

falls drastically. Ofﬂine areas have a better efﬁciency level.

For those interested in formulas, the bus stop capacity becomes:

Bl = 3600 * Nd * (g/C)/(Tc + Td * (g/C) + Z * cv * Td), with Nd the

Number of effective loading taken from the previous table.

260

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

Table 4.10 Estimated maximum capacity of online Linear bus stops (bus/h) assuming 10-s
clearance time, 25 % failure rate, 60 % dwell time variability coefﬁcient and random bus arrivals,
for line with signaling (0.50) and without (1.00)

Dwell time

1 loading
area

2 loading
areas

3 loading
areas

4 loading
areas

5 loading
areas

0.50
0.50
Signaling
128
84
30 s
74
48
60 s
52
34
90 s
120 s
40
26
Source Transit capacity and quality of service manual—2nd Edition

1.00
169
93
64
49

1.00
120
66
46
35

1.00
69
38
26
20

0.50
118
68
48
37

0.50
48
27
19
15

1.00
182
101
69
53

0.50
133
76
54
41

1.00
189
104
72
55

The following table gives an estimation of the maximum capacity for online

linear bus stops (Table 4.10).

For instance, with 5 loading areas, a dwell time of 30 s and without any sig-
naling, the maximum capacity in terms of number of buses, which can load and
unload passengers, would be 189.

4.6.7 Real Bus Capacity at Average Speed

The TransmilenioTM BRT running in the Colombian Capital Bogota offers the
largest BRT capacity in the world. Many documents have mentioned its capacity,
with a maximum throughput varying from 35,000 PPHPD to as much as 41,000
PPHPD. This BRT system includes 38 km of dual lane, with 59 stations spaced at
500–750 m. These stations have different loading areas, with station length varying
from 40 to 193 m (Fig. 4.8).

BRTs can use multiple stopping bays, which increases capacity, especially when
two segregated lines (i.e., Transmilenio) are built. The following capacity formula
shows parameters used to calculate the multistopping bay BRTs:
(Formula
extracted from the BRT—Planning guide 2007, source: Steer, Davies, Leave).

Co ¼ Nsp (cid:2) X (cid:2) 3600=ðTd (cid:2) 1(cid:3)Dir

ð

ð
Þ=Cb þ Ren (cid:2) T1

Þ;

where:
(cid:129) Co = Corridor capacity in PPHPD
(cid:129) Nsp = number of stopping bays
(cid:129) X = Saturation level (affects bus queue length)
(cid:129) 3600 = Number of seconds in one hour
(cid:129) Td = Dwell time
(cid:129) Dir = % of bus that are perform express service
(cid:129) Cb = Capacity of the bus
(cid:129) Ren = Renovation rate
(cid:129) T = Average boarding and alighting time per passenger

4.6 Bus Capacity

Fig. 4.8 Transmilenio BRT.
Source (Picture of the
Transmilenio BRT Source;
http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/
jlascar/4585122508/)

261

If we apply the formula to the Transmilenio line, we would have:
– 3 stopping bays (Nsp)
– A low level of saturation level: 40 %
– 50 % bus stop limit
– Dwell time: 13 s
– Vehicle capacity: 150 passengers
– Renovation rate: 25 %
– Average boarding and alighting time per passenger: 0.3 s

This translates in a capacity estimated at a little bit more than 37,000
PPHPD, which the operator conﬁrms can be met. If the Transmilenio oper-
ation were not to operate express services (i.e.: stopping at each bay), total
capacity would be reduced to only 26,721 PPHPD. Mixture of stopping and
express lanes is only possible because of the very wide road width.

The following table describes capacity of various BRTs (Table 4.11).

4.7 Unmanned Bus Operation

Can new wireless technology originating from the V2V concepts be applied to
buses? Of course, what is true for cars will be applicable to any road vehicle!
Obviously speciﬁc bus braking characteristics would need to be integrated, but
V2V could be applied easily to buses. The question is can it improve conventional
bus line and BRT capacity? The theoretical answer is yes. V2V combined with V2I
can eliminate perception and reaction time to almost nothing. Managing through
V2I road crossing priority for buses could eliminate some of the wasted waiting
time for conventional lines. Closer headways would also increase road capacity and
reduce journey time.

262

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

Table 4.11 Capacity in PPHPD for various BRT systems table adapted from Wikipedia by author

Location

System

Bogotá, Colombia

Transmilenio

Passengers per
day

2,154,961

Length
(km)

106

PPHPD

35,000–
41,000
26,900

13,900–
24,100
15,800–
20,300

7300–
19,500
10

15,500

Guangzhou, China

Curitiba, Brazil

Belo
Horizonte, São
Paulo
Istanbul, Iran

Lahore, Nigeria
Tehran, Iran

Jakarta, Indonesia
New Jersey, USA

Guangzhou bus rapid
transit
Rede Integrada de
Transporte

Metrobus (Istanbul)

Metrobus (Lahore)
Tehran bus rapid
transit
TransJakarta
Lincoln Tunnel XBL

Brisbane, Australia

South-East Busway

15,000

1,000,000

2,225,000

800,000

180,000
1,800,000

350,000
62,000 (4 h peak
only)

22

81

24

52

28
150

208
–

23

However, these potential headway gains for conventional

lines could have
problems translating into increased capacity for BRTs, as one the main limiting
capacity factor is the time taken to load and unload passengers. For instance, could
the Transmilenio 2 min departure per bus, which translates into one of the three
buses using around 40 s for dwell and clearance times, be improved? It seems
difﬁcult but not impossible. As we’ve seen, the efﬁciency of the third berth in ofﬂine
loading area is already 80 %. Perception and reaction time could be knocked out,
but wouldn’t have much impact. On the other hand, efﬁciency for the fourth and
ﬁfth ofﬂine loading berth is, respectively, 65 and 50 % and could be slightly
improved by such technology. Probably, the biggest gains though would originate
from improving the efﬁciency of the fourth and ﬁfth berth in platooning (i.e., 25 and
10 %) and random arrivals (i.e., 20 and 10 %). Though no existing study can verify
the extra capacity, by using a simple rule of thumb, we could estimate potential
BRT capacity gains from V2V and V2I to around 20 %. Indeed platooning could be
systematically used instead of random arrival, increasing the overall clearance
process. Furthermore, unmanned operations would reduce signiﬁcantly the number
of accidents and errors improving thus the failure rate ﬁgures.

However, the biggest winners of the e-mobility revolution would be certainly the
more conventional lines. On top of some of the advantages we just described,
synchronization of lights at crossing could reduce journey time signiﬁcantly. We
could for instance imagine, waiting time at lights being adjusted, based on higher
priority given to buses.

4.8 Mass Transit Capacity

263

4.8 Mass Transit Capacity

Trains come in all sizes and shapes. Their dimension and resulting capacity depend
largely on the application and expected journey distance. For metro and commuter
trains with short journeys, capacity will be at its maximum, as most passengers will
be expected to stand. For regional or intercity journeys, capacity will be reduced by
the need for more comfortable seating and services (i.e., baggage rack, restaurants,
toilets, etc.). Another key differentiating feature is the required dwell time. Metros
must load and unload people in less than 20 s, while high-speed intercity train may
take up to 15 min for that task. Besides the operational requirements, the number of
doors per vehicle, their location, size, and design will also impact the dwell time.
Our railway capacity analysis will be restricted to mass transit systems, which

can be found in megacities.

4.8.1

Increasing Capacity of Existing Infrastructure

To avoid investing in new networks, Transport Authorities can improve the vehicle
and increase the line’s throughput. For instance, larger and longer vehicles, running
faster and closer to each other can make better use of existing infrastructure. Thus,
designers can play with four variables: vehicle capacity, ﬂeet size running on the
system, average speed, and headway.

4.8.2 Vehicle Capacity

For any given existing railway infrastructure, vehicle capacity can be optimized by
playing with one of the four following elements: physical characteristics, comfort
level, safety standard, and occupancy rate.

Physical characteristics Metro, commuter trains, monorails, and tramways vary in
size. The external dimensions, which are called envelop, are usually given by the
physical characteristics of the network. Tunnel and platform clearance and heights
are some of the main variables that impact these external dimensions. As train are
moving objects, metro engineers consider the dynamic envelop, which takes into
consideration clearance with lateral and vertical movements (Fig. 4.9).

Unfortunately most networks are unique, which prevents metro standardization.
The art of the railway manufacturer is thus to take in its product portfolio an
existing proven technology, which envelop is the most similar to the network
requirements. Once this is done, engineers work on optimizing the seating, door,
and equipment arrangements to allow for the highest available useful internal
surface.

264

Fig. 4.9 Network’s
characteristic impact on
trains’ physical
characteristics. Source Author

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

in Great Britain a target

Comfort level The comfort level is usually imposed by Transport Authorities. For
instance,
restricting overcrowding was set as
for
“Passengers in excess of capacity” (PIXC). This was deﬁned by the government as
greater than 10 % of the vehicle’s seating capacity or of an allowance of 0.55 m2
per passenger depending on the type of vehicle. As a consequence, number of seats
and their speciﬁc occupying space are normally ﬁxed. Space can typically vary
from 0.35 m2 for metro operation in megacities to 0.55 m2 for comfortable mass
transit seating arrangements (even more for ﬁrst class intercity train). The surface
dedicated to standees is a consequence of the remaining inner available surface of
the cars, including door and gangway space (rigid ﬂexible section between two
separate vehicles).

Industrial designers are hired by metro manufacturers to optimize seating
conﬁguration, loading and unloading ﬂow (e.g., optimizing door size and
types) as well as repartition of the standees within the metro. Their objective
is not only to make the transit cars appealing and functional, but also to allow
for the maximum number of standees. A direct link between seated passen-
gers and standees exist called load factor.

Safety standard As we’ve seen in the section on signaling, railway operation is
very standardized, but standards are not always safety related. For instance, areas
reserved for handicapped people, or seats designed for obese are now required for
social reasons in most mass transit operations. This has obviously an impact on
capacity.

4.8 Mass Transit Capacity

265

One of the most important safety-related requirements is linked to the train’s
weight, as it affects structural and performance requirements. Once the standing
space is calculated, one must take into consideration the weight of the number of
standees per m2. Usually, 70 kg per passenger is used, though this weight value can
change in some cities.

The railway industry takes into consideration mainly 5 weight requirements:
AW0 (empty trains), AW1 (weight with seated passengers), AW2 (weight with
average peak hour load), AW3 (weight with crush load weight), and some also use
AW4 weight measures. In fact, these measures are usually simpliﬁed taking into
consideration, respectively, 0, 4, 6, 8 and 10 passengers/m2.

Let’s use a simple example to illustrate the impact of passenger weight: a
metro car with inner dimensions of 10 m by 2.8 m, with 30 seats required
with an area of 0.35 m2 per seat.

The total available space would be 28 m of which 9.8 m2 would be
dedicated to seating areas. To simplify, we would have 18 m left for standees.
In terms of the seating weight, we would have 30 × 70 kg = 2.100 kg to
which we would need to add the standees weight. The number of passengers
and additional weight would be:
– 4 passengers/m2 = 18 × 4 = 72 passengers × 70 kg = 5050 kg
– 6 passengers/m2 = 18 × 6 = 108 passengers × 70 kg = 7560 kg
– 8 passengers/m2 = 18 × 8 = 144 passengers × 70 kg = 10,080 kg
– 10 passengers/m2 = 18 × 10 = 180 passengers × 70 kg = 12,600 kg

For most cities this is just a manufacturing standard, as the vehicle capacity
requirement is always calculated at 4 passengers/m2. However, for megacities of
this world, such as Sao Paulo or New Delhi, accepting a comfort level of 6 or
8 passengers/m2 or even more is a quick and dirty (not to say smelly) way to add
extra capacity. Some cities like London, for instance, calculate different load factors
such as 8 passengers/m2 between doorways and 6 passengers/m2 elsewhere.

The fact of using 4 or 8 passengers/m2 will obviously impact the structural
weight, as more metal will be required with more density. This will have an impact
on motorization, which will require more powerful motors, but also on air condi-
tioning, braking system, etc. In other words, though the trains could have the same
inner space devoted to standees, the characteristics of a metro car calculated at 4 or
8 m passenger/m2 would make these two very different beasts.

Occupancy rate This rate gives the real capacity number. In other words, a metro
car of the megacity can be designed for 6 passengers/m2 but the reality is that in
some of the megacities of Brazil or India, there are 8 and sometimes even 10
passengers/m2!

266

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

4.8.3 Mass Transit Network Capacity

Capacity is expressed in PPHPD and can be represented as the results of multi-
plying the number of trains passing by a particular station in one hour by the
number of vehicles per train and the number of passengers that could be carried by
each vehicle. Similarly to bus systems, we’ve just seen that there are four main
elements deﬁning the mass transit network capacity: train capacity, ﬂeet size,
average speed, and headway.

Train capacity Unlike most buses though, metros are composed of several cars
linked together by gangways or couplings. Capacity is thus function of the number
of cars tied up together. In most modern metro applications, tube shape metros can
be composed of up to 12 cars tied up by gangways. The maximum number of cars
will be function of the metro station length. The train capacity formula is:

Tc ¼ train=h (cid:2) cars=train

(cid:1)

(cid:2) seats=car (cid:2) passenger=seat þ standing area m2=car (cid:2) standees=m2

(cid:3)

;

Fleet size It is the number of trains available at peak hour to cover the entire line.
The maximum number is function of the network characteristics and is deﬁned by
speed and minimum headway achievable safely.
Average speed It is mainly inﬂuenced by acceleration, deceleration and speed of
the vehicles, as well as the distance between stations; and
Headway It is mostly inﬂuenced by the authorized time between two vehicles
following each other, according to the LMA (see section on safety for more
information) and the time required for vehicles to reenter operations after reaching
the end of the line.

4.8.4 Railway System Capacity

There is no standard capacity number for railway systems. It really depends on the
application from heavy-to-light metro system, commuter, tramway regional, or high
speed trains. But even within each category, technology and safety standards will
highly inﬂuence capacity.

These are a few examples of how other factors beyond the four just identiﬁed
can inﬂuence highly capacity. For instance, commuter train pulled by a
locomotive won’t carry any passenger while another commuter train based on
an Electrical Multiple Unit conﬁguration, will carry passengers in all its
railcars. Tramways can be coupled to increase capacity and metro and

4.8 Mass Transit Capacity

267

monorail can see their train composition increased according to maximum
station length. Line can be segregated, reducing signiﬁcantly all non pro-
grammable events such as interaction with car, bicycle, bus, pedestrian and
road crossing lights and thus reducing signiﬁcantly travel time.

4.9 Transport Mode Capacity Comparison

In the last sections, we’ve seen different transportation systems capacity. How can
we compare them? The answer is: not easily!

4.9.1 Highway and Road Capacity

The issue is that we cannot really use the maximum capacity for cars expressed in
PPHPD, as we do for buses and trains. The reason is that we know that most cars
run without any passengers other than the driver. This is why we prefer to use the
average occupancy rate rather than the maximum capacity of 5 passengers per car,
which in the USA and Europe, is around 1.5 passengers. This means that the
theoretical capacity of 5800 PPHPD for one highway lane would be reduced to
around 2800 PPHPD at the speed of around 25 km/h (Fig. 4.10).

Fig. 4.10 Capacity in
PPHPD according to
theoretical, average, and peak
occupancy. Source Author

PPHPD

Capacity for 1 highway lane

5500

5000

4500

4000

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

50

100

150

200

km/ h

268

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

Fig. 4.11 Capacity in
PPHPD for 1 and 2 lane with
platooning. Source Author

Capacity with average occupancy rate (1.55)

PPHPD

11000

10000

9000

8000

7000

6000

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

0

50

100

150

200

km/ h

This, however, shows the potential of car pooling in addressing capacity issues
within the city. Doubling the number of passengers per car, automatically translates
into increasing twofold the capacity, without any impact on infrastructure and
almost no impact on pollution.

Proposing platooning services of unmanned cars is a formidable opportunity to
solve transit issues in gridlock urban areas. Combining platooning with car pooling
services (or unmanned taxis with several onboard passengers) offer even more
appealing opportunities to solve transport capacity problems. With a two-lane pla-
tooning service of unmanned taxis operating at full capacity (i.e., 4–5 travelers per
car), the road capacity could reach 20,000–30,000 PPHPD depending on operational
speed, or the equivalent of a medium-sized metro line and double the capacity of a
tramway! Obviously these numbers would need to be tested, but still show the
tremendous opportunities that unmanned operations can unleash (Fig. 4.11).

Now, calculating an average capacity for a conventional road is almost impos-
sible, as there are too many variables, such as crossings, lights, pedestrian, etc. For
comparison purpose we could shoot and take half the highway lane capacity: 1600
PPHPD.

4.9.2 Bus and BRT Capacity

The following chart gives a value of capacity for bus and BRT systems taking into
consideration various bus types on one single lane. It also shows that operational
efﬁciencies can improve drastically the capacity of the bus network, even for only
one BRT lane (Table 4.12).

4.9 Transport Mode Capacity Comparison

269

Table 4.12 Impact of vehicle platform interface and vehicle size on capacity

Max bus
capacity
(No.)

Paying on
or offboard

Average
dwell time
(s)

Av.
Boarding + alighting
time (s)

Corridor
capacity
(PPHPD)

Bus/hour
(No.)

Vehicle and
operation type

Minibus

Midi-bus

Standard bus

Articulated
vehicle

Bi-articulated
vehicle

Articulated with
level platform

Bi-articulated
with level
platform

Articulated with
level platform

Bi-articulated
with level
platform

15

35

70

160

240

160

240

160

240

Onboard

Onboard

Onboard

Onboard

Onboard

Onboard

Onboard

Offboard

Offboard

10

11

12

13

14

13

14

13

14

1140

1580

1870

3780

4020

5120

5570

9780

12,170

76

45

27

24

17

32

23

61

51

Source Steer, Davies, Gleave: BRT- Planning guide 2007 (Table 8.6)

Table 4.13 Capacity of various transportation means at 6 passengers/m2

Technology

Description

Capacity

120 s

90 s

Heavy
metro

Monorail
Tramway

6 passengers/m2
Small body
(Rc + M + M) × 2
Medium body
(Rc + M + M) × 2
Large body
(Rc + M + M) × 2
7 car train
30 m
30 m × 2 (coupled)

Source EAMESP and Author

Unit

1016

1508

1002
270
540

PPHPD

PPHPD

30,500

40,600.00

42,500

60,300

1736

52,100

69,400

30,080
8100
16,200

40,000
10,800
21,700

4.9.3 Metro and Train Capacity

The following chart based on an EAMESP study (Engineering association of the
Sao Paulo metro) and our own calculation gives an idea of the various technologies,
using comparable premises. As indicated in the chart, the capacity is calculated with
6 passengers/m2, which is an operating standard in this city. It also takes into
consideration the interval between two trains of 90 and 120 s (Table 4.13).

1.5

1.5

3

3

3

1

1

0.3

0.3

Car
no
No

6.00

6

6

7
1
2

270

Technology

Table 4.14 Bus capacity at 6 passengers/m2

Standard bus type 1, 1 lane,
1 stopping bay

Source EAMESP and Author

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

Description

Car
no
6 passengers/m2 No
2 axles
Articulated
Bi-articulated

1
1
2

Capacity

120 s

90 s

Unit

85
121
173

PPHPD PPHPD

2550
3650
5190

3400
4840
6920

The same source also allows us to compare train and bus running on conven-

tional routes (Table 4.14).

It is interesting to note that capacity varies according to frequency and
density. For instance, had the frequency been 180 s and the density 4
passengers/m2, the tramway’s capacity would have been 5700 (42 m) and
4200 PPHPD (32 m), and the bus’ 2200 (biarticulated) and 1600 PPHPD
(normal bus).

4.9.4 Comparing Apples with Apples

Comparing capacity between different transportation means is pretty complex. The
following chart coming from a specialist in BRT gives a comparison of light trains,
metros and BRTs, which portrays BRTS in a favorable light (Table 4.15).

The following table compiled by Transport for London is interesting, as TfL
operates different transportation means and cannot be seen as biased. To give the
full picture, we’ve added to this chart
information on conventional road and
highway capacity (in italics) (Table 4.16).

Table 4.15 Bus transit systems: the case of Transmilenio

Characteristic

Capacity (Pax/veh)
Vehicles/unit
Maximum speed (km/h)
Commercial speed (km/h)
Maximum frequency at stops (units/h)
Capacity at stops (pax/h/direction)
Capital costs (€ M/km)
Source Steer, Davies, Gleave

Tram—LRT
110–250
1–4
60–80
15–35
40
6000–20,000
15–50

Metro
140–280
1–10
70–100
25–55
20–40
10,000–72,000
30–200

Bus transit
80–160
1
60–70
15–28
70–210
11,000–40,000
1–10

4.9 Transport Mode Capacity Comparison

271

Table 4.16 Capacity and cost per kilometer of different transportation means

Modal
characteristics

Unit type

Car
road
lane

Car
highway
lane

Bus

Bus max
priority

BRT

Tramway

Light
rail

Heavy
rail

PPHPD

1600

2800

2500

4000

6000

12,000

18,000

Capital cost per
route km

M£/km

M$/km

<1

<1.5

<1

<1.5

Maximum
capacity

Operating cost
per passenger

Cents/km 15–70

15–75

Average speed

km/h

10–20

20–40

Source Transport for London and Author

15–20
20–30

10–45
15–70

30000
and >
45–250
70–400

1.6–3.3

15–22

1.6 to
2.2
18–40

2.3–2.8

18–40

1–2
1.5–3

2.5–5.8

3.9–9.1

14–18

<1

<1.5

3.8–
8.8
5.9–
13.8
10–
14

1–20
1.5–
30
2.5–
5
3.9–
7.8
15–
22

Pence/km 9–50

9–50

1–2.1

1–1.4

1.5–1.8

As we can see, TfL identiﬁes the main public transport modes’ characteristics,
focusing on capacity, capital cost, operating cost, and average speed. Not surpris-
ingly, the main difference with the previous chart is concerning the BRT, where
capacity is much reduced. The fact is that high-capacity BRTs found in South
America aren’t really popular in the rich world and probably misunderstood. We
will now see why.

4.9.5 Considering Lost Capacity

Not all construction of new transportation lane is neutral from a lost in capacity
perspective. For instance, appropriation of an existing road to build a one- or
two-lane bus system or even a tramway will reduce signiﬁcantly car trafﬁc ﬂow in
the neighborhood. BRT and tramway capacity can be huge but their impact on the
city trafﬁc jams can also be. The reason is that there are two consequential damages
of building such systems on segregated lanes.

Bottlenecks By cutting the city into two, such segregated system creates bottle-
necks wherever trafﬁc passes over or under the lanes.

Land appropriation These segregated systems either replace existing roads or
could be replaced by new roads that would help the trafﬁc ﬂow. The size of the land
intake is function of the expected maximum speed, level of trafﬁc, and nature of the
separator (can be run through or not). For instance in an urban environment, for a
maximum speed of 50 km, the bus must have:
(cid:129) 6.80 m in double lane for trafﬁc smaller than 60 buses/hour (2 directions)
(cid:129) 7.10 m in double lane for trafﬁc higher than 60 buses/hour (2 directions)
(cid:129) 3.50 m in single lane.

272

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

3.0m

7.0m

5.0m

3.5m

3.5m

3.0m

Fig. 4.12 Transmilenio land appropriation. Source Author

The following design gives a view of the total space occupancy of the
Transmilenio. The total system occupies 19 m. If we consider a 3 m width for a
normal lane, the Transmilenio could add 6 extra lanes (Fig. 4.12).

Assuming the minimum occupancy rate of 1.1, the lost opportunity in terms of
capacity generated by such system would be at minimum 6000 PPHPD at peak
hours and probably more in the range of 10,000 PPHPD.

Furthermore, in the future such segregated lanes could be dedicated to pla-
tooning services with car pooling or unmanned taxi services, which we’ve seen
could compete advantageously with BRT or tramway systems (capacity of a 2 lane
could go up to 30,000 PPHPD).

On the contrary underground or elevated transportation means such as metros or
monorails have very little land intake and almost no negative impact on existing
road capacity.

4.10 System Price Comparison

Comparing prices between the different transportation means is even more com-
plicated than analyzing capacity differences. Actually, even comparing the same
transportation means across different countries is extremely difﬁcult. To help better
understand why, we must obviously look at the capital expenditure (CAPEX)
linked to building the system and acquiring all equipment and software, as well as
the Operational Expense (OPEX) resulting from operating and maintaining the
systems (as TfL has done in their chart), but not only. We also must analyze the
impact of ﬁnancing the projects, which is part of
the Total Cost of
Ownership. Furthermore, OPEX, CAPEX, and ﬁnancing costs must be brought
back into a value called Net Present Value that takes into account the cost of money
over time. However, ﬁnancing costs for AAA+ rated Governments have nothing in
common with nonrated Governments’ borrowing cost. Thus, comparing ﬁnancing
costs for a new London or Karachi metro line is really impossible. This already
explains in parts why it is so difﬁcult to compare costs between different infra-
structure projects, as ﬁnancial costs which can be substantial over a 30-year period
are not technology but mainly investor rating-related.

4.10 System Price Comparison

273

4.10.1 CAPEX Comparison

Transport CAPEX can be regrouped under two different meaningful categories:
system and civil construction work. Under system, we include the vehicles and the
signaling system, as well as all the auxiliary equipment necessary to make the
network operate (e.g., elevators, telecom, ticketing system, etc.). The construction
work will include concrete work for laying tracks or building roads, tunneling as
well as all auxiliary building infrastructures, such as stations and control centers. As
we’ve seen in TfL’s chart, there is such a big variation in costs (e.g., US$45 M to
US$450 M), that these numbers start to be meaningless for comparison purposes.
Let’s understand why.

Vehicle comparison For cars and buses, prices are today globalized but can be
different from one country to the other, mainly due to import or VAT taxes.
Furthermore and as we all know, prices between a luxury and a small compact car
have nothing in common.

Trains are mainly tailored made and even though the market is globalized there
can still be huge differences in prices linked to factors such as quantity, delivery
schedule, risks, etc. For instance, a metro car can cost as little as $1 M if produced
in large quantity but the same trainset could reach the price of $1.6 M to $1.8 M if
produced in small volume. Taxes and import duties can also affect greatly this price.
Finally, as train manufacturing is mainly tailor made, cost and productivity of man
power will also impact greatly the train’s costs. Moreover, frequency and headway
will inﬂuence the ﬂeet size. Costs of a 20 km line with a 4-car EMU (Electrical
Multiple Unit) coming in every 3 min have nothing in common with high capacity
systems where 10-car metros must meet 60 s to 70 s headway.

Signaling and other software driven equipment comparison These equipment that
are mainly present in the railway industry are also globalized. Price will be mainly
affected by the level of safety and the complexity of the integration work required.
For instance, a SIL 1 can cost one-fourth of a SIL 4 signaling system.

Construction work General prices for construction work are mainly local. For
instance, concrete cost can be affected by the presence of concrete plants nearby or
even by the need for special concrete use due to environmental factors. Local man
power cost will also greatly inﬂuence the overall construction costs, as thousands of
blue collars can work on these huge construction sites. Construction work is also
inﬂuenced by environmental conditions in which the work will be performed. Soil
characteristics especially will have a huge impact on tunneling costs even more so
wherever lines must run under rivers. Over or under pass, as well as bridges are
infrastructure works, which can increase immensely the CAPEX.

All of these factors that inﬂuence CAPEX can in fact vary by at least 100 %.
investment comparison of transport
This explains, why making any potential
infrastructure costs across countries is extremely difﬁcult. It is not to say, that
CAPEX comparison of different transport means cannot be done. In fact it must be
done, but at the local or city level.

274

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

4.10.2 OPEX Comparison

Operational expenses can be divided into three main cost drivers:
(cid:129) Execution:

the main cost centers are energy consumption, drivers’ salary,

ticketing, security team salary, administrative work, etc.;

(cid:129) Maintenance: these costs include cleaning, daily maintenance, maintenance
regimes for corrective and preventive maintenance, asset replacement; and

(cid:129) Soft costs: they include items such as marketing and gratuities.

Execution costs They depend really on transportation technologies and the size of
the operation. Interestingly, bigger operation doesn’t always translate into more
expensive ones. For instance, energy costs aren’t proportional to ﬂeet size. Indeed,
kinetic energy resulting from braking can be signiﬁcantly saved by other vehicles,
as long as there is always one nearby train that can recuperate this energy during
acceleration. Driverless operations can also get rid altogether of driver and station
ticketing,
attendants salary,
security, and administrative cost usually beneﬁt from volume as the ﬁxed costs of
managing huge or small transport systems are almost the same. When looking at all
these elements, we can conclude that operating cost per passenger kilometer
transported is usually much lower for big metro networks than smaller ones.

independently for the network size. Furthermore,

Maintenance costs Thirty years ago maintenance costs were mostly proportional to
the ﬂeet’s age. Classically, maintenance costs would grow over time. Infrastructure
characteristics (ramp, curb, quality of running surface, etc.) as well as operational
conditions (driving style, speed, number of stops, mileage performed, etc.) would
obviously affect the electromechanical parts, making the need for replacement more
or less urgent. However, various maintenance strategies and methodologies were
introduced trying to decouple maintenance costs with ﬂeet age. For instance
instead, of considering vehicles in its entirety, maintainers optimized the mainte-
nance at the equipment level. As we will see in the chapter on connected cities, new
e-mobility technologies are enabling further decoupling by enabling preventive
maintenance based on failure predictability rather than operational cycles.
Soft costs Such costs (i.e., marketing, public relations, gratuities) are usually ﬁxed.
The operation’s size doesn’t have much inﬂuence.

The Transport for London chart shows OPEX costs of the various transportation
technologies expressed in $ per passenger per kilometer traveled. We used
extracts from the UK Automobile Association’s Motoring cost for 2014, at peak
hour for the cheapest and the most exclusive cars). As we used peak hour values,
it obviously shows much higher OPEX values than public transport means. Were
we to use occupancy rates of 3 and 5 passengers rather than 1.1, it would show
that OPEX for small cars would be at par with buses and metros respectively.

4.10 System Price Comparison

275

Table 4.17 Social beneﬁt costs with an exchange rate of 2.33R$ US$ per US$, not considering
inﬂation; extracted and adapted from the Sao Paulo metro 2009 annual (see footnote 6) report
Social beneﬁts

In million

M US$

Reduction in pollutant emission
Reduction in fossil fuel consumption
Reduction in bus OPEX
Reduction in car OPEX
Reduction in road lane OPEX
Reduction in lost time
Reduction in the number of accidents

Source Author

2009 values
Unit

t/y
L/Y
km/y
km/y

H/y
Number

783
407
246
1207

556
12
Total

66
393
388
245
15
1038
50
2196

4.10.3 Social and Environmental Costs

In order to assess the value for money of any given transport system, one cannot
just consider the previous costs, as very few public transport projects can offer a
viable return on investment. Social and environmental costs need to be integrated to
get the full view on the real costs of any given transportation system. Many metro
operators, which need to take into consideration such factors, show in their annual
balance sheet ﬁgures related to social beneﬁts for the population. The following
ﬁgures are extracted from the Sao Paulo metro 2009 annual report6 (Table 4.17).
An interesting feature of such chart is that it shows what would happen to car
and bus operations, if the metro would stop carrying so many people. In other
words, it shows the opportunity cost of not having such metro network.

The ﬁrst social beneﬁts, we would like to discuss about are linked to opportunity
cost from an environmental perspective. As a matter of fact, we will ﬁrst describe a
cost that is never really considered in most feasibility study.

4.10.4 Appropriation Costs

Road advocates never consider the land occupancy as a major decision-making cri-
terion, whenever comparing transportation means alternatives. However, we’ve just
seen that a BRT system such as the Transmilenio could occupy a 19 m area over more
than 50 kms. How much is that worth? Surely it is worth something, even if it is just to
transform this lane into a green area. Property value around such a park would most
likely double in the midterm and so would property taxes. However, an easy way of
estimating such cost exists. If we take the average cost per m2 within the

6Sao Paulo annual report 2009.

276

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

neighborhood, we can easily calculate the lost opportunity cost. In cities like London,
as there is no more building area available, we could use the 2014 average price per m2
slightly higher than 10,000 pounds or $15,000. With a 20 km long and 19 m wide area,
we would reach an amount of $5.7B (3.8B pounds)! London is not exceptional. For
instance, the 2013 price per square foot reached in West Chelsea (New York City)
$850 per square foot (US$9150 per m2)7. At such retail price, the same area could be
worth around US$3.5B in the Big Apple. With land worth so much, no wonder high
capacity BRTs aren’t really popular in the rich world!

4.10.5 Expropriation Costs

Expropriation shouldn’t be mixed up with appropriation. It is basically linked to the
conﬁscation by the Authorities of land and whatever is standing on it, and to the
reimbursement of such property usually at fair market price. Obviously the deﬁnition
of fair market price is difﬁcult to establish and results in numerous legal battles.
Expropriation cost varies according to the area in which the line or the road will go
through. Cost of land is an indicator of such costs, but can increase tremendously if
there are buildings or residences that need to be demolished.

Most transportation projects are affected by such costs. Even metros running in
tunnels need expropriation for placement of the TBMs (Tunnel Boring Machines),
the construction site and/or the stations. However, stations in many big cities are
usually included in buildings or shopping malls, turning a cost into a revenue
stream for the metro operator. Monorails can also be integrated within buildings and
generate the same type of revenues. They also need expropriation for the depot.
However, as their dynamic envelop (maximum limit by which the vehicle moves
during normal operation) is very small, it can actually be built between 2 lanes of an
avenue, not requiring any expropriation at all (Fig. 4.13).

Bus systems or tramways that run in mixed trafﬁc also don’t generate much
expropriation cost except for the depot/garage. On the other hand, BRTs such as the
Transmilenio require a huge number of land plots to build access ramps to the
stations positioned in the middle of the lanes.

4.10.6 Congestion Costs

Americans waste 4.2 billion hours in trafﬁc every year or nearly one full week of
work for every traveler. When such wasted time is translated into money, trafﬁc
congestion represents a $87.2 billion annual drain on the American economy or

7Developers play with thin margins as Manhattan land prices skyrocket; Article in NYC’s
(new) land rush; December 01, 2013 Author: Melissa Dehncke-McGill.

4.10 System Price Comparison

277

Fig. 4.13 Picture of monorail tracks in the city of Sao Paulo laid between the two lanes of a large
avenue, resulting on minimum expropriation and land appropriation. Source Author

more than $750 for each US passenger. We also need to add to congestion costs the
equivalent in wasted combustible, which represents an extra 15.9 billion liters of
wasted fuel. This is in line with the EU’s own estimate of congestion costs of nearly
$130B (100B Euro) or 1 % of EU’s GDP per year. As we’ve seen before, the Sao
Paulo metro quantiﬁes the direct beneﬁts it generates in regard to congestion costs,
such as reduction in fuel consumption, in car, bus and road OPEX, as well as the
saving in loss time due to trafﬁc jams. The lost time savings are worth around half
the social beneﬁts that this city metro system is bringing to the population. This
isn’t uncommon.

A 2005 US study8 showed that taking size into account, cities with large, well
established rail transit systems perform better in various ways than cities lacking
rail systems. These beneﬁts result from the rail’s ability to help create more
accessible land use patterns and more diverse transport systems. The conclusion of
this study is that high capacity mass transit systems have a signiﬁcant positive
impact on congestion cost savings. Beneﬁts to a city operation are proportional to
the capacity of its mass transit system and inversely proportional to congestion
costs generated. Bus systems, especially when not segregated, produce signiﬁcantly
lower congestion savings.

To translate these costs at the level of a project’s feasibility study, we need to
integrate the fact that transportation means have different capacity. Thus any lower
capacity system should be penalized by the extra amount of congestion costs
resulting from such lower capacity to really compare apples with apples.

8Rail Transit In America A Comprehensive Evaluation of Beneﬁts (April 2005) Author Todd
Litman; Victoria Transport Policy Institute.

278

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

4.10.7 Environmental Costs

Unlike electrical traction vehicles, fossil fuel vehicles emit CO2 and other GHG,
which have an impact on global warming, at the point of consumption. In fact buses
generate at least 50 times more CO2 per year than electric metro wheel to wheel per
passenger transported. For instance, the average yearly emission of buses running
60,000 km can vary from 87 tons (18 m bus) to 110 tons (24 m bus) of CO2, when
we use a value of 2.63 kg/L of C02, compared to 0 for electrical metros. However to
make a fair comparison, we need to use CO2 emission values well to wheel (see
Chap. 2 for more details).

The price estimation of a ton of CO2 can vary tremendously depending on the
price basis. The current CO2 price has nothing to do with the challenges of global
warming that we are now facing. According to the World Resources Institute, an
environmental think tank in Washington DC, bringing carbon dioxide levels down
to those suggested by United Nation reports would cost $US20 to $US100 per ton.
McKinsey & Co., a consulting ﬁrm, estimates that it would cost $US40 per ton of
CO2 to reach the 2030 greenhouse gas levels recommended by the UN studies.
Using a price tag of $US40 per ton, we could estimate that solely for carbon
dioxide, each bus should bare the annual cost of $4000. This might seem small
value, but when we add car pollutant emission, ﬁgures start to be pretty impressive.
In fact many metro operators calculate the beneﬁts in pollution reduction resulting
from their operation. For instance, the Sao Paulo metro estimated in 2009 (see
footnote 6), their savings in pollutant emission at 783 M tons, of which 723 M only
for CO2 and estimated the yearly savings for mother earth at US$66 M.

4.10.8 Social Beneﬁts

Public transportation plays a social role. It allows all citizens, whatever their wealth,
to get access to services. In megalopolises, poor people are often condemned to live
in the city’s outskirts, as they cannot afford the high housing price of inner city.
Unfortunately, work doesn’t exist in these crime ridden regions and the poorer
citizens are often condemned to longer commutes and frequently, higher trans-
portation fees to ﬁnd work. In the megacities of this world, the poorest citizens can
lose three hours or more per day commuting from home to the work place and back.
Anyone who has experienced traveling in a crowded environment for so long will
clearly recognize the burden that it represents on such people’s life. In fact, if we
look at the 2009 Sao Paulo annual report (see footnote 6), almost half of all the
generated social beneﬁts are linked to reduction in lost time due to trafﬁc jams.
There are two ways of improving such ﬁgures. The ﬁrst one is to build higher
capacity systems which will reduce the traveling time of ordinary people. This is
time consuming, expensive and difﬁcult to implement. The second way to improve
such ﬁgures is to make the travelers’ journey more productive by enabling them to

4.10 System Price Comparison

279

work or get access to the internet. The beneﬁts and the way to enable this alternative
solution will be described in detail in Chap. 5.

4.10.9 Health Cost Linked to Air Pollution

From an health perspective, where the pollution is emitted is probably more
important than how much pollutants’ is send in the air, as many inhabitants live in
cities where pollutants are trapped.

Air pollution impact on OECD countries health costs (including deaths and
illness) was estimated at around $USD 1.7 trillion (2010 values). In a 2014 pub-
lication9 the OECD suggests that road transport would account for roughly 50 % of
these costs. Obviously yearly health cost in the range of US$850 billion imputable
to air pollution is no small number.

Estimating how much health cost bills would be reduced by introducing a new
metro or bus line is complicated but doable. As we’ve seen in Chap. 2, we need to
take into account the pollution impact well to wheel to really understand the
complete cost—beneﬁt of removing fossil fuel vehicles.

To ﬁnalize this chapter on megacities, we would like to talk about a last

important feature, which is the quality of ride.

4.11 Quality of Ride

In the previous section, we clearly identiﬁed that poor people of megacities can
spend a signiﬁcant portion of their spare time traveling between their work place
and their home. Obviously middle class citizens or even the Richs can also spend
hours in trafﬁc jams but the burden on someone life’s isn’t the same. This reality is
that journey time is clearly inﬂuenced by the perceived comfort and quality of the
service provided, which are usually better in the city center, where these social
classes live. To quote the French writer Françoise Sagan “If you need to cry, you
might as well cry in a Rolls Royce rather than in a deux Chevaux (an old popular
French car).”

There are in fact various ways of improving the quality of ride.

4.11.1 Average Speed

The most obvious one is to increase the network’s average operational speed. To
give an example, bus speed can reach 25 km/h, however during peak time average

9Cost of air pollution; health impact of road transport—OECD (2014).

280

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

speed can fall to values as low as 12 km/h on busy routes. Putting in place measures
and equipment to come back to the average speed outside of peak hours, would
immediately cut journey time by half! Changing the transportation mean would also
do wonder. The following ﬁgures give a view of the worldwide average commercial
speed for other transportation means:
(cid:129) 27 km/h for heavy metro;
(cid:129) 20 km/h for tramways on segregated lines;
(cid:129) 17 km/h for BRTs; and
(cid:129) 34 km/h for automatic Light Rail Trains.

4.11.2 Comfort

Improving the conditions in which people travel is a good way to enhance the
quality of ride. Air conditioning is a feature of modern transport that comes
immediately to mind when one thinks about comfort in megacities, mostly located
in hot climates. Wider seating space, good lighting conditions, low level of noise,
nice design, are a few of these additional features that make traveling more pleasant.
Reducing overcrowding is also a measure that greatly enhances the traveling
experience but unfortunately decreases capacity.

4.11.3 Quality of Service

Facilitating the life of passengers can also improve the quality of ride. For instance
reducing, the queuing to enter or exit metro stations can be greatly appreciated.
Improving payment convenience by using for instance rechargeable electronic
payment cards or even in the future smart phones, adds ﬂexibility to passengers
who don’t have to queue to buy paper ticket or monthly pass. Higher bus or metro
frequency can also greatly improve quality of ride, as people can avoid wasted
connection time.

4.11.4 Access to Information

Passengers want to get quick access to information concerning their trip. As we will
see in the next Chapter, people want to know immediately if there is any problem
on their itinerary that will affect their arrival time. Passenger information systems,
which provide in real time such information, are plebiscited by passengers. Decent
internet access to surf on the web is also extremely important, especially for the
younger generation.

4.11 Quality of Ride

281

4.11.5 Transportation Modes’ Integration

The last element that improves journey time, which is maybe the most important of
all, is the integration of transportation means in a coherent manner. People don’t
travel from point A to point B. They travel from one activity to the other. For
instance, they go from resting at home to working in an ofﬁce or plant. If there is no
direct link between activities A and B, they will either cancel such activity or if they
don’t have the choice, such as driving their own car, will go from location A to B
through point C and even D. This adds not only to the journey time but also to the
exhaustion and stress of these trips. Thus, the issue for most city planners is to
ensure that as many people as possible can go from point A to B with the less
connections possible. The consequence of this is that they need to improve transport
coverage in order that passengers avoid losing time walking to or waiting for the
next vehicle. This unfortunately translates into higher public transport costs.

In today’s world of manned vehicles, this means that you need to provide a wide
spectrum of transportation means that connect easily. In transportation, the image of
a Fishbone is often used to describe the best possible integrated network. Cars or
small buses feed into secondary bus or light train lines. These secondary lines
integrate with primary lines such as heavy metro that constitutes the backbone of
the city transportation network, at connection stations (Fig. 4.14).

In a driverless car world, this ﬁshbone image could change drastically. Indeed
this current ideal integration is based on a point to point transportation model,
where metros and buses need to stop at all stations. In a driverless world as we will
see in the next chapters, multi-point to multi-point transport will be possible. In
other words, we could envision that through transport apps, unmanned taxis pick up
and drop off several passengers according to an optimized journey time, at a very

Light metro line

Main metro line

Bus line

Fig. 4.14 Transport means integration taking the shape of a ﬁshbone. Source Author

282

4 Avoiding Megacities’ Standstill

Fig. 4.15 Picture of a multimodal integration platform in the German city of Unna, where
regional and city trains, station, as well as several bus platforms and an adjacent parking are
located together in the city center. Source Author

low fare cost. This will obviously disrupt the public transportation industry as we
know it, but will improve drastically the quality of ride of millions of poor citizens
(Fig. 4.15).

Acknowledgments and disclaimer The use of pictures or references made to studies or com-
panies and their brand does not in any way suggest that the authors of such studies or the
mentioned companies endorse in any way this book or its content. The author endeavors in
respecting the copyright subsisting any of the graphics, and texts that he uses, to use graphics and
texts he has himself created or to use graphics and texts not covered by copyright. All trademarks
and brand names quoted in the book including those protected by copyright of third parties are
subject unreservedly to the provisions of current copyright law and the rights of ownership of the
registered copyright holders.

Companies and Brands Stated in the Chapter

(cid:129) Transmilenio S.A.
(cid:129) Transport for London
(cid:129) McKinsey & Co.

Chapter 5
Connected Cities

Acronyms

ABS
API
CAN
CCTV
EDA
HVAC
(IPv4 and IPv6)
LIN
M2M
Mbps/Gbps
MOST
NGN
PDA
PnP
PTC
RFID
SDP
SOA
TCP/IP
URI
V2I
V2V

Anti-lock braking system
Application program interface
Controller area network
Closed circuit television
Event-driven architecture
Heat ventilation and air conditioning
Internet protocol version 4 and 6
Local interconnect network
Machine to machine
Mega bytes per second/Giga bytes per second
Media-oriented system transport
Next generation network
Personal digital equipment
Plug and play technology
Positive temperature coefﬁcient
Radio-frequency identiﬁcation
Service delivery platform
Service oriented architecture
Transmission control protocol/Internet protocol
Unique resource identiﬁer
Vehicle to infrastructure
Vehicle to vehicle

5.1

Introduction

It is trendy for big companies to talk about intelligent cities. It brings a notion of
high tech and green image that big corporations love to be associated with.
However, the notion of intelligence can barely be applied to any city at all. As far as

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
S. Van Themsche, The Advent of Unmanned Electric Vehicles,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-20666-0_5

283

284

5 Connected Cities

we know, there isn’t yet any mega computer supervising the various infrastructures
and harmonizing the residents’ life accordingly. What we believe exists and is being
developed further in many cities is the infrastructure to improve the connectivity
between all things. Already in 1999, the concept of the “Internet of Things” was
introduced to society. The main idea behind such concept was that all things could
be interconnected. Initially, it was thought that all devices would be connected
through a unique electronic product code (i.e.,: RFID) but under the advances of
internet, this same concept has evolved into objects having an IP address or Unique
Resource Identiﬁer (URI). This means that any device—computer, phone, or
machine—connected to the internet is associated through a URI. Originally, this
URI was a 32-bit number (IPv4: Internet Protocol version 4) but as the number of
connected devices is expected to grow exponentially, a 128-bit identiﬁer was
launched in 2013 under the IPv6, allowing for trillion of devices to be intercon-
nected. With IPv6, the Internet of Things growth won’t be restricted anymore by
software limitations.

Changes in hardware have also happened to allow for this increase in commu-
nication capabilities. On the ﬁxed network side, most city residents have now
access to Ethernet at home or at work. But until now, these Ethernet accesses were
limited in download speed and data transport capacity. This is now changing in
most big cities, as cable companies are adding the last few meters of connection,
enabling fast internet services. These fast Ethernet medium will not only enable
video and music on demand, they will allow for more sophisticated service pro-
viding, fuelling even more the shift from retail buying to online purchasing. These
fast Ethernet connections will also enable data transfer at a reasonable cost and
speed, fuelling the machine-to-machine (M2M) communication revolution. But the
main game changer in the equipment area is the advent of smart phones or tablets
connected to 4G telecom technology. What is actually happening in front of our
eyes is the laying of the infrastructure foundation enabling everyone or everything,
everywhere in the city, to get access to whatever information or services he, she, or
it needs 24/7.

This chapter looks at the various opportunities and challenges linked to these
new Internet-based technologies and how they will affect public and private
transport. In order to get a glimpse of the impact of the internet on transportation,
let’s ﬁrst go back to the main communication modes. Basically, there are three
modes (a fourth one would be one to nobody but this isn’t hopefully the focus of
this book…):
(cid:129) One to one;
(cid:129) One to many; and
(cid:129) Many to many.

5.1 Introduction

285

In the past, communication was mainly “one to one” (i.e. phone) or “one to
many” (i.e. newspaper or television) types. However, with internet and new
software technologies “many to many” communications has become increas-
ingly popular. A good example of this technology is social media such as
Facebook or Twitter, which we are all familiar with. New technologies are also
blurring the distinction between communication types. For instance Skype, an
online phone service software, allows smart phones or tablets to be used in
groups or on a one to one basis. Media network such as Facebook allows
people to show a message on their board or to send individualized messages.

These technological changes are now at the heart of the news (or at least the
users’ news) and can immediately transmit worldwide information or picture of
events. Besides the social aspect of being connected 24/7, there is also a cultural
impact to get peers’ information and seeing the world through the eyes of our
connections. Furthermore the “Internet of Things” is changing our daily life and the
economy by for instance changing the buying decision process. We will now see
how this will inﬂuence transportation.

5.1.1 The Mobile Environment

For many years, the internet experience has been achieved through a PC in the
comfort of one’s home. Home wireless routers have helped diffuse wireless tech-
nology through the mass market but it is only with the introduction of smart phones
and tablets that the ordinary users have been able to connect on the move. For the
IT world, the possibility of getting in touch with potential clients outside of a
building opened new business opportunities. The problem for many years was still
the cost of data transfer. However, in this last decade mobile operators have started
offering ﬁxed rate packages with unlimited download capacity, opening the way for
24/7 internet access. With the introduction of 4G networks, mobile operators are
now able to improve download quality and speed, fuelling even more this
e-mobility revolution. Be it wirelessly or through ﬁxed lines, there is now almost no
limit to quality and quantity of bits of information transmission. This opens the
constant connectivity revolution within the cities.

5.1.2 Acquisition of Intelligent Thermostat Manufacturer

In January 2014, Google acquired Nest, a manufacturer of intelligent devices, such
as thermostats, which can through clever algorithms understand energy consumption
patterns and optimize the turning off and on of boilers and air conditioning to reduce
energy consumption.

286

5 Connected Cities

Imagining a future where home automation would be integrated within
Google’s own traveling application platform, we could envision smart phones
adapting their user’s daily environments through M2M communication,
according to anticipated time arrival and departure. To understand the beneﬁts
of such acquisition, we need to make the link with the expected exponential
growth in M2M communications likely to occur in building infrastructure.
Indeed, it is estimated that by 2022, 37 % of all connections will be in the area
of intelligent building, mainly coming from communication between HVAC
and security devices (2013 white paper)1.

This acquisition illustrates how big IT players are positioning themselves around
the “Internet of Things” opportunities. They propose and will continue to add
services and technologies to beneﬁt from the growth of M2M communications
[2 billion in 2013 to the anticipated 18 billion in 2022, of which 8 % will be in
automotive sector alone, according to the same study (see Footnote 1)]. As mobile
devices will have grown during this same period from 146 million to 2.6 billion
devices, with M2M communication accounting for 22 % of all cellular connections,
we understand better the need for a company such as Microsoft to buy the mobile
activities of once number one mobile manufacturer Nokia.

An outsider to this book, could ask herself, in what way is all this information
relevant to transportation. The fact is that the M2M revolution is already reshaping
the public transportation world and will impact the automotive industry as well. To
understand how a world without human interference can work or even as a matter
of fact write about e-mobility, connected cities, connected electrical grid, transport
Apps, etc., it is in our view impossible not to describe the main technological
factors behind this revolution: the Internet and its big players. We will very brieﬂy
explain what the main IP technologies are, and how all this works together, before
showing how this is affecting transportation means.

5.2 The “Internet of Things” Technologies

We realize that for non-IT specialist, this section will seem a little dry, but we will
try to keep it as simple as possible. For those that are really not software driven and
wish to skip the section, we will resume what is necessary to understand for a M2M
world where decisions must be made without human beings:
(cid:129) Rugged, proven software technology: in order for everyone to be able to
communicate, people must speak the same language. The Internet Protocol
(IP) technology has been this universal “lingua franca” for the last 40 years and
is likely to continue to be so for many more, regardless of its current limitations.

1M2M market in 2013 white paper published by Machina research (2013).

5.2 The “Internet of Things” Technologies

287

(cid:129) Fast wireless and ﬁxed networks: There is no communication without a
medium through which such information can be exchange. Like the strings of
the throat that create sounds that travel through air, there needs to be a way to
transmit and transport messages from one side of the world to the other. New
broadband IP networks developed by communications carriers can provide such
capacity.

(cid:129) Open software architecture: If people don’t know whom to talk to, we basi-
cally have a situation where everyone receives every conversation, ending up in
cacophony. Equipment must also know what information is pertinent and which
other devices should receive what kind of data. Service-Oriented Architecture,
with its open service approach, enables a harmonious exchange of information.
(cid:129) Service delivery platform: It typically provides services (control, creation, and
orchestration) and execution environments. In other words, it sets the rules of
how things work, especially for multimedia services.

(cid:129) Event-driven architecture: In a world without human beings, there needs to be
triggers for machines to send information to other machines, in order for the
system to take precise actions. These triggers are function of deﬁned events,
which can for instance, be as simple as time based or as complex as a camera
identifying someone in an area where he or she shouldn’t be.

(cid:129) Plug and Play: A world where hard programming doesn’t need to be done for
each machine to communicate simpliﬁes the introduction of thousands of M2M
products. In this M2M world, auto-discovery is the way to go.

5.2.1

Internet Protocol Deﬁnition

IP is a data-oriented protocol used for communicating data across packet-switched
networks. It is a standard that controls or enables connection, communication, and
data transfer between two computing endpoints. More precisely, it is a network
layer protocol usually associated with another communications protocol called
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and is encapsulated in a data link layer
protocol (e.g., Ethernet). The TCP/IP deﬁnes a set of rules to enable computers to
communicate over a network. It provides end-to-end connectivity specifying how
data should be formatted, addressed, shipped, routed, and delivered to the right
destination. It speciﬁes protocols for different types of communication between
connected devices and provides a framework for more detailed standards (Fig. 5.1).

5.2.2 TCP/IP Layers

Layer 4: Process or Application Layer This is where the “higher level” protocols
operate and include all processes involving users or device interactions. The
application determines the presentation of the data and controls the session.

288

5 Connected Cities

Fig. 5.1 TCP/IP is generally
described as having four
‘layers’ (or ﬁve if you include
the bottom physical layer)

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 

Application  

Transport 

Internet 

Network Access  

Physical layer  

Examples of these protocols are:
– Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP, the de facto standard for email

transmissions across the Internet);

– File Transfer Protocol (FTP);
– Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP, a communications protocol for the
transfer of information on intranets and the World Wide Web); and
– SOAP (a protocol for exchanging XML-based messages over computer

networks, normally using HTTP/HTTPS).

Layer 3: Transport Layer This is where ﬂow-control and connection protocols
exist. This layer deals with opening and maintaining connections, ensuring that
packets are in fact received.

Examples of these protocols are:
– Transmission Control Protocol: TCP;
– User Datagram Protocol (UDP). enables programs to send short messages

(called datagram);

– Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) deﬁnes a standardized packet format

for delivering audio and video over the Internet;

– Wireless Access Protocol (WAP), etc.

Layer 2: Internetworking Layer This layer deﬁnes IP addresses, with many routing
schemes for navigating packets from one IP address to another. The IP is the
primary protocol of this layer.

Layer 1: Network Access Layer This layer describes both the protocols used to
mediate access to shared media, and the physical protocols and technologies

5.2 The “Internet of Things” Technologies

289

necessary for communications from individual hosts to a medium (which, as
mentioned, can also be considered a ﬁfth layer). As new hardware technologies
appear, new network access protocols must be developed so that TCP/IP networks
can use this new hardware. Consequently, there are many access protocols—one for
each physical network standard.

Examples of these protocols are:
– WLAN is a wireless computer network that links two or more devices

using a wireless distribution method;

– WIFI is the name of a popular wireless networking technology that uses
radio waves to provide wireless high-speed Internet and network con-
nections, based on the IEEE 802.11 standard;

– WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access) is a tele-
communications technology aimed at providing wireless data over long
distances in a variety of ways, from point-to-point links to full mobile
cellular type access. It is based on the IEEE 802.16 standard; and

– Ethernet is a family of frame-based computer networking technologies
for Local Area Networks. It deﬁnes a number of wiring and signaling
standards for the physical layer, through means of network access at the
media access control (MAC)/data link layer, and a common addressing
format. Ethernet is standardized as IEEE 802.3.

Layer 0/Physical Layer This layer describes the physical protocols and technolo-
gies necessary for communications from individual hosts to a medium.

Examples of these technologies and physical protocols are:
– Ethernet physical layer;
– RS-232;
– Optical ﬁber;
– Coaxial cable; and
– Twisted pair.

IP is at the basis of the “Internet of Things” revolution, but it isn’t sufﬁcient to
make it work. A proper environment is also required, which can foster easy con-
nectivity between devices. One of the examples is the V2V network that we have
seen in a previous chapter where a mesh network topology is required. The choice
of the network topology isn’t neutral. For instance, it allows for the different net-
work elements to communicate, even when one of the elements is failing.

290

5 Connected Cities

5.2.3 Network Topology Description

Unmanned cars will require constant communication. Thus, selecting the right
network’s topology enabling failsafe communication will be crucial for the advent
of self driving cars.
Network topology deﬁnition Network topology is the study of
the network
arrangement of the elements (links, nodes, etc.), especially the physical and logical
interconnections between nodes. Any particular network topology is determined
only by graphical mapping of the real conﬁguration and the virtual connections
between nodes. The arrangement of the elements of a network gives rise to certain
basic topologies, which may then be combined to form more complex topologies.

Basic types of network topology The following design shows the basic network
topologies: point-to-point, bus, star, ring, mesh, and tree.

Point-to-point It is the simplest physical network. It can be an established per-
manent link between two end points or can be established by circuit-switching or
packet-switching technologies;

Bus network This topology can be described as a backbone (or trunk), where all of
the nodes of the network are connected to a common transmission medium and
where data can be received by all nodes in the network virtually simultaneously.

Star network It categorizes networks in which each of the network nodes is con-
nected to a central node with a point-to-point link. All data transmitted between
nodes in the network is transmitted to this central node, which is usually some type
of device that then retransmits data to some or all other network nodes;

5.2 The “Internet of Things” Technologies

291

Ring network It can be described as a topology in which each of the network nodes
is connected to two other nodes in the network and with the ﬁrst and last nodes
being connected to each other, forming a ring. All transmitted data between net-
work nodes travels in a circular manner and the data generally ﬂows in a single
direction only. Redundant systems which are common in public transport often use
a dual-ring network where each of the nodes of the network is connected to an extra
other network node;

Mesh network It is a network topology in which some of the nodes are connected to
more than one other node with a point-to-point link. This makes it possible to take
advantage of some of the redundancy that is provided by a physical fully connected
mesh topology, without the expense and complexity required for a connection
between every node in the network;

Tree network It is a hierarchical network topology where the top level of the
hierarchy is connected with a point-to-point link to other nodes that are one level
lower, while these intermediary level nodes also are connected via a point-to-point
link possibly to one or more other nodes that are one level lower in the hierarchy.

Hybrid network topology It is a type of network topology that is composed of one
or more interconnections of two or more networks that are based upon different
physical topologies. Hybrid networks use a combination of any two or more
topologies in such a way that the resulting network does not exhibit one of the
standard topologies (e.g., bus, star, ring, etc.).

292

5 Connected Cities

5.2.4 Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA)

In a world without man interfacing, machines or cars need to know who to talk to
and what to listen to. SOA, which is a computer system’s architectural style for
creating and using business processes packaged as services, allows doing so. It
deﬁnes and provisions the IT infrastructure enabling different applications to
exchange data and participate in business processes. These functions are loosely
coupled with the operating systems and programming languages underlying the
applications. SOA separates functions into distinct units (called services), which
can be distributed over a network and can be combined and reused to create
business applications. These services communicate with each other by passing data
from one service to another, or by coordinating an activity between two or more
services (Fig. 5.2).
Open architecture SOA architecture is not tied to any speciﬁc technology. It may
be implemented using a wide range of technologies, (such as the newer technol-
ogies: SOAP and Web Services). SOA can be implemented using one or more of
these protocols and, for example, might use a ﬁle system mechanism to commu-
nicate data conforming to a deﬁned interface speciﬁcation. The key is independent
services with deﬁned interfaces that can be called upon to perform their tasks in a
standard way, without the service having foreknowledge of the calling application,
and without the application having or needing knowledge of how the service
actually performs its tasks.

From a programming perspective, SOA can be regarded as a style of infor-
mation systems architecture that enables the creation of applications that are
built by combining loosely coupled and interoperable services. These services
inter-operate based on a formal deﬁnition that is independent of the under-
lying platform and programming language. The interface deﬁnition hides the
implementation of the language-speciﬁc service. SOA-based systems can

5.2 The “Internet of Things” Technologies

293

Fig. 5.2 Illustration of a SOA architecture with a service provider (primary engine underlying the
Web services), service broker (ensuring service information is available) and service consumers
(issuing one or more queries to the service broker to locate a service and determine how to
communicate with that service). Source Author

therefore be independent of development technologies and platforms (such as
Java, .NET, etc.). For instances, services written with Microsoft’s C# and
running on .NET platforms can be consumed by a client application.
Applications running .Net or Java platform can also consume services run-
ning on the other as Web services, which facilitates reuse.
– SOA beneﬁts: A ﬂexible, standardized architecture, which can better
support connections of various applications and sharing of data coming
from various sensors or systems. It achieves the goals of increased
interoperability.

– Programming reusability: SOA achieves this by allowing fairly large
chunks of functionalities to be tied together to form new ad hoc appli-
cations, which are built almost entirely from existing software services.
The larger the chunks, the fewer the interface points required to imple-
ment any given set of functionalities.

– Composability: SOA is a highly composable architecture (that brakes
complex problems into simple ones), which provides recombinant ser-
vices that can be selected and assembled in various combinations to sat-
isfy speciﬁc user requirements.

– Information exchange: SOA uniﬁes business processes by structuring
large applications as an ad hoc collection of smaller modules. These
applications can be used by different groups of people.

– Plug and Play: The key to a successful standard lies in its usefulness and
easy adoption in a particular ﬁeld/industry. Whenever adding new

294

5 Connected Cities

devices, SOA approach is enabling plug-and-play enhancements without
the need for binary code programming and subsequent recompilation of
software code by computer programmers.

– System upgradability: Newer technologies such as SOAP and Web
Services enable the separation between the interface and the implemen-
tation. In other words, the invoker of a service needs only to understand
the interface. Thus, the implementation can evolve over time, without
disturbing the clients of the service.

– System scalability: Traditionally, when a new device (i.e. sensor such as
a new camera or photoelectric switch) needed to be added to a system,
APIs would be the common communication method between vendor
supplied devices. The separation between interface and the implementa-
tion enables APIs to be eliminated all together.

5.2.5 Service Delivery Platform (SDP) and Access

Networking

Speaking the same universal language (IP) and knowing who to talk to and about
what subject (SOA) isn’t sufﬁcient for a world without human to work. Something
needs to set the rules of how things work and this is where SDP plays its role.

Thanks to new SDP standards and network architecture, telecommunication

companies are driving SOA implementation to:
(cid:129) Decouple applications via middleware from IT server/storage/network resources;
(cid:129) Compose new services using standard-based technology and protocols;
(cid:129) Reuse architectural components to lower costs and time to develop;
(cid:129) Improve conﬁguration and change management.

Telecom and network providers are putting their R&D efforts on evolving the
current generation of SDP to converge Web and Telecom domains. This increases
demand for communication-entertainment devices and services from internet users.
As the telecom and Internet networks evolve to 4G, the beneﬁts of the converged
Web and Telecom will become even more pronounced.

SDP refers to an architectural style applied to telecommunication infrastructure.
SDPs typically provide service creation, execution, and control environments, a
service orchestration and abstractions for media control, presence/location, inte-
gration, and other low-level communications capabilities. SDPs applied to business
applications often focused on the integration of telecom and IT capabilities.

5.2 The “Internet of Things” Technologies

295

Newer SDP technology: New standards for voice and image transfer have
been developed recently to support new technologies, such as Voice-over-IP
(VoIP) and Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).
IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS): The IMS is an architectural framework
for delivering IP multimedia to mobile users. To ease the integration with the
Internet, IMS as far as possible uses IPs such as SIP.

5.2.6 Next Generation Networks (NGN)

Speaking the same language (IP), knowing who to talk to and on which subject
(SOA) and understanding what are the rules to communicate (SDP), isn’t sufﬁcient
for a world without human interference to thrive. Indeed without a medium through
which such information can be exchanged, we literally have discussions between
mute equipment. Broadband IP networks, which provide the carrier capacity to
transmit and transport messages from one side of the planet to the other, are also
necessary.

New broadband IP networks developed by communications carriers (called Next
Generation Networks. NGNs) incorporate real-time multimedia communications
and service quality management functionality, providing high-quality video, vid-
eoconferencing, and high-reliability communications services in addition to exist-
ing ﬁxed and mobile telephone service. NGNs also support SDP functionalities
mentioned earlier, allowing communications carriers to offer application-building
functions to third parties.

NGN deﬁnition: The general idea behind NGN is that one network transports
all information and services (voice, data, and all sorts of media such as video)
by encapsulating these into packets, like it is on the Internet. NGN is able to
make use of multiple broadband and Quality Of Service (QoS) enabled
transport technologies, in which service-related functions are independent
from underlying transport-related technologies.

NGN involves three main architectural changes in the:

– Core network: NGN implies a consolidation of several transport net-
works each historically built for a different service into one core transport
network (mostly based on IP and Ethernet);

– Wired access network: NGN implies the migration from the ‘dual’
legacy voice to a converged setup in which the voice port is integrated on
IP (VoIP), allowing to remove the voice switching infrastructure; and

296

5 Connected Cities

– Cable access network: NGN convergence implies migration of constant
bit rate voice to CableLabs Packet Cable standards that provide VoIP and
SIP services.

Beneﬁts of NGN: In a NGN there is a more deﬁned separation between the
transport (connectivity) portion of the network and the services that run on
top of that transport. This means that whenever a provider wants to enable a
new service, they can do so by deﬁning it directly at the service layer without
considering the transport layer—i.e. services are independent of transport
details. Increasingly applications, including voice and images, will tend to be
independent of the access network (de-layering of network and applications)
and will reside more on end-user devices.

5.2.7 Event-Driven Architecture (EDA)

In a world of human being, using a “lingua franca” (IP), knowing who to talk to and
on which subject (SOA) under established rules (SDP) and through a medium
(NGN) would be sufﬁcient. However, in a world of machines or cars, there is one
element that is missing: when should they communicate. Without the notion of
event, all the equipment would have the capability to communicate but would be
paralyzed by the fact that they wouldn’t know when to talk or act. In a world of
machine to machine communication, the “when” is triggered by events.

EDA is a software architecture, which promotes production, detection, use of,
and reaction to events. This architectural pattern may be applied by the imple-
mentation of applications and systems transmitting events among loosely coupled
software components and services. It is clearly divided into two sections: event
selection and handling.

EDA typically consists of event consumers and event producers. Event con-
sumers subscribe to an intermediary event manager, and event producers publish to
this manager. When the event manager receives an event from a producer, the
manager forwards the event to the consumer. If the consumer is unavailable, the
manager can store the event and try to forward it later.

Building applications and systems around EDA allows these applications and
systems to be constructed in a manner that facilitates more responsiveness,
because event-driven systems are, by design, better adapted to unpredictable
and asynchronous environments.

In EDA the ﬂow of the program is determined by sensor outputs (such as
video cameras), user actions (mouse clicks, key presses) or messages from
other programs.

5.2 The “Internet of Things” Technologies

297

Fig. 5.3 EDA and SOA are complementary architectures. SOA 2.0 in fact, is a design approach
that deals with complex event processing. Source Author

Event-driven programs can be written in any language, although the task is

easier in languages that provide high-level abstractions to support it.

5.2.8 EDA and SOA Together

EDA complements SOA architecture because services can be started by triggers
such as events. Business systems beneﬁt from the features of both a SOA and an
EDA, since an EDA can trigger event consumers as events happen and loosely
coupled services can be quickly accessed and queried from those same consumers
(Fig. 5.3).

For systems to be highly responsive, they must be able to quickly determine the
necessary actions when events are triggered. To this end, events should be pub-
lished and consumed across all SOA boundaries,
including the layers of the
architectural stack and across physical tiers.

Events can be deﬁned as any published change in a system, platform, com-
ponent, business, or application process. They can be high-level and
business-oriented, or low-level and technical in character. Because events can
be transmitted and received, event-aware applications and services can
respond to the underlying changes as needed. The secret to understanding any
given event is to know its cause at the time the event occurred.

298

5 Connected Cities

5.2.9 Plug and Play Technology (PnP)

For a world of M2M communication to work, plug and play technology isn’t
required. Having said that, for a M2M world to grow exponentially, one must
simplify to its minimum the connectivity requirements of all equipment. Indeed, if
an object costing let’s say 5$ must communicate with the network, it needs to
automatically self connect or the cost of installing such device will make the
connectivity requirement unviable. The secret is auto-discovery on the network.

PnP is a concept that addresses integration’s interfacing aspects. Solutions are
assembled from components designed and delivered using common platform
architecture. The idea is that the platform architecture speciﬁes an interface pattern
that allows new components to:
(cid:129) Be deﬁned, providing specialized services based on the common interface

pattern—often in the form of an API;

(cid:129) Plugged in easily, using existing available component services;
(cid:129) Immediately substitute existing similar components from other vendors,

whenever supporting the same interface and services.

Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) is a set of computer network protocols
promulgated by the UPnP Forum. UPnP goals are to allow devices to connect
seamlessly and to simplify the implementation of networks (data sharing,
communications, and audiovisual content) and corporate environments. UPnP
achieves this by deﬁning and publishing UPnP device control protocols built
upon open,
Internet-based communication standards. UPnP architecture
allows peer-to-peer networking of PCs, networked appliances and wireless
devices. It is a distributed, open architecture based on established standards
such as TCP/IP, UDP, HTTP and XML.

Any UPnP compatible device can dynamically join a network, obtain an IP
address, announce its name, convey its capabilities upon request, and learn
about the presence and capabilities of other devices. Devices can leave the
network automatically without leaving any unwanted information behind.

5.3 M2M Communication

All the IT concepts running together around the TCP/IP technologies we brieﬂy
described before can form the basis for the M2M infrastructure. This M2M buzz
word refers to technologies that allow both wireless and wired systems to com-
municate. It is a broad term that doesn’t refer to any speciﬁc technology but only to
exchange of information and performs actions accordingly without the use of any

5.3 M2M Communication

299

human interference. Typically device to device communication network connec-
tions have evolved from “one-to-one” to “one-to-many” communications. In the
past, equipment would talk to each other via dedicated APIs, supervised by a
monitoring system. In this new IT environment, all connected device will inform
about and will only use the services that are relevant to it. The worldwide Web
expansion and the emergence of these new IT technologies have made it easier for
M2M communication to take place. We will in this section try to explain what
constitutes a M2M network, besides the software and telecom equipment we’ve just
presented.

5.3.1 Sensing Devices

Sensors come in all forms and have different measurement purposes. They will
include simple equipment such as photo-electric or electromagnetic sensors that can
detect the presence or passage of objects, but also smarter equipment that can detect
shapes or colors (i.e.,: cameras used in people proﬁling). Sensors can be embedded
within equipment (i.e.,: PTC sensor which measures motor heat) or not (i.e.,:
HVAC’s thermostats hanging on the wall). Sensors are fundamental because they
are the link with the real word and provide the basis for machine decision making.
In a world without human interference they will identify the events that will trig-
gered a set of services and actions linked to these services.

5.3.2 RFID

It is typically a chip that equips non-powered equipment or non smart equipment
that allows for small data recording and updates. There are typically two types of
RFID:
(cid:129) Passive: data is recorded or read when an object powers on the RFID; and
(cid:129) Active: it can send data according to a programmable logic.

The RFID cost is dropping quickly allowing for the simplest objects to be RFID
tagged, providing the basis for data storage and transfer of information of all
objects.

5.3.3 Algorithms

Computers are as intelligent as their algorithms are sophisticated. These algorithms
need to interpret data and make decisions based upon events or information sup-
plied by sensing devices. They are at the heart of the M2M revolution, because a

300

5 Connected Cities

world where only events would be gathered without any action decided would be
pointless. The secret of M2M lies in these algorithms, for which companies like
Google are willing to pay big money.

5.3.4 Communication Links and Networks

Wi-Fi, cellular, or ﬁxed links allow for data exchange between connected sensors
and computers. There is currently no standardized communication platform
throughout the M2M equipment providers but as seen, many IT advances are
fueling this evolution. Furthermore, with the growth in the M2M market, it is likely
that vendors will agree upon a standard or adopt directly these new TCP/IP tech-
nologies, which will continue simplifying the life of businesses wishing to develop
new equipment operating around these concepts. The market being potentially
huge, many companies are trying to push their proprietary solution, teaming up
with complementary technological partners.

Some of these most prominent consortiums are:
– AllSeen Alliance integrating companies such as Qualcomm, Microsoft,

– Industrial Internet Consortium, composed of companies such as General

LG Panasonic, Haier, etc.;

Electric, IBM, Cisco;

– Ipso Alliance promoting the use of IP technology; and
– Open Interconnect Consortium, with Broadcom, Dell, Samsung, etc.

As for many new technologies, in the end the industry is likely to adopt a
common standard. As a matter of fact, the Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers (IEEE) is already building such a consensus among several consortiums,
working on deﬁning this common architecture.

5.3.5 Transportation Within the M2M Market

We need to recognize that the adoption of these standards and technologies
will not be dependent on, nor be speciﬁc to the transportation industry. As
we’ve seen, M2M applications touch various areas of society. Currently, non
transport related activities are mainly related to warehouse and supply chain
management, logistics services, telemedicine and robotics, where tracking
and tracing applications play a big role. In the transportation area we can
identify a least three areas were M2M applications is bringing added value:

5.3 M2M Communication

301

(cid:129) Security (see section on security for more information);
(cid:129) Trafﬁc control and signaling (see section on trafﬁc control); and
(cid:129) Predictive Maintenance.

Furthermore SOA and EDA technologies have also started being implemented in
the public transport. In particular, projects ﬁnanced by the EU such as InteGrail,
Protectrail, and SECUR-ED, have taken up the challenge of testing across multiple
product platforms from various vendors, these technologies in the real environment
of various European city railway operations.

5.4 M2M Applied to Public Transport

We’ve discussed already a lot about driverless trains, where mobile and way-side
environments are connected through a control center. This is obviously an area
where the M2M buzz word could be used, though at all time someone in the
signaling control center can intervene. The technology being extremely speciﬁc,
related to safety and not IP based, it is usually not deﬁned within the M2M tech-
nology portfolio. This can however, be seen as semantic, as in the end the objective
of new moving block signaling technology is to use device to device interface to
avoid human errors. Human interference is usually reduced to intervening whenever
there are problems on the line.

5.4.1 Railway Onboard Networks

The TCP/IP revolution that transformed the “wired world” has not left the public
transportation world untouched. Obviously, on the way-side, the same trends as in
other utilities could easily be seen. However, what is interesting is that in the past
railway manufacturers have strongly focused on implementing
few years,
IP-technologies onboard vehicles.

Deployment of local area networks onboard rolling stock goes way back to
the 1980s. Technologies such as CAN bus, Proﬁbus or FIP, which were
originally developed for the automation and automotive industries, were
widely adopted by the public transport sector. Strangely, an old technology
such as CAN bus is still widely used throughout the automotive industry.
However and though it is true that IP technology is being implemented in the
railway industry, the prevailing railway technology still remains the Train
Communication Network (TCN), deﬁned in IEC 61375 and in IEEE 1473

302

5 Connected Cities

standards. Though different in their characteristics and performance, all these
old technologies have a common bus topology, which allows for limited data
transmission in the range of 1 KBit/s up to 10 MBit/s. Indeed, all these bus
topologies have physical limitation with respect to achievable bandwidth,
with technological limitation around 40 MBit/s transmission rate.

In order to overcome the old technologies’ limitation, railway manufacturers are
changing to point-to-point connections by using modern switching technologies,
such as Ethernet. The introduction of these switching technologies also offers the
possibility to adopt standardized and open layer protocols like TCP/IP. However,
contrary to IP networks in the ofﬁce or on the factory ﬂoor, train IP networks are
mobile and thus are dynamic with respect to their topology, because train com-
positions can change manually or automatically during operation, by adding or
removing train cars.

5.4.2 New IT Technologies that Affect Transportation

Dynamic addressing requires deﬁning a railway-speciﬁc approach for the deployment
of IP. This is especially true for concepts, such as addressing, network topology,
redundancy, and network operation. In particular, it requires sophisticated network-
ing technologies such as ring redundancy topology or wireless bridges (Fig. 5.4).

These more complex conﬁgurations need correspondingly advanced addressing

technologies. Two technologies are particularly useful in railway operations:
(cid:129) Automated ring coupling: After train consist re-conﬁguration, the status of
ports that are active or blocked can change. In order to have the system auto-
matically auto-conﬁgure, switches must determine by themselves which ports to
set as active, redundant, and inactive.

(cid:129) Automated wireless bridges: going wireless brings many advantages, especially
in refurbishment projects where coupling pins (equipment that will connect
electrically two train-consist together) are usually mostly used and where electrical
shielding issues are constant between car-sets. Wireless bridges using standards
such as 802.11n exist with auto-carriage conﬁguration.

New IEC standard (IEC61375-2-5) for Ethernet Train Backbone network, has
also been introduced to simplify communication across multiple train
consists. The ETB can use the Train Topology Discovery Protocol (TTDP),
to identify the elements of the train starting from the lead vehicle. Based on
the deﬁnition of the lead train (only remaining input given by the driver),
TTDP will extrapolate the other car consists. Then the ETB maps all onboard

5.4 M2M Applied to Public Transport

303

Fig. 5.4 With dynamic coupling each port of the ETN will automatically identify if it should be
active or inactive. Source Author

IP equipment throughout the various consists and uses a table to give then a
dynamic unique IP address. To work, the ETB also needs a third element,
which is a technology that allows ﬁber optic connections to deﬁne the pri-
mary and backup links in order for ETB to have redundancy capability.

Other technical working bodies are trying to deﬁne the sets of rules and concepts
necessary for the train to ground communication to work. The EU founded project
InterGRail worked on standard deﬁnition such as IEC 61375-2-6 within environ-
ments with heterogeneous technologies, (i.e.,: IPv4/IPv6; WIFI/GPRS; WEB
Services/FTP; etc.) enabling the railway community to proposed a uniﬁed approach
to train to way-side communication around TCP/IP technology.

5.4.3 Beneﬁts of IP Networks Onboard Trains

In the past years, railway manufacturers have strongly focused on implementing IP
technologies on vehicles, which beneﬁts from the fast technology improvements in

304

5 Connected Cities

ofﬁce and network technologies. This approach provides many beneﬁts for the
operators.

Operational beneﬁts:
– Lower cost by using standardized products supported by most vendors;
– Easy installation since higher system integration means less cables,

smaller couplers, etc.;

– Easy to maintain through remote maintenance;
– Integration with ground system data networks;
– Subsystem suppliers can access their systems for commissioning and

quality follow-up;

– Operators can access vehicle data;
– Remote train maintenance and advanced diagnostics.
– Integration of new functionalities enhancing the traveling experience:
– Network cameras for security supervision;
– Video entertainment; and
– Real-time information to travelers and passenger information system.

5.4.4 SOA Applied to the Railway Environment

One of the biggest current technological trends in the railway environment is the
evolution from older concepts of distributed computing and modular programming
toward a “built-upon service” concept, such as that found in SOA concepts. On the
way-side these technologies can already be found.

For instance NS, the Dutch railway operator has implemented in 2011, a
single network based on SOA for most operational services. This wireless
network covers 49 rail stations throughout the Netherlands. At each of these
stations public hotspots can be found for passengers but also for the
10,000 NS employees. Through PDAs, train conductors, platform staff, and
operations teams have access to different application services depending on
their access rights, regardless of where they are located. These services
include business-critical data such as train trafﬁc conditions and schedule,
employees working shifts, maintenance information, etc. Security staff
members are also alerted via their PDA when any abnormal behavior is
observed and can get real time streaming of CCTV images from within the
trains to identify potential hazardous situations. Train departure and arrival
information is easily accessible online in the station and on the trains for

5.4 M2M Applied to Public Transport

305

passengers. Inspectors check through their PDA, personal information of
customers trying to avoid paying tickets and, if necessary, ask security per-
sonnel to intervene. NS is also contemplating using mobile phone technology
for paperless proof of payment.

5.4.5

InteGRail

SOA networks, which can be found on the way-side, are rare within the onboard
environment. In 2011, the EU founded project called InteGRail allowed for inte-
gration tests, based on SOA onboard network.

It demonstrated that SOA could be implemented at the subset of rolling stock,
infrastructure, train operation, and trafﬁc management levels. InteGRail was suc-
cessful in demonstrating that cooperation between different applications was pos-
sible and integrated technologies, in order to achieve working prototypes. The wide
scope and size of the project allowed it to tackle all aspects of integration of railway
information systems, deﬁning an overall framework from which many speciﬁc,
more focused solutions could be derived. One of them is related to predictive
maintenance applied to railway subsystems.

5.5 Predictive Maintenance

Predictive maintenance has been for years, part of airplane manufacturers strategy
reliability and increase aircraft overall performance.
to improve equipment
Recently, predictive maintenance has become a hot topic of railway manufacturers.
Indeed, more and more private operators and Government authorities are looking at
the total cost of ownership in their rolling stock tender process. Cost of mainte-
nance, but also down-time of material, are important cost drivers of such concept
(Fig. 5.5).

Traditional asset management strategy focused primarily on reactive mainte-
nance management, where train operators only responded to failures. Predictive
maintenance, in comparison, takes asset management many steps further by helping
users monitor equipment condition and identify vulnerabilities before the equip-
ment failure, based on historical data and predictive models.

By predicting equipment failure, predictive maintenance helps reduce equipment
downtime, unplanned maintenance, and schedule disruption. Other advantages of
such concept include increased asset utilization and enhanced productivity, both of
which result in tangible beneﬁts and accelerated return on investment. Furthermore,
predictive maintenance increases reliability, reducing by the same token hefty

306

5 Connected Cities

Fig. 5.5 Choice of
maintenance strategy and
impact on cost and reliability
levels. Source Author

penalties that have been pushed to the railway manufacturers to ensure that the
trains’ performance doesn’t affect the operator’s QoS.

Several KPIs have been introduced to asses train performance, such as:
– Mean Time Between Service Affecting Failures, which basically iden-
tiﬁes the time between two failures that have an impact on operation, even
if not impacting trafﬁc ﬂow; and

– Mean Kilometers Between Failures, which identiﬁes the number of

kilometers performed between two failures.

With penalties and cost of ownership being so critical, no wonder why manu-
facturers have started investing heavily in predictive maintenance. This mainte-
nance methodology relies on the possibility to get precise status of different critical
train components and to make useful correlation between equipment status and the
probability that they will fail according to past experience, taking also in consid-
eration the impact of such failure on operation.

5.5.1 Constant Monitoring

The ﬁrst key element of predictive maintenance is the possibility to monitor on a
constant basis the various connected equipments. This seems obvious in a ﬁxed
environment where IP-based networks connected allow easy “many-to-many”
connections. This is much more complex in a mobile environment. Thus, the ﬁrst
brick that train manufacturers had to lay to create a predictive maintenance engine
was the possibility to create an onboard network using modern rugged network
technology, such as Ethernet (Fig. 5.6).

5.5 Predictive Maintenance

307

Fig. 5.6 Illustration of train onboard networks. Source Author

Many issues had to be solved such as automatic conﬁguring of the various
car-trains composition, electro-magnetic compatibility and shielding of data
packets (especially whenever connecting separated train sets through auto-
matic coupling), train distances of more than 100 mbit for gigabit Ethernet,
integration of CCTV with its high bandwidth requirements, etc.

This network technology is now mature and many trains are equipped with fast
Ethernet networks
information. However and as mentioned,
safety-related information is mostly still being sent through other network tech-
nologies (Fig. 5.7).

for non-vital

The second brick was to convince equipment and component suppliers to use the
IP technology. Such equipment involves engine, gearbox, traction system, brake,
door, battery, HVAC, etc. This was reasonably easy as these OEMs could see a
direct beneﬁt in terms of return of experience. With most vendors now using
Ethernet connections, all onboard equipment can now send status report and
communicate together.

The problem for railway manufacturer didn’t stop there. The information sup-
plied by the thousands of onboard equipment needed to be transferred to the
way-side for integration, in order to enable predictive maintenance. This means that
information needed to be uploaded and downloaded between train and based sta-
tions positioned along the tracks to relay the information to the predictive main-
tenance engine. This mobile environment meant additional issues, such as latency
time, bandwidth capacity, QoS, etc.

308

5 Connected Cities

Fig. 5.7 Illustration of data acquisition and treatment. Source Author

Latency problem: it is due to the fact that internet data is carried in small
packets. In M2M communication the issue is less about receiving smoothly
the information to ensure a good user’s experience than the fact that infor-
mation packets can be lost while traveling from one base station to the other.
The higher the speed of the train and the further apart the based stations are,
the more critical becomes this problem. In high speed train for instance,
communication needed to use speciﬁc satellite technology to upload and
download internet content.
Bandwidth capacity: Providing metadata information is usually not that
demanding in terms of bandwidth capacity. The issue is more linked to the
fact that other information such as audio or video stream must often be
downloaded simultaneously from the train.
Quality of Service: whenever partial information is sent, the system must
ﬁgure out which data wasn’t sent, so that it can be done in priority.

Though real-time communication is ideal for predictive maintenance, some
operators have decided to do the download at night, whenever the trains are in the
storage yards.

5.5 Predictive Maintenance

5.5.2 Data Crunching

309

The second critical element of this predictive maintenance is the capacity to gather
billion bits of information coming from thousands of equipment installed on hun-
dreds of trains, operating on many lines and make a sense out of it all. This means
that in the cloud, servers hosting databases, having constant access to various ﬂeets,
must receive and organize data in a meaningful way. This implies not only com-
paring values using historical data but also reorganizing it in a way that alarms and
new thresholds can be established.

5.5.3 Event-Driven Information

Some old railway folks might say: “well the industry always had alarms that
informed the operator whenever an issue was detected. Thus, nothing’s new under
the sun.” The reality is that going from alarms to event driven environments, is a
complete change of paradigm. Alarms or logs give a picture of the reality at a given
time. In order to make useful correlations between equipment states, data must be
organized according to the same master clock and stored together.

To help understand this point, let’s take an example. If a door fails within the
usual maintenance environment, a message will be sent that at a given time, a
speciﬁc door had a malfunction. There is nothing we can learn from such
information and someone from maintenance will have to search the causes of
that malfunction to solve the problem. Now, in an event driven environment,
for instance opening and closure time, as well as electric information (door
voltage and intensity), number of opening and closure already performed, etc.
can be identiﬁed. This not only helps understanding the root cause of the
problem, it allows also to build historical data that can be reuse for future
malfunction prediction.

For instance if the correlation between events shows that closure and
opening time was 5 % above the normal time and the number of opening and
closures was inferior to 1 % of the limited recommended number before
going into maintenance inspection, new procedures could be established with
new thresholds to take this malfunction into consideration.

310

5 Connected Cities

5.5.4 Useful Algorithms

Making useful correlations between events is good. Making intelligent decisions
upon such correlations is much better. By integrating past experience, these algo-
rithms can be improved over time, either through the work of analyst or through
self-learning algorithms. This area is still new but operators and railway manu-
facturers will want to increase the intelligence of their system to beneﬁt fully from
predictive maintenance.

5.5.5 Failure Criticality

Supposing that through an algorithm, the system can detect that one component is
likely to fail or as a matter of fact already failed (i.e.,: the air conditioning com-
pressor), the system may decide that it is not worthwhile stopping the train. Instead
the train will continue running and will wait for the train to be back to the main-
tenance station outside of operating hours, to replace the defective equipment. On
the more advanced systems integrated to maintenance software such as MaximoTM
from IBM, the system could automatically send a maintenance order to perform
such substitution after operating hours.

5.5.6 M2M Public Transport Market Estimation

M2M business characteristics in public transport are primarily driven by cost
reduction. For those who come from other industries this is a concept that can be
difﬁcult to understand. After all, any new business generates revenue growth. The
reality is that added value and its associated markup is usually given up by railway
manufacturers in the lowest bidder tenders, as it is perceived as a risk reduction
enabler or as a way to reduce cost of ownership.

In other words, solutions such as predictive maintenance aren’t sold for what
they can bring but rather as a tool to lower the total cost of ownership so that
rolling stock manufacturers can sell more trains and maintenance contracts.
Furthermore, the cost of such solutions (software, a few telecom and network
equipment) is usually very low in relation to the value of the global contract,
representing less than 1 % of the overall contract value. It is true, that some
manufacturers have been able to sell such predictive maintenance services as
a stand-alone contract, but once again the railway industry, isn’t keen on
independently from the complete maintenance
buying such services

5.5 Predictive Maintenance

311

management of their ﬂeet. The other M2M services such as Security and
trafﬁc controlling, are also cost driven and the M2M solutions are being used
to lower the costs of the tender proposals.

5.6 M2M Applied to Cars

M2M applied within the automotive industry is still in its infancy but picking huge
momentum as it is being pushed by EU and American initiatives to reduce fatalities
after car accidents. Indeed new EU regulations supporting the implementation of
eCall requiring car owners to have M2M technology enabling automatic notiﬁca-
tion to the nearest emergency center whenever drivers have been involved in a
crash, is likely to be mandatory by 2015. The cars will be required to send a
minimum set of information to the nearby emergency service. As a result of this,
technology experts estimate that response times could improve by up to 40 % in
urban areas and 50 % in rural areas, saving many lives. A consequential beneﬁt will
be that M2M telecom infrastructure will be available on all new cars and will be
able to transmit wirelessly whatever type of data, via a secure mobile network. Two
options are being considered for connecting cars to the network:
(cid:129) From the SIM that is inside of the driver’s mobile phone, through the car’s

Bluetooth or USB connection; and

(cid:129) From an embedded SIM card inside the vehicle.

Many people within the industry are predicting that the EU Commission will
soon make the embedded SIM mandatory, as it removes uncertainty over mobile
availability and would lead to more consistent responses.

5.6.1 Re-programmable SIM Cards

In 2013, the association of mobile operators agreed on a standard for reprogram-
mable SIM cards. Though these SIM cards could also be used for voice trans-
mission (Apple is pushing for such a solution), the main beneﬁts of such technology
is to connect devices.

By doing this, SIM cards could be ﬁxed to the car and allow switching from
one telecom provider to the other according to data transmission quality or
even price. For instance, if automakers were to issue their own SIM cards and

312

5 Connected Cities

rent spare capacity of operator’s network, they could save $billion a year on
operating cost and propose an attractive package to car owners.

By forcing car manufacturers to work together for once on driverless func-
tionalities around a common onboard network platform around the Ethernet/IP
technology, car manufacturers could also save billion on harness and cable design.

5.6.2 Existing Onboard Car Networks

Probably drivers don’t know that high end cars integrate around 1000 wires,
totaling a few kilometers of cables. Modern cars have dozens of different electronic
units, such as engine management system, power steering, electric windows,
HVAC, lighting, etc. all controlled by chips that use wiring harnesses to commu-
nicate. In fact, cars have been using for years many onboard network technologies.
The most widely used technology—CAN Bus—was created as early as 1984.

At least three network topologies have been used by the automotive industry.

(cid:129) Linear topology: It is used in drive train and body network systems;
(cid:129) Ring topology: It is used for multimedia; and
(cid:129) Star topology: This network is low cost design single wire interconnect net-
work for use in on-off equipment such as seat control, door locks, mirrors, etc.

Today most vehicle innovations involve electronics and software, and the
number of control units (e.g., Dynamic Stability Control) has increased signiﬁcantly
over recent years as a result. For instance, up to 70 control units are ﬁtted in
premium-class cars. The latest models boast several hundred electric and electronic
functions, and up to 115 MBytes of program code and data on board. Up to four
different bus systems, such as CAN, LIN, MOST, and FlexRay, work side-by-side
to transport electronic data around today’s vehicles. All are equipped to meet
demands of their individual areas of application, but all speak their own automotive
languages (Fig. 5.8).

5.6.3 Onboard Car IP Networks

the ﬁrst all Ethernet-based IP network will only hit

The automotive industry hasn’t yet embraced the TCP/IP revolution. It is expected
that
the market around
2015– 2016, enabling 100 Mbps throughput. The reality is that it wasn’t really
needed till today. It is only with the advent of cameras, infotainment services and
more generally of all the technologies required to support driverless cars that such
capacity became a necessity. As the new safety-related technologies will require

5.6 M2M Applied to Cars

313

Fig. 5.8 Illustration of the various car networks. Source Author

transparent communication across the automotive industry, the big market players
have decided to team up their efforts to create a common network platform.

Open Alliance: This group is formed by an alliance of around 200 car
manufacturers and OEM companies (i.e.: Ford, GM, Daimler, Honda,
Hyundai, BMW, Toyota, Volkswagen, Renault, Bosch). Its aim is to create a
single vehicle Ethernet standard around the IEEE 802.3 working group, to
establish 100 Mbps and 1 Gbps onboard Ethernet networks.

Working groups are still establishing the requirements for the different
sub-systems. Currently the groups are assessing several scenarios with as
much as 35 Ethernet nodes. These scenarios include sophisticated driver
assistant systems such as 3D and infrared cameras, radar sensors, telematic
transceiver systems for GPS and vehicle-to-vehicle communications.

IP beneﬁts IP networks with their faster network connections will improve per-
formance (for instance,
increasing response time between ABS braking and
drivetrain systems). A collateral beneﬁt will be a reduction in weight due to
Ethernet ports connection, which requires fewer cables. It is estimated by some
industry experts, that by around 2020, 100 million of such Ethernet ports will be
found worldwide (Fig. 5.9).

5.6.4 New M2M Added Value Services

By making M2M (and most likely V2V communication infrastructure) technology
mandatory, Governments are helping the automotive industry get access to other
beneﬁcial information. Automotive manufacturers and their OEM suppliers can get

314

5 Connected Cities

Fig. 5.9 Connecting all equipment through an ethernet backbone and router switches. Source
Author

access to onboard equipment status. This allows better understanding of the vehi-
cles’ performance and driving behaviors. Furthermore, this enables car manufac-
turers to develop and evolve relationships by having continuous exchange of
information with their key-stake holders (dealers, suppliers, and consumers) during
the lifetime of
their product. This should bring to market new innovative
value-added services, but also create new service offering from other automotive
players such as:
(cid:129) Fleet managers: they will be able to know in real time the status of their car

ﬂeet, helping them manage better their assets;

(cid:129) Insurers: they will be able to track the portfolio of their insured cars (Fig. 5.10).
(cid:129) Emergency call centers: A major M2M beneﬁt is to enable immediate auto-
matic contacts with emergency call centers. EU’s initiative called eCall was
voted on March 2014 and will impose to all car manufacturers to equip after
October 2015 (this date could be slightly postpone), an emergency call system.

The minimum set of information that will be sent through eCall includes:
– Accident information: the exact crash site location, time of incident, travel

direction;

– Car information: car’s category, fuel type; and
– Safety information: number of buckled safety belts.

It is anticipated that this extra device will cost a few hundred euro.

(cid:129) Safety and security service providers: automatic dialing to roadside services
or vehicle assistance will be possible, informing about potential hazardous sit-
uation such as cars stopped on the side of the lane or in tunnels. Car thefts
immediate reporting to police station will also be possible.

5.6 M2M Applied to Cars

315

Fig. 5.10 Illustration of new service offering

(cid:129) Electric energy providers: Some service providing will also include the
capacity to manage the connection between home or energy providers for
electric vehicle recharging.

As in the railway industry, new innovative services will be in the area of:
(cid:129) Remote monitoring and diagnostics: Basic remote monitoring of vehicle
equipment is already possible. Some simple diagnostic such as a malfunction of
equipment can be made. The advantage of such services is that drivers will be
able to be assisted from the comfort of their home or on the side of the road, by
experts that could detect quickly the cause of a car failure. It could also enable
the same revolution that has already started in the railway environment of
predictive maintenance. Some high end services already provide data about the
car’s state to identify problems before they happen. For instance, analytics can
diagnose engine or braking problems that would in the past been caught only at
the garage maintenance check-up. However and as seen for railways, predictive
maintenance will require synchronized event driven information, supplied in
real or quasi real time. Besides the issue about privacy (i.e.,: geo-localization,
speed, etc.), communication cost might also end-up reducing the attractiveness
of such services.

(cid:129) In-car infotainment and entertainment: As people spend more and more time
in their car, stuck in trafﬁc jam, they wish to create an environment that feels like
home. Car manufacturers are providing passengers with internet access to radio
and over-the-air content delivery. Drivers can also use their system to play
music from their smart phone, while other passengers can simultaneously
connect laptops, tablets or smart phones via the vehicle’s WIFI system. DVD or
Blu-ray disk players can also be found to play movies on rear end or even
dash-board screens.

(cid:129) Safe telecom network: The embedded SIM will enable 3G/4G-based devices
from common design platforms to connect and communicate through multiple
mobile broadband networks offered by different wireless operators.

316

5 Connected Cities

The SIM card will provide:
– Enhanced coverage, redundancy and reliability;
– Application processing capabilities;
– GPS for location with navigation system update;
– Wi-Fi for connectivity with user consumer devices (hotspot mode) and

wireless displays; and

– Bluetooth for hands-free calling and connectivity with tablets or PCs.

5.6.5 M2M Versus V2V or V2I

As indicated for trains, specialized communication between vehicles (V2V) or
between vehicles and the road infrastructure (V2I) are in our view separate seg-
ments of the M2M market. This can be seen once again as semantics as the ﬁnal
objective is to have no interface between cars and human beings. As mentioned, the
main difference is that V2V and V2I are safety-related and use-speciﬁc commu-
nication technology (i.e.,: Dedicated Short Range Communications, based on
WiFi-like 5.9 GHz technology without preidentiﬁcation required).

5.6.6 M2M Private Transport Market Estimation

M2M in private transport is price driven and thus can be more easily assessed. In
order to do so, we need to analyze three different market segments: equipment,
communication, and added-value services.
M2M Equipment We’ve seen that the cost of an embedded SIM card with con-
nection to other navigational systems will cost around 250 euro per car. In the last
years, the number of cars sold topped 80 million. As it should become mandatory
within the next years, we could estimate this market for the equipment to reach euro
20 billion before 2020, depending on adoption rates outside of Europe and North
America.

M2M Communication In 2010, around 450 million European had 660 million SIM
cards. Included in this, 4.3 million cars had already onboard telematic system, such
as theft prevention, emergency call, and motor insurance tracking. Despite reduc-
tion in price, higher volume of data transported allowed the telecom industry to
grow. In 2010, the mobile industry generated 175 billion euro. Thus, and all things
being equal, yearly revenue per SIM card was 265 euro that year. Using this

5.6 M2M Applied to Cars

317

amount, which is probably acceptable to most car owners, we would again identify
20 billion euro in market opportunities.

Big telecom providers have tried to close deals with car manufacturers to
position themselves in regards to this market. Vodafone announced a new
agreement with Volkswagen and Audi in Europe to provide connected car
services through embedded global SIM cards, starting with new Audi models
from 2015. With a strong European presence, Vodafone wishes to provide
high-speed internet services throughout that continent. Telefónica a Spanish
mobile provider has also teamed up with U.S. carmaker Tesla to propose an
in-car TV demonstration. Ferrari, Mercedes-Benz and Volvo also demon-
strated a new in-car user interface from Apple, named CarPlay, at the 2014
Geneva International Motor Show.

5.7 E-Mobility Technology Limitations

M2M, V2V, and moving block technologies, as well as the electriﬁcation of
transport have the possibility to change completely the landscape of the transpor-
tation business. Thousands of new companies will create new services that will
make our trips safer, cheaper, more environmentally friendly, productive, and
comfortable. New business models and software applications are already being
developed to beneﬁts from such disruptive technologies. However, in order to rip
the full beneﬁts from these technologies, society will need to solve a crucial
problem: the lack of investment in new infrastructure. The attractiveness of these
technologies is indeed somewhat limited if city residents can only drive at 10 km/h
or need to wait for three passing-by metros to be able to commute. As we will see in
the next section, there is a growing gap between the infrastructure funding and
ﬁnancing needs and Governments or private sector capacity. We will propose
solutions that, with courage, could solve problems not only in the rich world but
also in poor countries of Asia and Africa.

Acknowledgments and disclaimer The use of pictures, or references made to studies or com-
panies and their brand does not in any way suggest that the Authors of such studies or the
mentioned Companies endorse in any way this book or its content. The author endeavors in
respecting the copyright subsisting any of the graphics, and texts that he uses, to use graphics and
texts he has himself created or to use graphics and texts not covered by copyright. All trademarks
and brand names quoted in the book including those protected by copyright of third parties are
subject unreservedly to the provisions of current copyright law and the rights of ownership of the
registered copyright holders.

318

5 Connected Cities

Companies and Brands Stated in the Chapter

(cid:129) Facebook Inc.
(cid:129) Twitter Inc.
(cid:129) Google Inc.
(cid:129) Nest Labs
(cid:129) Skype is division of Microsoft Corporation
(cid:129) Microsoft Corporation
(cid:129) Nokia
(cid:129) .NET and C# are Trademarks of Microsoft
(cid:129) Java is a trademark of Oracle Corporation
(cid:129) Qualcomm
(cid:129) LG Corporation
(cid:129) Panasonic Corporation
(cid:129) Haier Group
(cid:129) General Electric Company
(cid:129) IBM/International Business Machines Corporation
(cid:129) Cisco Systems
(cid:129) Broadcom Corporation
(cid:129) Dell Inc.
(cid:129) Samsung
(cid:129) Nederlandse Spoorwegen/NS
(cid:129) Maximo is a trademark of IBM
(cid:129) Apple Inc.
(cid:129) Ford Motor Company
(cid:129) General Motors Company
(cid:129) Daimler AG
(cid:129) Honda Motor Co., Ltd.
(cid:129) Hyundai Group
(cid:129) Bayerische Motoren Werke AG/BMW
(cid:129) Toyota Motor Corporation
(cid:129) Volkswagen group
(cid:129) Renault S.A.
(cid:129) Robert Bosch GmbH
(cid:129) Vodafone Group plc
(cid:129) Audi AG
(cid:129) Telefónica S.A.
(cid:129) Tesla Motors Inc.
(cid:129) Ferrari S.p.A.
(cid:129) Mercedes-Benz is a division of Daimler AG
(cid:129) Volvo Group/AB Volvo
(cid:129) CarPlay is a trademark of Apple Inc.

Chapter 6
New Transportation Business Models

Acronyms

International Energy Agency
Operational expenses
Pay-per-click model

BRICS Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa
CAPEX Capital expenditure
IEA
OPEX
PPC
PPHPD Passengers per hour and per direction
Private public partnership
PPP
Return on investment
ROI
Special purpose enterprise
SPE
Sovereign wealth fund
SWF
Total cost of ownership
TCO
Vehicle to vehicle
V2V

According to the World Economic Forum, the yearly global spending on infra-
structure is around $2.7 trillion while the needs are around $3.7 trillion. This gap of
almost 30 % is likely to increase as population of Africa and India continues
growing quickly, putting even stronger pressure on transport infrastructure. In the
past, most of this money came from Governments. Transportation was seen as a
public service, which wasn’t supposed to be subject to market forces.

Today, few countries can afford funding such expensive projects and fewer
are doing it. China and Middle East Countries such as the GCC and Saudi
Arabia are probably the current exceptions. Governments from the developed
countries that could still afford improving their transport means by using the
current very low borrowing rates prefer to use their budget to fund recurring
costs rather than invest
in new electric grids, water treatment plants or
transportation projects. If borrowing rates are low and Countries like the US
didn’t even invest in times of high unemployment in labor intensive projects,
what will happen to their crumbling infrastructure? Will they wait for their
bridges to fall apart before they take the necessary measures? We’ve stated

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
S. Van Themsche, The Advent of Unmanned Electric Vehicles,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-20666-0_6

319

320

6 New Transportation Business Models

the USA, but the problem isn’t limited to this Country. Developing countries
like Brazil, Argentina or India have systematically under-invested in infra-
structure. In poor countries the problem is even worst. There, Governments
just can’t afford to build and maintain basic infrastructure, such as power
station, roads or railway lines.

The issue is that the global ﬁnancial resources, which would be needed to be
allocated to infrastructure projects, are so huge that Governments won’t be able to
solve the problem all by themselves. For instance, $16.6 trillion will need to be
invested worldwide in roads only, between 2013 and 2030 to meet the growing
institute. Furthermore,
population needs, according to the McKinsey Global
$4.5 trillion will have to be allocated to railway projects during this same period. If
Governments won’t or can’t fund this level of investment, how and who will
ﬁnance a large portion of these $21 trillion? The obvious answer is the private
sector will. However, this isn’t a good answer. If the investment opportunities were
attractive enough, the current situation wouldn’t show such a gap.

Furthermore, the problem humanity is facing is even more drastic when we take
into consideration the investments needed in green solutions to avoid global
warming. According to the IEA, $500 billion in yearly green energy investments
are required. Public transport, which could reduce signiﬁcantly carbon emission and
pollution levels, could be part of the solution. By investing in railway networks,
society would kill
two birds with one stone, reducing CO2 emission while
improving the life of billion of citizens. New business models that the e-mobility
revolution can bring such as car sharing, car pooling, or convoying on dedicated
lanes have the possibility to solve this problem by reducing the need for more
infrastructures. This chapter will describe the likely ﬁnancial players and new
business models that can help bridge that gap.

6.1 Project Finance

Understanding how to solve this yearly $1 trillion gap means knowing:
(cid:129) Which ﬁnancial players could be attracted to such opportunity;
(cid:129) What are the legal conditions that make such project attractive;
(cid:129) What are the risks that the private sector won’t accept;
(cid:129) What are the additional subsidies or tax exemptions that would increase the

(cid:129) Finding new ﬁnancial solutions that could help boost the investors’ conﬁdence

projects’ attractiveness; and

in such projects.

We will ﬁrstly explain the different project ﬁnance concepts to which these pri-
vately ﬁnanced investments usually answer to.

6.1 Project Finance

321

6.1.1 Corporate Versus Project Finance

The simplest way for a project to happen is to ﬁnd a corporation that will accept to
ﬁnance a project from its own balance sheet. For small investments, this is usually
possible. However, Finance 101 will tell us that money could be better used for
other activities related to the core business of the corporation.

For instance, a high tech company could make better use of the share-holders'
money than to buy its head-ofﬁce building. Besides the notion of return on
investment (ROI) and immobilization, many companies’ stock value is also
assessed on the ratio of revenues versus equity. In other words, many
ﬁnancial analysts will sanction companies that have too many assets. This is
why few companies like tying their money to big investments and will only
do so if they don’t have the choice. Railway manufacturers that invest in
concession usually will do it because this is the only way for them to sell their
own rolling stock technology. If they can’t avoid it, these companies will
want to be sure that their participation in the project and the money that they
will earmark for it, as well as the maximum liability they will be exposed to,
will be limited to the amount of their participation in the project. This is
typically when project ﬁnance kicks in.

Project ﬁnance is a method of ﬁnancing in which the lender looks primarily to
the revenues generated by a single project, both as the source of repayment and as
security for the exposure. The deﬁnition given by the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision,
International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital
Standards (“Basel II”) is:

Project ﬁnance may take the form of ﬁnancing the construction of a new capital installation,
or reﬁnancing an existing installation, with or without improvements. In such transactions,
the lender is usually paid solely or almost exclusively out of the money generated by the
contracts for the facility’s output, such as the electricity sold by a power plant. The
borrower is usually a special purpose entity (SPE) that is not permitted to perform any
function other than developing, owning, and operating the installation. The consequence is
that repayment depends primarily on the project’s cash ﬂow and on the collateral value of
the project’s assets.

By limiting their total ﬁnancial exposure to a deﬁned level, companies can
accept risks that could otherwise bankrupt the corporation and would make the
investment unattractive.

To illustrate a structured Project Finance, let’s say a railway manufacturer
invests $10 million in a $200 million project to secure a rolling stock sale of
$100 million. The other investment partners would have to foot in $40 mil-
lion, if we consider the remaining $150 million to be ﬁnanced by bank loans.

322

6 New Transportation Business Models

Thus, the manufacturer would own 20 % of the equity. We could suppose a
net proﬁt of 10 % on the equipment and a linear $2 million yearly proﬁt on
the results of the railway operation over 20 years after debt repayment. If the
SPE would pass the entire $40 million proﬁt as dividend, the overall proﬁts
for the manufacturer would be $18 million ($10 million for equipment and
20 % of $40 million) over that 20-year period. Through ﬁnancial calculation
such as net present value (current value of money after discounting the cost of
money), the manufacturer would need to estimate if the ROI would be suf-
ﬁciently attractive. The issue is when proﬁt isn’t there or when manufacturers
need to add more equity. In our example, the manufacturer could have to
invest in theory up to $200 million if all the other partners went bankrupt just
to ﬁnalize the project and could have to absorb operational
losses for
20 years. In other words, with Project Finance, the manufacturer could hope
for $18 million in proﬁt with its maximum $10 million exposure on equity.
With Corporate Finance, the proﬁt level would be the same but with a
maximum exposure of $200 million, with operating risks over 20 years.
Furthermore, the manufacturer would most likely have to book on his balance
sheet
the $200 million assets and the loan which would deteriorate its
ﬁnancial status (under special conditions, the manufacturer could avoid to
integrate the SPE assets in its balance sheet).

Thus one of the ﬁrst conditions for the private sector to become an active player
in the infrastructure ﬁnancing market is to have laws enabling Project Finance on
a ﬁnal recourse basis, where the lender or the Government cannot go after the
corporation. Having such laws isn’t sufﬁcient though. The market needs also
ﬁnancial institutions that accept to play by these rules. For instance in Brazil,
BNDES one of the few players which mission is to ﬁnance project at reasonable
interest rates, won’t accept nonﬁnal recourse project ﬁnancing. Projects still happen
because other players will take the risk that the banks or the Government won’t.
Thus understanding who the likely players are and what makes them accept projects
is key for creating a vibrant private market.

6.1.2 Private Financial Players

There are several players involved in transportation projects with different roles:
(cid:129) Lenders: usually private or public banks
(cid:129) Institutional investors
(cid:129) Corporate investors
(cid:129) Manufacturers
(cid:129) Civil companies.

6.1 Project Finance

323

We will ﬁrst analyze the potential roles of ﬁnancial institutions and try under-
standing if there is an appetite for infrastructure projects.

infrastructure ﬁnancing was dominated by
Potential bank role In the past,
European banks (i.e., Paribas, Deutschbank, UBS). Due to the subprime crisis,
many of these banks have become more conservative and are focusing on
improving their balance sheet. Furthermore, under the “Basel 3” banking rules,
banks have less incentive to get involved in long-term ﬁnancing. As typical big
infrastructure project ﬁnancing duration is 15–25 years, the ﬁnancial resources for
Project Finance have all but dried up.

Banks as we’ve just said are penalized to offer long-term loans but have also a
much lower appetite for risk. In the past and on projects with reasonable
predictivity and visibility, banks would ﬁnance up to 90 % of the project
needs. This would be the case for instance on highway project ﬁnance in rich
Countries. Today for these same projects, banks will only offer up to 70 % of
the ﬁnancing needs. The rest must come from private owners or from other
institutions, which cost of borrowing is usually higher.

If there is less appetite from banks to ﬁnance projects, who could replace banks

and bridge this 20 % difference in level of ﬁnancing?

Long-term investors With so much money required, infrastructure is now attracting
long-term investors such as insurers, pension funds, and sovereign wealth funds. It
is estimated that these institutions have around $50 trillion to invest and that not
even 1 % of their investments are in the infrastructure sector. Were they to increase
it to 10 %, a huge portion of the gap would be ﬁlled. This level should be rea-
sonably achievable as there is a clear correlation between their long-term ﬁnancing
obligations and the long-term proﬁtability of such project ﬁnanced investments.
Furthermore, once the risks from the construction phase are over, the revenue
inﬂow usually offers high predictivity and is usually protected from inﬂation and
economical crisis.

A bigger role from these institutions would bring three major advantages:
– More long-term capital allocated to transport would not by itself lead to
much more projects, but the increased access to capital would lower
capital cost to the sector and hence make more projects bankable.

– These long-term investors are interested in buying back the assets of
projects already developed, freeing the capital of private players that don’t
wish to immobilize for the length of the concession, such as manufac-
turing and civil companies.

324

6 New Transportation Business Models

– Having onboard such players also offers a protection against Government
interference, as it is more difﬁcult for a Government to penalize let’s say a
pension fund than a private equity ﬁrm.

Private equity ﬁrms Corporate buyout remains the core business of private equity
companies such as Blackstone, Apollo, KKR & Co., and Carlyle Group LP. However,
as competition is becoming ﬁercer, many private equity ﬁrms have started analyzing
possibilities to invest in infrastructure and some have already started doing so.

For instance Blackstone, one of the most well known private investor has
invested $125 million in a $900 million hydroelectric project in Uganda,
ensuring a 2/3 stake in the project. Besides power projects like the dam in
Uganda, Blackstone has used billions of dollars of its investors’ money to buy
ships and gotten into ocean transport. Blackstone is said to pursue similar
dam projects elsewhere in Uganda, in Tanzania and along Rwanda’s border
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Unfortunately, for the transportation area most of these infrastructure projects are
in the energy business. The ROI of transportation projects would need to be higher
(typically around 10 %) to attract such players.
Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF) Total wealth of the world’s SWFs amounts to more
than $5 trillion, of which 60 % belong to the world’s oil and gas exporters. A few of
these SWFs, like Singapore’s Temasek and Abu Dhabi’s, have already started
investing in infrastructure project. However, the great majority are only allowed to
invest in listed equities, bonds, and real estate. For instance, this is the case of
Norway’s SWF, the world’s largest SWF.

However, there is a move for Norway to allow their SWF to invest directly in
projects, though only renewable energy ones. If this SWF was given the green
light to expand its portfolio to include direct investments in renewable energy
assets and ideally other green infrastructure project (i.e.: railway though this
isn’t even considered yet), this could potentially have a signiﬁcant change on
infrastructure ﬁnancing. For instance, if the Fund was allowed to invest up to
5 % of its total assets into infrastructure, the Fund could on average allocate
in the range of 10 $Billion USD per year to the green energy investment
market from 2015 onwards. As Norway’s SWF is seen as a peer leader
among SWFs when it comes to governance and social responsibility, a
decision to let Norway’s Fund seek low-carbon direct investment opportu-
nities, could be followed by other SWFs.

6.1 Project Finance

325

Private companies In order to ﬁnd potential investors, that will take over the con-
struction and operating risks, Governments have very often drafted private public
partnership (PPP) contracts that made it interesting or compulsory for companies that
would be taking over the construction and the system to be involved in.

For most of these companies blocking for a 30-year period their precious
assets is something they do reluctantly. Indeed, technology and civil com-
panies are usually ﬁnancially assessed against the level of equity they use and
often punished by the ﬁnancial markets for using too much equity in regards
to debt or asset. Furthermore, the amounts invested in the SPC’s equity are
usually better used in developing new products or new markets. In other
words, these companies could achieve a much better return on investment
allocating this money to other needs, than the 5–7 % that PPP opportunities
usually advocate. Even though by doing this, they could win a portion of the
construction or system scope, they still resent blocking equity for such a long
period. In some case, they add extra provisions in their cost to compensate for
lower ROI or rush after entry into service operation to sell their equity to
long-term ﬁnancial investors, which are happy to lock long-term asset for a
5–7 % steady income ﬂow.

For this and other reasons, concessionaire companies, usually composed of
long-term investor shareholders or the ﬁnancial institutions’ specialized divisions in
concession, often prefer not to have the construction or system companies within
the operating entity. By doing this, they usually can beneﬁt from their lower rate of
borrowing and avoid any additional costs that construction and system companies
might decide to add within their equity.

6.1.3 Private Participation in Transport Infrastructure

Governments are always highly involved in transportation projects. This involve-
ment ranges from direct ownership and management to elaborating a regulatory
framework that deﬁnes operational standards. The trend toward greater private
involvement in transportation started with the privatization in the 1980s of existing
transportation ﬁrms. New relationships started to be established with ﬁnancial
institutions since public funding and subsidies were substantially reduced and new
competitors entered the market. Then, many transportation ﬁrms were able to
expand through mergers and acquisitions into new markets.

In the many countries where Governments’ responsibilities and roles are well
deﬁned, the private sector will accept to get involved in all phases of transportation
project, from the early stage of the project (project ﬁnancing and feasibility studies)
to the building phase (design, construction and project management) as well as the

326

6 New Transportation Business Models

operation phase (operation and maintenance). Contemporary transportation infra-
structure ﬁnancing is facing the following challenges:
(cid:129) Lack of funding
(cid:129) Divergence of purpose between political and commercial interest;
(cid:129) Uncertainty in the outcome on overall transport system performance; and
(cid:129) Time frame misalignment between ﬁnancing and operation.

6.2 Transport Infrastructure Privatizations

In many countries, government and public authorities are under a lot of pressure to
improve mobility, while at the same time must cut public deﬁcits to bring debt level
in line with their reimbursement capacity. In such environments, privatization can
be seen as an attractive solution. Higher efﬁciencies that can be brought by the
private sector, resulting from lower operating and maintenance costs, are usually an
important reason invoked to justify privatization. In railway and road transport,
there are very few privatizations where Government assets are sold to private
investors (contrary to airlines or maritime sectors). In general, Governments decide
to maintain land ownership and grant a concession to the private sector.

6.2.1 Concession Agreement of Existing Transport

Facilities

The ﬁrst dominant form of privatization is to grant the right to operate road or
railway lines for a given period of time. As road concessions are usually proﬁtable,
the concession is mainly awarded without any subsidy. In general, the winner of the
road concession is the company that will require from road users the lowest pay-toll
amount possible. Usually,
road
re-asphalting will also be required. In public transport, existing transportation
operations are rarely proﬁtable, except for regional and high speed concessions. In
most cases, the winner of the concession is the company that will make to the
Government the most attractive offer, resulting from the lowest subsidy and the
lowest fare level possible.

lane duplication or

investments

such as

6.2.2 New Project Concession

The second popular form of privatization is through project ﬁnancing. This strategy
brings new sources of ﬁnancing but with a higher cost of borrowing (typically most
companies will pay around 2–3 % base over the Government’s borrowing cost) that

6.2 Transport Infrastructure Privatizations

327

will need to be compensated by better technical and managerial expertise during
construction and operational phases. Several types of tendering process exist.

The one with the most demanding private sector involvement is design,
ﬁnance, built, operate, transfer (DFBOT), where the private sector basically
runs the show from the start of the project till a period where it basically
transfers the infrastructure back to the Government, usually after a period of
25–30 years. Other forms exist with less involvement such as design, built,
operate, and transfer (DBOT), built operate and transfer (BOT), or design and
built (DB). Governments will decide on the model depending on the level of
risk that they wish to take and the ﬁnancial attractiveness of the concession to
the private sector.

6.2.3 Management Contract

The last dominant model is the management contract. While infrastructure asset
ownership remains with the Government, the operation and maintenance is trans-
ferred to the private sector.

In many countries, privatization is commonly favorably perceived by
Governments and population. This is especially the case wherever new
projects must be built and less so when existing infrastructure are leased. As
in DFBOT, DBOT or BOT models, the risks are mainly bared by the private
contractor, there are usually few voices raised against such models. However,
this isn’t the case for management contracts, were assets are taken over by a
company that hasn’t really made the initial investment.

Furthermore, not all privatization have been successful and fear is higher that the
provided services will be downgraded. Three main reasons are usually linked to
such failures:
(cid:129) Government doesn’t honor its part of the contract, relying on the private
investors to solve all issues, such as land expropriation or obtaining the nec-
essary licenses, delaying the construction phase;

(cid:129) Private contractor are badly performing and unable to meet commitments made;

and

(cid:129) New cost structure is perceived to be unfair by users since privatized infra-
structure must reﬂect more openly the real cost structure to repay the investment
made. This happens often in cities where customers are used to low subsidized
costs.

328

6 New Transportation Business Models

6.2.4 Private Public Partnerships (PPP)

PPPs are contractual agreements between a public agency (Federal, State, or
Municipal) and a private sector entity. PPPs take place in environments where
stakeholders ﬁnd the project too risky or need subsidies in order to construct or
operate the project’s assets. Governments thus help leveraging the position of the
private sector, which commonly results in a better allocation of resources than if
they would have done so independently.

6.3 New Potential Financial Instruments and Incentives

Creating the right ﬁnancial instruments to add liquidity to the market, while pro-
tecting investors is something that should be analyzed urgently by ﬁnancial
authorities. Financing needs of infrastructure are so huge that there is a real
incentive for all parties to ﬁnd solutions to bridge the mentioned gap. Governments
could ﬁnd alternative sources to their own funding. Financial markets could create
new products. Long-term investors, such as pension funds, would ﬁnd projects with
a duration meeting their long-term maturity obligations. Manufacturers and civil
companies could ﬁnd more easily other private investors willing to take over their
investment in an SPE after the riskier ﬁrst years of construction and operation.

Creating these ﬁnancial instruments might not be sufﬁcient though. Giving also
tax incentives would help. In the next section, we will see a few emerging ﬁnancial
instruments and will suggest a few tax models that should reduce the gap between
infrastructure ﬁnancial needs and means. We will start with three green ﬁnancial
instruments that could effectively be used extensively for public transport, as long
as railways start rightfully being considered as a solution for carbon problems by
Public and International Institutions.

6.3.1 Green Bonds

Green bond is a ﬁnancial instrument that ties proceeds of bond issue to environ-
mental activities.

It is always hard to say what is green and what isn’t. A metro line will
undoubtedly take out of the road thousands of pollutant cars. However, how
many is always the question, as it is difﬁcult to assess on the long term.
Because it is already difﬁcult for transportation specialists to answer such
question, it is even harder for investors to know what is green and what isn’t.
This is why green bonds were usually associated with the World Bank’s

6.3 New Potential Financial Instruments and Incentives

329

environmental department. When they were ﬁrst launched in 2008, they were
associated to small emission values and weren’t very popular. In 2013 this
changed with the emission of a $1 billion green bond by the International
Finance Corporation. Later on that year EDF the French energy conces-
sionaire emitted a $1.9 billion green bond and Toyota issued a $1.75 billion
to help ﬁnance the sales of hybrid cars.

The President of the World Bank estimates that the market in 2014 could rise to
$50 billion from $11 billion. At that growth pace, green bonds could represent up to
15 % of the corporate bond market by 2020.

6.3.2 Carbon Credits

In order to reduce global warming, several Governments have come up with a
ﬁnancial instrument called carbon credits, which relies on regional ﬁnancial markets
and tax incentives. But carbon credit prices have crashed to $4 levels owing to the
ﬁnancial crisis in Europe and lack of consensus on the future of the Kyoto Protocol
beyond 2012.

Carbon credit It is basically a title bought by companies in exchange for the right
to pollute. This title is traded openly on a speciﬁc market. Though several countries
have tried pushing such type of markets (i.e., Australia), the main market remains
European.
Carbon credit price evolution When it was ﬁrst introduced in Europe in 2000, the
price was set around 20 euro per ton of CO2. In order to avoid penalizing too much
their own industry, European Governments provided too many exemptions. As a
consequence, the price has been falling down to a value lower than 5$ per ton, a
price which makes carbon credit too cheap to be worthwhile the hassle.
Impact on transportation ﬁnancing Even before the carbon credit value crashed,
carbon credit had a limited impact on the ﬁnancing of public transport projects.

These are some of the reasons explaining why carbon credits haven’t been
used extensively:
– Cost of new metro line: The cost of a metro line can reach $100–
$200 million per kilometer, which means $3–$5 billion for a normal
20 km line. One must add on top of the CAPEX, OPEX over a 30-year
period, which usually doubles this amount. CO2 savings resulting from the
reduction in cars due to a new metro line will at most generate one to two
million dollar in yearly revenue at a medium carbon price ($10 per ton).

330

6 New Transportation Business Models

This is still worth around $10 million for a seven year period but the
process needs to be renewed each year, requiring lots of efforts.

– Difﬁculty to assess carbon reduction: calculating how many CO2 tons
can be reduced by people switching from private to public transport can be
tricky, time consuming and expensive. Potential ridership studies along
the future line must also be done, adding extra difﬁculties.

– Ownership of carbon credit: revenues from carbon credit would need to
go to the SPE to be meaningful. However, this cannot be done as credit
demand needs to be done prior to the constitution of the SPE. Indeed,
carbon credit requirements are that they should be included in the project’s
ﬁnancing calculation. However, being in an open bid, the potential SPE
cannot use it, as theoretically the Government needs to authorize such use
of carbon credit, which would then be available for each bidding SPE.
This is a chicken and egg issue.

– Rules of operational cost: In order to receive carbon credit approval,
potential users must usually follow already approved methodologies. The
other option is to create a new one, which can be difﬁcult, very expensive
and uncertain in terms of approval. Once the project beneﬁts have been
calculated, it must then be registered by the United Nations and validated.
However, the main methodology which could be used for ﬁnancing new
transport concessions is very difﬁcult to use as it validates only projects
for which the beneﬁts coming from the carbon credit can contribute sig-
niﬁcantly to the concession’s OPEX. Though the railway industry has
asked successfully to relax such rules, it still is almost impossible to meet,
as carbon credit prices have dropped to an all time low. Another carbon
credit offsetting methodology based on mounting regenerative system
onboard trains has been used successfully to overhaul train and improve
energy efﬁciencies. But with carbon credit prices being so low and this
system being generalized it is unlikely that it will be used commonly in
the future.

– Poor Country rules: These credits have in the past been used for poor
and developing countries projects. The EU has changed the rules in 2013,
to rule out all developing countries, such as BRICS Countries. The
remaining Countries are basically too poor to afford a metro line, thus
defeating the purpose of such tool for mass transit project ﬁnancing.

6.3.3 Voluntary Carbon Market

As indicated in its name, this market is composed of companies that decide for
social responsibility purposes to buy carbon credits. This is quite a dynamic market,

6.3 New Potential Financial Instruments and Incentives

331

with a yearly growth in the range of 5 % in volume of carbon offsets (100 million
tons in 2012), though in value the amount fell signiﬁcantly due to the price of
carbon credit (slightly higher than $500 million in 2012).

The “State of the Voluntary Carbon Markets” 2013 report, estimates that the
total market value could reach a value of $1.6 billion (projection based on
historical rates) to $2.3 billion (projection based on predicted rates) by 2020.
If proven true this would mean that the market would double the current
market size, offsetting around 200 million tons. However, with a price of 4 $
and not knowing if Governments would allow project developers to issue and
monetize their own offsets, it is still not clear if such offsetting amounts could
be earmarked towards transportation projects or be mainly used in refores-
tation project in poor African country, as it is today.

6.3.4 Corporate Donation and Tax Exemption

Even if all these measures would be applied, it would still not solve the problem of
citizens of the megacities of poor African Countries. As seen no mass transit system
can survive without getting subsidies. In poor Countries, Governments have
problems ﬁnancing the project and offering such subsidies. By taking away the
Governments’ obligation to fund the project but keeping a certain level of subsidies,
such projects may happen. However, most companies will not invest as they see big
infrastructure projects as too risky. In order for the private sector to invest in these
countries, there needs to be a sense of doing good as well as the possibility to obtain
immediate gains from such action. Why not allow corporations throughout the
world to consider investment in a SPE of such countries, as a nonproﬁt action and
allow the SPE to apply for a qualiﬁed charitable organization classiﬁcation? In the
eyes of tax authorities such as the IRS in the USA, charitable donations are gifts
made to qualiﬁed charitable organizations. These include churches, nonproﬁt
organizations, a foundation or trust fund or any other organization “operated
exclusively for charitable, religious, educational, scientiﬁc, or literary purposes.” If
you deﬁne charitable as the possibility to do good to thousands of people, such
a Transportation SPE should evidently qualify.

The interest of enabling these SPEs to be characterized as charitable orga-
nization is that the contributions could qualify as tax deductions against the
company’s annual tax liability and not as an expense or worst an investment.
Monetary contributions through share acquisition in SPEs could be tax
deductible up to a certain level of the company’s yearly proﬁts (e.g.: 10 %).

332

6 New Transportation Business Models

Some level of protection for potential smaller investors would be required to
there are always serious committed active investors. Proﬁts
ensure that
generated by such SPEs would be taxed in the corporation’s home country as
it would be for any other business investment. Corporations would be in-
centivized to contribute during the early construction phase as the expected
gains would be the highest. Possibility to have shares buyback could make
these contributions even more attractive. In other words, in the best case
scenario, the corporations would be entitled to get a proﬁt proportionate to the
level of contribution in the SPE as a dividend and potentially to sell its share
at a proﬁt. In the worst case scenario it would have been able to deduct a
portion of its taxes and still done a good action.

6.3.5 Certiﬁcate of Potential Increase in Construction

(CEPAC)

For once, one of the most interesting ﬁnancial instruments doesn’t come from the
Northern but from the Southern Hemisphere. The Certiﬁcate of potential increase in
construction (In Portuguese CEPAC or Certiﬁcado de Potencial Adicional de
Construção) is a ﬁnancial
instrument, whose objective is to obtain ﬁnancial
resources dedicated to public work. Created in Brazil in the early 2000, this
instrument has already been able to ﬁnance several re-urbanization
ﬁnancial
projects in big cities such as Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo.
Capturing speculation beneﬁts for the collectivity It works on the principle that real
estate speculation that would inherently result from the increase in attractiveness of
a region due to work improvements, can be anticipated and promoted to ﬁnance
public work. To illustrate how it works, let’s take the example of Rio de Janeiro’s
Porto Maravilha.

Rio’s Porto Maravilha project: In Rio de Janeiro, a 4 km elevated inner city
overpass called Perimetral was inaugurated in 1960. The Perimetral ran
through the heart of Rio’s historical past where many beautiful historical
buildings shared space with the central market. Unfortunately, to build such
infrastructure, many old buildings and the central market itself had to be
demolished. With the years, this part of the city became dirty, polluted and
dangerous. Middle and upper class left and the region started to be deserted
fueling even more a no man’s land.

6.3 New Potential Financial Instruments and Incentives

333

Rio Bay 

(Guanabara)

Residential

Cultural

Commercial

Hotel

Institutional

Other

Fig. 6.1 View of the various areas allocated to different construction types in the project Porto
Maravilha in Rio de Janeiro Brazil. Source Author

In June 2010,

the city launched the project Porto Maravilha, which
objective is to re-urbanize a region near the inner port of Rio (see map
hereafter) (Fig. 6.1).

At the heart of this re-urbanization lies the demolishing of the 4 km
overpass and its substitution by the construction of three tunnels running
directly under the overpass. Other infrastructure improvements include the
re-urbanization of 70 km of roads and 650,000 m2 of walkway, as well as the
reconstruction of 700 km of urban infrastructure network (water, sewage and
drainage, telecom) and 3 water treatment plants. The project also includes the
implementation of 52 km of a free catenary operation tramway. All these
transportation infrastructure work should allow for an increase of 50 % in
trafﬁc ﬂow (Fig. 6.2).

To improve the quality of life of this neighborhood, the project plans to
implement 17 km of bicycle lanes and to plant 15,000 trees (the green area
should raise from 2.5 to 11 %). The city’s objective is to revitalize the region
not only by creating ofﬁces but my motivating Rio residents to move back to
the area. The city objective is to make the region attractive enough and supply
the necessary apartments to increase the residential density from the 22,000
inhabitants today, to 100,000 within a 10-year period.

All these works are estimated at R$7.6 billion (around US$ 2.5 billion)
and will be ﬁnanced by CEPACs and executed within a PPP between the
company responsible for the RIO port development (CDURP) and a private
consortium (Concessionária Porto Novo S/A constituted of the civil compa-
nies OAS Engenharia, Norberto Odebrecht and Carioca Christiani-Nielsen
Eng.).

334

6 New Transportation Business Models

Free catenary tramway 
project. Porto Maravilha

Fig. 6.2 Illustration of the free catenary tramway line of 52 km to be funded entirely by the
CEPAC ﬁnancing scheme. Source Author

Legal framework In order to create such successful ﬁnancial instruments, Brazil
needed to vote special laws that could create a legal and ﬁnancial framework.

Based on articles 182 and 183 of the Brazilian Federal constitution, the
Federal Government voted in 2001 a special law (10,257), which deﬁned the
municipal status. This law allowed Cities to promote and vote special laws
enabling the ﬁnancing of re-urbanization projects for a speciﬁc city area
(called a OUC/Operações Urbanas Consorciadas).

For instance, the city of Rio de Janeiro, passed a law in 2009 (i.e.: com-
plementary Law 101/2009 for the OUC Porto Maravilha), authorizing the
construction above the existing city restriction on land occupation. This law
deﬁned the perimeter of the region where the works would happen.

Limit on surface to be built It also imposes a ceiling for new surface to be built. For
instance, in Porto Maravilha the limit was set at 5 million m2. The project also
deﬁnes how these m2 should be distributed according to ofﬁce, commercial, and
lodging necessities. Areas already protected such as natural preservation and cul-
tural patrimony buildings or areas, as well as public service ofﬁces cannot be
touched by construction.

6.3 New Potential Financial Instruments and Incentives

335

What is a CEPAC? It’s a ﬁnancial instrument emitted by a municipality (i.e.:
Rio, São Paulo) via a SPE (i.e.: CDURP in Rio Porto Maravilha).
This CEPAC is used as a counterpart for the right to increase the construction
level in a dedicated area of the city (i.e.: 5 million m2 in Porto Maravilha).
Each CEPAC is equivalent to a value of m2 for construction area or for a
modiﬁcation in the use of land. A table is established for each project giving
the CEPAC m2 cost according to the type of use or region within the deﬁned
urban area. This price is updated on a monthly basis, according to a con-
struction index taking into consideration inﬂation. The CEPAC is speciﬁc to a
project and cannot be used to ﬁnance infrastructure improvements in other
city areas. The CEPAC doesn’t have any time limit. It lasts as long as the law
voted for this speciﬁc project is still active or until all CEPACs are sold.
Purchase of CEPAC: Investors interested in getting access to real estate
space buy CEPAC, giving the right to increase construction levels from the
municipalities of the said region. CEPAC are ruled by the instruction 401 of
the Comissão de Valores Mobiliários (CVM) ﬁnancial market. The CVM
market will oversee the project making sure that the CEPAC investors are
protected throughout the execution of the project. CEPAC can be bought
from two different sources: In auction organized by the main Brazilian
ﬁnancial market called BOVESPA; and on secondary markets through
ﬁnancial brokers. They can be bought and resold to other Parties freely on
these secondary markets, until they are speciﬁcally associated to a dedicated
lot in the region.
Control of CEPAC: A SPE (i.e.: CDURP for Porto Maravilha) must be
established by the municipality to manage and supervise the works to be
performed. The SPE must participate in the approval of the real estate pro-
jects, during technical meetings with the municipality’s secretary of
Urbanism. It is also the entity’s role to make land available for the market.
The money received through the sale of CEPAC is separated from the
municipality’s budget, which cannot use it for any other reasons than the said
project.

Two ﬁnancial institutions are in charge of monitoring the entire process.
As mentioned, the Brazilian market authority CVM will control the allocation
of the CEPAC to ensure that investors are protected. The Federal ﬁnancial
institution Caixa Economica will oversee that the resources generated by the
CEPAC sale are indeed allocated to the speciﬁc project purpose and will
follow the different construction interventions throughout the project.

Beneﬁts for the Municipalities Most cities experience budgetary restraints, which
make it difﬁcult for them to front money for a project or earmark a signiﬁcant
amount of their budget to a re-urbanization project. Another interesting ﬁnancial
aspect of CEPAC is that they don’t generate any rights of credits against the

336

6 New Transportation Business Models

municipality. In other words they are treated off balance sheet with no impact on the
city’s indebtedness level. With money secured, contracts are easier and cheaper to
negotiate with potential civil construction companies that can execute the works,
without the risk of seeing the money disappear with changes in the Mayor’s agenda
priorities or changes in the city’s political team.
Beneﬁts for the investors CEPACs allow investors who believe in the real estate
potential of the region to buy the rights of increasing the urbanization level, within a
strong legal framework. It creates a real estate market in a place where usually no
home or ofﬁce owner would dare investing, either by fear of the re-urbanization
project not going ahead or because the minimum transport infrastructure wouldn’t
be there to attract residents and workers.

6.4 Reducing Infrastructure Construction Needs

One way of bridging the gap between infrastructure investment needs and the
money available is obviously to reduce the need for more investment in transport
infrastructure. We’ve seen in the previous chapters a few of these solutions.

6.4.1 Encourage Working from Home

The easiest way of reducing the need for new infrastructure is to motivate people to
work from home and enabling companies to legally do so. With internet, there is no
technological limitation to working from home.

Some practical restrictions may exist related usually to worker’s position.
Indeed, some jobs require interaction with clients, suppliers or even other
colleagues and thus may involved from time to time physical meetings. But
this is more the exception than the rule and even more so in global companies
where people cannot easily meet. However, in most cases, corporate culture is
at stake. Top management in most companies believes that coming to work
enhances employees’ productivity. Bosses also feel more conﬁdent when they
can oversee what their subordinates are doing. Thus, many employees believe
that their yearly appraisal is positively inﬂuenced by their long hours spent at
work, very often regardless of
real work was performed or not.
Additionally, culturally many employees accustomed to working with col-
leagues or under monitoring feel uneasiness whenever working from home.
This feeling is what many freelancers call “free ﬂoating anxiety”.

if

6.4 Reducing Infrastructure Construction Needs

337

6.4.2 Encourage People to Stay in Their Neighborhood

By tying real estate development to job creation and available commercial facilities,
city planners can reduce the need to commute or travel.

6.4.3 Higher Occupancy Rate

Increasing the number of passengers per existing transportation mean, by using for
instance car pooling is a good way of achieving such result quickly. With 1.1
passengers per car at peak hours in the main American and European cities, dou-
bling or triplication of the occupancy rate is an instant win for the infrastructure, the
environment (any additional passenger will only consume between 2 and 5 % extra
energy) and the passengers’ wallet, if they were to share the cost. In public
transport, increasing the number of passenger per m2 or adding more spacious trains
or buses is also a good way of increasing nominal capacity without changing the
infrastructure and the cities environmental footprint.

6.4.4 Higher Transportation Means Density

Increasing the density of existing transportation networks is an interesting way of
reducing the needs for more road or railway infrastructures. It can be achieved by
adding new signaling system (i.e., moving block) allowing for lower headways.
Road platooning technology allied to V2V technology should also reduce spacing
between vehicles to a minimum and increase safely the road capacity.

6.4.5 Car and Parking Space Reduction

New alternative car ownership and rental models are being created, such as
peer-to-peer car sharing, or rental by the hour. These models will have a durable
impact on infrastructure needs as most cars sit idle on the street or in parking lots
95 % of the time. Through new Apps, the e-mobility revolution will optimize their
usage, reducing signiﬁcantly the needs for car parking space.

6.5 Electrifying Transport

Global warming is one of the biggest threats the future generations will face. Many
governments have decided in theory to reduce their CO2 footprint, but results so far
have been disappointing. In fact, CO2 emission continues to rise inexorably and an

338

6 New Transportation Business Models

increase of a minimum of 2 °C is now accepted by most scientists. Limiting this
increase to only 2 °C will already be a challenge and few countries have taken real
steps to reduce their CO2 emission.

Probably one of the most active Countries in this area is the UK. The British
Government has made some difﬁcult political choices, such as restarting the
construction of nuclear power plants. Though some green activists in
Germany would see that measure as completely inappropriate, environmen-
talists in the UK have embraced such policy, as they consider that nuclear is
the lesser of the two evils. They also recognize that a responsible energy
strategy cannot rely in the short term only on renewables and that the UK
needs a source of stable energy, till there is plenty enough of other renewable
sources. We don’t want to start a debate on the beneﬁts of nuclear versus its
negative impact because this isn’t the purpose of this book. However, what is
important with these measures is that the UK Government puts its money
where its mouth is. By supplying stable energy with zero CO2 emission, it
ensures that its important decision to transform the current transport industry
based mainly on fossil fuel to an industry driven by electric technology has
teeth. In its report “Making the connection: The plug-in Vehicle Infrastructure
strategy” the Ofﬁce for Low Emission Vehicles sets the strategy and the steps
forward for the Government and all industrial players to provide the neces-
sary recharging infrastructure alongside improvements in vehicle range. It
also provides favorable incentive for the switch to electric automobile, such
as reduction in vehicle excise duty, company car tax exemption as well as
enhanced capital allowances. Planned investments in new train or metro
networks such as Crossrail should also help reduce signiﬁcantly UK’s
transportation CO2 footprint. As we’ve seen in Chap. 3, the collateral beneﬁt
of all this is that it will also bring huge ﬁnancial beneﬁts for UK’s trade
balance.

6.6 Changing Public Transport Business Model

Building a new train network or metro line from scratch is hugely expensive,
especially at a time when most Governments have problems meeting their debt
commitment. Unfortunately, such infrastructure project cannot be done without
public support and money. As we’ve just seen, PPPs have been introduced as a
ways to share risks between the private and public transport to ﬁnance or fund
CAPEX. However, even mast transit operations are likely to run a deﬁcit and must
rely on government subsidies. During lean time, there are basically two ways of

6.6 Changing Public Transport Business Model

339

reducing the reliance on government money: reduce the operational costs and
enable higher revenues.

Here also the PPPs have been used to lower the amounts ﬂowing from the
governments to the transport authorities. Some governments have outsourced the
entire operation and others have decided to maintain it, while subcontracting the
maintenance usually to the technological provider. However, what should the basis
for such subcontracting be? Based only on the lowest acquisition price? The point is
that what seems the cheapest isn’t always what will cost the less to the asset owner.
This is why some governments have introduced the concept of Total Cost of
Ownership, which basically takes into consideration, the cost of an asset over its
entire life. This is an important change to the basic tendering model of many
countries, tying the technological provider to the long-term performance of its asset.
Backed by hefty penalties and sometimes bonuses, it ensures that the cost estimated
over a 30-year period will be met. It also passes the risk from the buyer to the
manufacturer, enabling the Governments or investors to know before committing to
the asset acquisition, their long-term base costs.

6.6.1 Total Cost of Ownership (TCO)

The TCO of an infrastructure or metro installation is the total expenses incurred
since its acquisition by the operator, including acquisition, ﬁnancial, operation,
maintenance, and obsolescence costs (Table 6.1).

Typical TCO distribution of a metro vehicle is shown in table above. This is
obviously benchmark information, as prices can vary extremely depending on the
technology used, the solvability of the asset owner and even the acquisition model
(i.e., some contract are based on rental hours where the customer is charged by the
km traveled). Roughly, 30 % of total life cycle cost (LCC) can be assigned to the
initial purchase price, while customers typically spend about 70 % during the rest of
the life cycle, mainly in operation and railway maintenance activities. The ﬁnancing
costs may on average represent around 15 % of the TCO. This number can obvi-
ously be higher in developing or poor countries where the cost of ﬁnancing is high.

An important element that doesn’t show that table is that investments that are
carried out at the start of the life’s asset reduce subsequent upkeep costs, even
low initial
though it may seem as more costly initially. For instance,

Table 6.1 TCO breakdown of a metro

TCO
phase (%)

Initial purchase
price (%)

Operation
(%)

Failure
cost (%)

Financing
(%)

Maintenance
(%)

Spare
parts (%)

20

5

15

10

20

100
Source Author

30

340

6 New Transportation Business Models

Table 6.2 Elasticity per transportation type in Europe

Transportation type
Vehicle travel—essential trips
Vehicle travel—optional trips
Bus, metro, tram passenger per km
Rail passenger per km
Mayeres 2000 study

Price peak
−0.16
−0.43
−0.19
−0.37

Price off-peak
−0.43
−0.36
−0.29
−0.43

investment (such as heavy standardized carbon steel trains) will end up
increasing various operational costs, such as maintenance, energy, warring of
parts, etc. On the other hand, investing in new moving block signaling
technology, which is still more expensive from an acquisition cost perspec-
tive, will offer good payback, as it will reduce staff cost over 30 years (as well
as strike risk) and maintenance costs, as many way-side equipment are
eliminated.

Knowing your costs and maintaining them to the bare minimum is a good step to
reduce reliance on Governments, but doesn’t allow public transport to survive
without subsidies. Thus, one must work on increasing revenues. Increasing fare
prices would seem an easy solution. However, there are three main issues with such
strategy. First, public transport is generally used by the poorest citizens. Increasing
price too heftily will penalize those that public transport is actually supposed to
help. Second, mass transit users represent valuable votes. No mayor in his right mind
will want to confront million of potential electors. Lastly but not the least, by
increasing prices too much, people will vote with their feet and will start buying cars,
defeating the purpose of promoting public transport. The following table compares
elasticity for different transportation means. It shows that an increase of 10 % in
price, reduces the number of km traveled in buses by 1.9–2.9 % (Table 6.2).

One other way of increasing revenue is to enhance vehicle and network capacity.
Putting more people without changing much the network’s characteristics will
increase revenues with little effect on the cost structure. But here also, if the comfort
level declines too much, people will opt to go back to their car.

We suggest two out-of-the-box ideas, enabled by e-mobility technologies that
could bring extra revenues: cross-subsidizing of fast lane with localized congestion
charges and geo-localized ads.

6.7 Private to Public Transport Cross-Subsidizing

Life is often not fair and the Government’s role should be to make political choices
that are the best for the greater whole of their population, in particular giving people
equal opportunities. Such choices never satisfy everyone but as long as they please

6.7 Private to Public Transport Cross-Subsidizing

341

the vast majority, politicians are happy to make such decision, as they increase their
chances of being reelected. This is why for instance, politicians like to invest in new
railway networks and highways, as ribbon cutting ceremonies can usually translate
into additional favorable vote intention. Unfortunately, in a democracy such events
are becoming extremely rare as many interest groups will have different views of
what is best for society. Furthermore, in society prone to litigation, these groups
have the means to delay or kill projects, even if they could bring great beneﬁts to
the majority.

Advocating that Governments should introduce initiatives to cross-subsidize
public transport with private transport money is likely to be seen a priori by
the car industry lobby as a no go. These big interest groups have deep enough
pockets to kill such initiatives easily. They would probably argue that car
owners pay enough taxes when buying their cars, register their automobile or
refuel. Without entering into a debate, one could probably answer, that the car
industry is one of the most subsidized industry when considering that road
work and their maintenance is paid directly by income and property taxes,
regardless of the fact that the tax payer might not even be a car user. For
instance, a 2005 EU commission study1 estimates that every year local
Governments in Germany spend 15 billion euro on their car trafﬁc. Only
between 15 and 45 % of this aide is actually recuperated through parking fees,
taxes, etc. In other words, each German citizen pays around 100–150 euro for
the car industry to be compared to around 84 euro subsidies for public
transport. The report states that these subsidies are in line with other European
countries. The other issue is that the appropriation of road is taken for granted
but, as we’ve seen, is a lost opportunity cost, as it could be used for housing
or green areas. Furthermore, the automotive industry doesn’t foot the bill for
the million of car deaths and injuries resulting from car crashes nor do they
pay for health costs resulting from pollutant emission.

The fact is that if the automotive industry wishes to continue selling high end
cars in the big cities of this world, they will need to promote initiatives that will
allow their clients to drive faster than walking during peak hours. This can only
happen, if a sufﬁcient number of citizens ride on the high capacity transportation
means. Thus initiatives that could provide money to fund Public Transport and
consequently reduce the number of cars within the inner city roads should be
welcomed. As a matter of fact, our ﬁrst suggestion should be a no brainer for the
automotive lobby but a politically not correct proposal for left wing Parties.

1Hidden subsidies for urban car transport; Public funds for Private Transport ICLEI (2005 study).

342

6 New Transportation Business Models

6.7.1 Fast Lane Cross-Subsidizing

Large monorail project can carry around 40,000 passengers per hour and per
direction (PPHPD). This is almost comparable to the large mass transit system that
could go up to 60,000 PPHPD. High-capacity BRT and tramway projects can
generally carry around 20,000 PPHPD. Without rejecting BRTs that can be an
effective, quick to implement and cheap solution or tramways that can rehabilitate
entire inner city region and cut pollutant emission, both technologies require
“expropriating” housing and or “appropriating” land. Metros and monorails on the
other hand, have a very low environmental footprint and usually will improve the
car ﬂow in the neighborhood of these new networks. Our idea is based on a concept
similar to CEPAC, which enables remuneration of housing expropriation based on
the future increased real estate value of a neighborhood, due to infrastructure
improvement. Why not bundle with a private concession, the future beneﬁts of road
appropriation. In other words, circulation improvement to a large avenue resulting
from a new mass transit system could be used to cross-subsidize the infrastructure
works and mass transit operations.

1800 and 3600 PPHPD for one and two exclusive lanes respectively, could
generate big money. Rich people or even taxis would most likely pay twice
the price of a bus or metro ticket to avoid spending hours in trafﬁc jams. The
same e-mobility technologies that exist today on the highways of this word to
pay tolls without stopping, would allow people to get in and out quickly from
these exclusive lanes. At 5 $ per access, an exclusive two lane express road
could maybe generate between $50 and $100 million per year in revenues
with not much cost. Furthermore, people not willing to pay would have fewer
options not to hop on the network, increasing the concession’s ridership. Both
revenue impacts would reduce signiﬁcantly the need for Government
subsidies.

The problem with this approach is obviously that left wing Parties might claim
rightfully that this creates two types of transport: for those able to afford private
roads and the others. However, it is already the case as the Rich stay in their car
while the Poor use public transport. Furthermore, one could argue that it gives an
attractive transportation choice to poor people in an area where they either would
have to use a car that they couldn’t afford or nonsegregated bus lanes.

6.7.2 Localized Congestion Charges

For those who systematically don’t want
to create cross-subsidies by mainly
improving “ostentatiously” the life of the Rich, there is the possibility of using

6.7 Private to Public Transport Cross-Subsidizing

343

congestion charges within the new line’s neighborhood to subsidize the mass transit
operation.

As we’ve seen several cities, such as London or Milano have put in place
these charges to discourage residents from using cars within certain area.
There is no technological limitation in installing the same video technology
that reads your driver’s plate and checks if you have paid your charges, in
smaller area alongside the network. Such congestion charges that can go up to
11.50 pounds ($18.70) in an expensive city such as London city could easily
be implemented in a restricted area beneﬁting from better trafﬁc for a fee of
$10.00 per day with weekly discounts to make it attractive enough. This
would penalize local residents but technology would probably allow for
modular charges, according to residency criteria. It should however, be noted
that congestion charging, road pricing and tolls have an impact on road usage.
For instance, a 2010 study2 concluded that elasticity to road charging is
between −0.1 and −0.45.

Another way of generating extra revenues for public transport is to turn time
wasted in transport into productive hours. In fact, the average one hour lost by
commuters in the rich world represents around 20 % of their free time. If only a
fraction of such time could be transformed on online searches to buy products or
services with smart phones and this money be channeled through the public
operator website, millions of dollars could be generated each day.

6.8

Internet Connectivity

Be it at home, on the metro, at work on one’s computer, walking on the street with a
smart phone, with Google glasses or with an Apple or Samsung watch on the wrist,
as well as driving in a car with a Google or Apple onboard platform, anyone can
now be connected 24/7 anywhere. Inversely, it means that the big IT companies
have unlimited access to customers’ information as well. Until recently, these
companies wouldn’t be in a position or willing to consolidate consumer across
multiple platforms. However, this isn’t the case anymore and they can follow
consumer behaviors across multiple platforms and physical locations. We will
analyze which are the potential IT companies that are likely to play an important
role in the public and private transport e-connectivity market. In order to do so, we
need to understand what the powerful business models and trends behind this push
are.

22010 study done by Spears, Boarnet and Handy.

344

6 New Transportation Business Models

6.8.1 Pay-Per-Click Model (PPC)

Companies like Google or Facebook, get their revenue mainly from advertising.
The PPC model, basically directs trafﬁc to company websites. These companies pay
the publisher a fee for all redirected connections. Websites using PPC ads display
these advertisements when a keyword search matches an advertiser’s keyword list,
or when a website shows relevant content.

Google AdWords: It is the most popular PPC advertising system. It enables
businesses to create ads that appear on Google’s search engine. In AdWords
advertisers bid on keywords and pay for each click on their ad. Every time a
query is initiated, Google digs into the list of AdWords advertisers and
chooses companies which products will appear in the ad space of Google’s
search result page. Selection is made according to a combination of factors,
including quality and relevance of their keywords, the advertiser’s rank and
the highest amount an advertiser is willing to spend.
Cost-per-click: The average Adwords PPC cost was around 0.90 $ per click
in 2013 (Facebook average PPC was $0.80). As Google’ advertising revenues
were around $32 billion, we can easily understand the importance of
increasing the overall number of PPC opportunities. If these PPC were
achieved mainly by people at their desk in the past, more and more they are
now generated through mobile devices.

6.8.2 Time Spent Online

Around the world, 2 billion people are connected. On average they spent online
each month around 16 h (2013 values). The monthly connection time of 153 million
Google visitors was around 1 h 45 (7 h 45 spent by the 137 million Facebook
members).

Among the favorite internet activities relevant to this chapter, as seen recently
in a survey, search engines topped the lists (over 90 % favored that activity).
Information search to buy a product and the real buying act were also
activities well appreciated with an overall assessment
in the 70 %.
Furthermore, the highest growing trend seen online was location based ser-
vices being sought out.

6.8 Internet Connectivity

345

6.8.3 Mobile Shopping

According to a McKinsey report, 50 % of consumers spent 75 % or more of their
total shopping time conducting online research. In the past it was mainly linked to
electronics but consumers are more and more searching or buying directly furniture,
health and beauty products, clothes, and even food. Furthermore, the presence of
mobiles in this shopping experience is growing. The last years have brought major
shifts on how users employ their mobiles to shop. Almost half of their time is now
spent on non voice activities.

For instance, European smart phone users are spending more than one ﬁfth of
their time doing online research on the go. 40 % of them actually mentioned
doing research in stores, using various research tools, such as professional
review, coupons, price comparison tools, stores website,
taking picture,
scanning bar codes, queries, social network.3

6.8.4 Mobile Activities

Why is all this online activities relevant to transport? The fact is that people spend
valuable time in transport and that time is worth a lot of money, if passengers can
do something useful out of it. On average American spend roughly 600 h in their
car per year. Over their average lifespan that equals out to be roughly 5 years of
their life or roughly 7 %. The following tables give a view of the time structure of
European men and women aged between 20 and 74 of an average day. This table is
based on a seven-week schedule and includes men and women not working. Thus,
when all this is factored in, European men and women spend at least 5 % of their
time traveling (Table 6.3).

Now, if we consider that people spend one-third of their time sleeping and more
than another third working or doing domestic work, sharing meals or taking per-
sonal care, we can conclude that the traveling experience if connected correctly,
could generate an extra 20 % opportunity for people to search or buy online. This
could generate signiﬁcant extra revenues for the public transportation players if
only a portion of these revenues could be captured by them.

3Mckinsey IConsumer, Europe 2011.

6 New Transportation Business Models

346

Activities

Table 6.3 Time spent in Europe on main activities according to gender (Source 2004 EU report)a

EE
Women

UK
Women

Men

Men

Men

FR
Women

Free time
Meals personal care
Sleep
Travel
Domestic works
Work or study
Total
aHow Europeans spend their time; Everyday life of women and men (2004 edition) source EU
Commission

5.28
2.15
8.32
1.17
2.48
3.40
24.00

5.05
2.16
8.27
1.25
4.15
2.33
24.00

4.46
3.01
8.45
1.03
2.22
4.03
24.00

4.36
2.08
8.35
1.06
5.02
2.33
24.00

5.30
2.04
8.18
1.30
2.18
4.18
24.00

4.08
3.02
8.55
0.54
4.30
2.31
24.00

6.8.5 Generation Gap

A massive generation gap is fueling the migration of advertising revenue from old
to new media and telecom revenues from ﬁxed landlines to mobile. The generation
that is under 35 isn’t buying ﬁxed technology but going directly to tablets or smart
phones. Furthermore, they are up to 50 % more likely to use social media and
VOIP/video chat than older generations. For youths, social media has displaced the
use of email. For them, social media has become information and entertainment
portals. In the long term, this massive shift in how consumers are informed and
communicate with the word cannot be ignored by all industries. This includes the
private and public transport players that will need to adapt their offer to these
changes.

For instance,4 reports that around 50 % of people aged 16–34 identify internet
as the most useful media compared to only around 15 % for population aged
55 and over. On the contrary, only 10 % of this population ﬁnd print most
useful versus 32 % for the over 65.

6.8.6 Mobile Advertising Market Estimation

The total online advertising revenues according to price Waterhouse was
$42.8 billion in 2013 for the USA only (IAB internet revenues 2013 full year

4Mckinsey Media and Entertainment practice.

6.8 Internet Connectivity

347

report) of which $7.1 billion was mobile (an increase of 110 % over 2012). Experts
estimate that global online ad spending will most
likely overtake newspaper
expenditures in 2014 (USD $100 billion vs. $93 billion), and will equalize the
combined total revenues of newspapers and magazines in 2015 ($132 billion).

At such a growth rate, the traveling experience be it on the bus, metro, train, or
in the cars will be worth $25 billion before 2020. Furthermore, this rate will
continue to increase under the phenomenal growth in car ownership, the increasing
time spent in private and public transport and the demographic tendencies, where
younger generation or poorer citizens opt to go entirely wireless. Where can these
numbers stop? The mobile search market is experiencing huge growth (i.e., 200 %
in 2012). Some industry experts predict that within a few years mobile will become
the primary way people access Google’s services. If we consider that cars will
double by 2030 worldwide, it isn’t too optimistic to think that advertisings revenue
generated during transport can reach $50 billion.

6.9 Transport Information Supplier of Choice

To put things into perspective, this $50 billion value is as big as the entire yearly
revenues generated by the total railway industry. If we want to understand better
this advertising market, we need to divide this between public and private trans-
ports. The following 2004 table gives a view of weekly European traveling patterns
and shows that though women used as much private and public transport, men spent
twice the time in their car (almost ten times more in Germany) (Table 6.4).

We will come back to these numbers and how they impact transport. But before,
we would like to discuss about the passenger information revolution in public
transport, as the two issues will become more and more interlinked. This is also an
important subject because most passengers want to know when they will arrive to
their ﬁnal destination. They will also want to experience the best quality ride during
the lowest journey time possible and to achieve this will need to know:

Table 6.4 European traveling patterns (Source EU 2004)a

Transport mode

EE
Women

UK
Women

DE
Women

Men

Men

Men

Car, motorcycle
Public transport
On foot, bicycle
Unspeciﬁed mode
Total
aHow Europeans spend their time; Everyday life of women and men (2004 edition) source EU
Commission

0.30
0.14
0.25
0.04
1.13

0.57
0.12
0.16
0.06
1.30

0.13
0.17
0.28
0.03
1.01

1.00
0.12
0.16
0.01
1.26

0.49
0.12
0.18
0.05
1.25

0.48
0.12
0.19
0.01
1.17

348

6 New Transportation Business Models

(cid:129) When the next train or bus will arrive. Ideally, they will try to be there at the
stop immediately before it arrives at the station, to reduce their lost time or avoid
spending time in the cold or under the rain;

(cid:129) Where to embark and get out, to get the most direct access from one activity to

(cid:129) Any potential road or network disruption due to unplanned events (i.e.: acci-

the other (i.e., home to work);

dents or union strikes);

(cid:129) How crowded is the road or bus, to postpone departure or select an alternative
transport solution (i.e., wait for the next bus, select another train compartment or
use a different highway).

Most railway or road operators will invest to provide this information via infor-
mation displays, in the stations, trains, and buses as well as on the road. However,
passengers with smart phones or navigational systems will be able to get on the go
such information. Along with this information, these connected passengers will
want to be as productive as possible and most likely want to ﬁnd potential services
along their way to simplify their life or decide to search for items to buy. By doing
this, they will grow exponentially this mobile internet advertising market.

6.9.1 Public Transport Information System

Public transport in many countries is known for late arrivals and departures. The
main sector associated with such late arrivals is obviously the airplane industry.
Huge arrival and departure panels are there to remind us of such frequent delays.
The railway industry has also been prone to such delays. Except maybe in a few
countries like Switzerland and Japan, late arrivals have been more the rule than the
exception. However, things have improved lately, with the entry into services of
new signaling systems. Time information displays have now moved from the
intercity stations to the commuter, metro, tramway and even bus lines. Two tech-
nologies have allowed for these information displays:
(cid:129) GPS-based information: typically buses can indicate their position and based
on trafﬁc information, systems can calculate the time of arrival and update such
information on real-time basis; and

(cid:129) Signaling based information: all modern signaling systems have real-time
schedule based information (i.e., train location, time to go, direction, etc.) which
can easily be sent to wayside information panels (Figs. 6.3 and 6.4).

In onboard environments, dynamic maps based on signaling or GPS information
can also indicate the direction and the next stops.

6.9 Transport Information Supplier of Choice

349

Fig. 6.3 Information system
on bus line in Luebek
Germany, GPS based. Source
Author

Fig. 6.4 Information system
in Berlin’s U-Bahn
(Muckernbrucke metro
station) based on signaling
system. Source Author

6.9.2 Battle for Passenger Information Access

In North America, public transport is mostly managed by Public Authorities with a
nonproﬁt orientation. Cities want their local operator to stay just that way: local.
A few private operators have been successful in winning bus, metro or commuter
line operations, but these contracts are more cost than revenue based. Mostly un-
derfunded, American public operators have been all too happy to give big IT
providers access to their critical schedule information. By transferring this
responsibility to content providers, they’ve been able to provide such valuable
service without the need to invest in passenger information technology. These same
big IT providers have tried to replicate such advantageous business model in
Europe, but with much less success. There, big railway and metro operators have

350

6 New Transportation Business Models

denied such access, as they felt this was part of their core business. Holding a strong
grip on their clients was perceived as fundamental to avoid being commoditized and
maintaining a strong brand.

Why is such train and bus schedule, maps and trafﬁc disruption so important?
Well, as mentioned, people want to improve as much as possible their quality
of ride. They will connect to get such information and then might decide to
use their mobile phone to do other things such as web searches. As most
players in this industry will recognize it, one out of three searches is currently
localized base and as we’ve seen this trend is likely to increase signiﬁcantly.
Thus it is fundamental to motivate potential users to connect and be associ-
ated with this ﬁrst connection. Furthermore, as information at the point of
purchase is increasingly important, getting information on nearby shops or
services is likely to generate extra revenues with higher margins.

Application using mobile maps to which are added data speciﬁc to users’
interests will help public transport passengers ﬁnd locations, click to call, get the
address and show how to get there: by walking, driving, or public transport.

6.9.3 Social Public Transport Apps

Moovit is proposing a social network Apps, based on crowdsourcing, but centered
on public transport users. Present in 11 countries and 65 cities the application gives
real-time trafﬁc information on buses and metros. With more than 2 million users it
has become a must for all public transport passengers. More than 3.5 million
researches are done each day and more than 10 million interaction between users.
This application gives real-time information on the next displacement. It tells the
passenger if any disruption happened on the bus line and can provide her or him
with an alternative transport solution. It will recalculate the time necessary to reach
your ﬁnal destination with this alternative trip. This platform relies on direct sharing
of information between passengers. Users may indicate information, such as delays
on the line, metro or train dysfunction, etc., or even send alarms to other users in
case of labor strikes, accidents, works, etc. All this data is integrated and fused with
ofﬁcial data coming from the operator information system. The aim is to give a
better traveling experience (Fig. 6.5).

Another interesting public transport application called TranquilienTM was
created by the French start-up Snips. This application indicates in which car
set to hop on, based on the number of passengers per car. This App uses

6.9 Transport Information Supplier of Choice

351

Fig. 6.5 Picture of Moovit
App. Source [CC BY-SA 3.0
(http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via
Wikimedia Commons

geo-localized data on smart phones to calculate the density of people in a
given place. The start-up doesn’t record the personnel data but analyzes it and
transmit this analysis to other companies for use by application companies.

By being the primary source of information, these Apps can motivate passengers
to use the site to look for advertisement but also to do online searches. To avoid
being a hostage to the attractiveness of the big online search engines or social apps,
the big mass transit operators can hope to develop location based application. There
are basically two types of technology for geo-localized ads: GPS and beacon based.

6.9.4 GPS Location-Based Information

This technology is based on smart phones’ GPS capabilities. Location based
information works on the principle that, knowing where the consumer is physically
located, it can deliver an ad for a product/service that can be found nearby. It can
actually even send an ad for a shop that is further along, competing with a nearby

352

6 New Transportation Business Models

Fig. 6.6 Picture of a
geo-localized shop in Berlin.
Source Author

shop. Ads or messages will be triggered whenever a mobile user crosses a prede-
ﬁned area on a map, also called geo-fence. This geo-fence can vary in size
according to the advertisers’ goal, from a few meters to a few kilometers. It is
important to note that not every service will be advertising based (Fig. 6.6).

6.9.5 Beacon Location Based Information

Beacons are equipment located in a certain area, which broadcast messages that are
detected by a receiver, usually a smart phone.

The major transmitting signal is based on Bluetooth (Low Energy) technol-
ogy. Bluetooth based beacon broadcasts very simple information: a Unique
identiﬁer and two information (major and minor), enabling mobiles to cal-
culate their position in regards to these two information. Unlike GPS loca-
tions that are forever ﬁxed and public worldwide, a beacon is something that
can be placed anywhere and has its location changed at anytime. However,
without the Unique Identiﬁer, the smart phones will never know the beacon is
there. Furthermore, a beacon’s reception is not precise and the distance
between this broadcasting device and the receiver will be greatly affected by
interferences (150 m maximum with best coverage around 30 m).

With the broadcasted information, Apps can detect it and tell how close the
phone is from it and perform actions, such as display alerts to the user, offer
discounts, or trigger automated events such as turning lights on or opening doors.

6.9 Transport Information Supplier of Choice

353

6.9.6 Legal Use of Geo-tagging Space

Geo-tagging, which is at the core of geo-localization ads, is based on the physical
position—latitude, longitude and even in some cases height for GPS based tech-
nology—and relative position in regards to beacon—of the user. To whom belongs
the physical location of a geo-tagged position? To the service provider of the ad or
to the owner of such position?

This is much more than a discussion on the sexes of angels. Would it be
acceptable for a company to see its customers receive ads in its own building
pushed by competitors? Will homeowners of an apartment over a sex shop
need to put parental guidance on their child’s phone? In fact this is a mul-
timillion dollar question,
their
geo-tagged position like they do for their web addresses, unless laws and
courts decide who geo-tagged space belongs to.

if people and companies need to protect

For the public transport industry, this is a key issue. Million of passengers use
every day, the metro and commuter systems of the big cities. Well-positioned
geo-tagged ads could bring lots of extra revenue every day. Will the lost making
transport operators be able to tap into this lucrative market or just see their billboard
and multimedia revenues shrink as they are replaced by these ads? Could a sharing
of revenues between content providers and landowners be possible on the basis of a
rental contract? Advocates of freedom of the internet and of the right of land
ownership are likely to clash. Furthermore, can one of the lesser important IT player
of the online advertising market team up with the public transport operators for GPS
based geo-fencing? The risk for the public operators isn’t only to see their adver-
tising revenue shrink. It is also the risk of seeing their brand being commoditized,
especially under the threat of specialized social networks such as Movit or other
networks providing real-time information on transport conditions.

6.9.7 Cross-Subsidies of Mobile Advertising Revenues

How much online revenue could be generated in a public transport environment? If
we take an important metro such as London, there are 970 million passenger-journeys
per year or 2.7 million passenger-journeys per day. If only 10 % were to do online
searches and click a PPC twice, this would still represent around $200 million per
year in extra revenues. Though we haven’t found speciﬁc research indicating what
percentage of the total $132 billion (2015 estimated value) mobile ad revenue could
be generated in public transport, it is still likely to be an important value, not even
considering geo-tagged advertisement revenue, a technology still in its infancy. If
Governments were to decide to pass a law making the right of property more

354

6 New Transportation Business Models

important than intellectual property rights for such technology, it would in the long
run generate a complete new source of income. Such law would be probably
challenged by big online search groups but at least for beacon based ads there would
be a good legal foundation for public operators.

6.9.8 Road Transport Information System

On many autoroutes or important trafﬁc lanes, infrastructure providers are able to
transmit in real time any road disruption. Based on trafﬁc ﬂow models, they can also
calculate and indicate to drivers, the average time a trip is likely to take between
two locations. However, such source of information isn’t as important as for public
transport, as most cars have now onboard GPS. In the next section, we will look at
the disruptions generated by the new e-mobility Apps that will change the private
transport picture.

6.10 E-mobility Software Applications

In transportation, social networks have been playing an increasingly important role.
Be it through advertising revenues or through impact on the younger generations
that are tomorrow’s transportation consumers, social networks can both represent a
threat or an opportunity. Depending on which side of the barrier the companies are
positioned—ﬁrst access provider of critical trafﬁc information or remote alternative
—companies and operators will be able to create loyal followers or face the risk of
being commoditized. Social network dedicated speciﬁcally to private transport have
been recently extremely successful. So successful in fact that they have been
acquired by the big IT players or are likely to be so very shortly.

6.10.1 Social Car Apps

The Tel Aviv start up Waze, which had almost 70 million users in 2013 throughout
110 countries, has ﬁnally been bought by Google for a price of almost $1.3 billion
after being pursued as a potential acquisition by IT groups such as Microsoft, Apple
and Facebook. This success story which started in 2006, around an open source
application to localize Israeli road radars had launched in 2012 an advertising
platform to monetize its services. This start-up had edited since 2008 a free GPS
App, which instead of relying on expensive map suppliers, was based on social
members’ information. Members would be invited to share their trips and signal any
disruption on the road (i.e., accident, road work, radars and policemen presence).

6.10 E-mobility Software Applications

355

Furthermore, members were also invited to improve existing maps. Through this
acquisition, Google was able to get access to an advertising platform proposing to
businesses to pay to be shown on the maps during the nearby trips.

6.10.2 Car Pooling Apps

As seen, one of the best way of ﬁghting city congestion and pollution is to favor car
pooling. Transportation agencies especially in the USA have developed infra-
structure to support car pooling with high-occupancy vehicle lanes, discounted tolls
for registered carpools, and support for areawide ridesharing programs. New Apps
now exist to improve the car pooling experience. For instance, Internet service
providers such as Carpool World, proposes free ridesharing services worldwide.
After registering contact information with privacy controls, the users indicate a trip
origin and destination, a weekly schedule or dates for such trips, and then can
search for potential car ridesharing partners using interactive map displays.

6.10.3 Car Sharing Initiatives and Apps

Ten years ago, no one knew whether car sharing could work. Yet today car sharing
initiatives have popped up all over the world. In many cities, car sharing has made a
strong impact on how city residents travel. Even in strong car ownership cultures
such as North America, car sharing has gained momentum. In the USA and Canada,
membership now exceeds one in ﬁve adults in many urban areas. Strong inﬂuence
on congestion and pollution can be felt from Toronto to New York, as each shared
vehicle replaces around 10 personal cars. City authorities with downtown areas
struggling with congestion and lack of parking slots are driving the growing
popularity of car sharing, encouraging people to give up their cars and use alter-
native transportation.

the world, using such Apps. Zipcar,

Car-sharing-rental Apps: A few innovative companies have appeared
throughout
the biggest car sharing
company in terms of membership (760,000 members), was one of them,
recently acquired by the Avis budget group for $500 million. This company
follows the faith of several other innovative start-ups snapped up by big car
rental companies. The Avis acquisition has shown synergies. Zipcar members
have gained access to Avis’ massive ﬂeet during weekends, when car-sharing
companies are usually short of cars and renting companies short on
customers.

356

6 New Transportation Business Models

Peer-to-peer car-sharing Apps: it allows city residents to rent out their
personal car to people who need transport, usually through Apps. To par-
ticipate in a car-sharing service, people must become members. Some com-
panies charge an annual fee for membership while others don’t. Users receive
a card that unlocks and locks the rented vehicles, which are conveniently
located to allow easy access. Reservations for the vehicles are made online,
and vehicles can be rented by the hour or by the day.

6.10.4 Mobile Taxi Hailing Apps

In the last years, taxi hailing companies had a go at the business of normal taxi
operators. In France for instance, 2014 street protest of taxi drivers who must pay a
hefty license to operate but in exchange beneﬁt from a protected market, have
blocked and paralyzed for a few days the main French cities.

6.11 Change of Car Ownership Business Model

For many baby boomers and the following generations of men and women, owning
a car was and still is perceived as a social status. Owning a fancy expensive car was
a sign that the driver had succeeded in life. We will look at the main factors
changing such perception (Fig. 6.7).

Fig. 6.7 The new generations
prefer using public transport
and owning tablets or smart
phones rather than dreaming
of owning a car. Source
Author

6.11 Change of Car Ownership Business Model

357

6.11.1 Car’s Negative Image

Young adults who would be in age to drive, or get their driver’s licenses, and by
extension buy their ﬁrst car, are increasingly deciding that it’s not a high priority.
Reasons explaining such attitudes toward cars are:
(cid:129) Rise of mass transit: It is today cool among young people to use mass transit.
In the past only poor people would dare taking public transport to university or
work, when they could afford not to;

(cid:129) The parent taxi: Teens parental transportation is another reason why many
young people hold off on getting their license or buying a car. Furthermore,
from a young person’s perspective, it makes good sense. Why go to the expense
of driving your own car when your parents will give you a lift?

(cid:129) Alternative transport means: Young people are increasingly combining mass

transit with walking and cycling, instead of using cars to get around;

(cid:129) Peer-to-peer transport: Young people can use their mobile to hail a ride from a
friend, participate in car pooling program or just rent a car by the minute;
(cid:129) High cost of driving: besides high acquisition and insuring cost, young people
must also pay high gasoline prices, tolls and in big cities congestion charges;
(cid:129) Boredom of driving: In the past, people could drive at high speed, drink and
drive and race their friends. Though this attitude killed thousands of young
people, it was still part of this image of excitement that cars carried on. Today,
with all the radars, new laws and law enforcement ofﬁcers ready to take out
licenses, young people ﬁnd more attractive other “extreme sports”.

(cid:129) Connectivity factor: While owning a car represented status and freedom for
past generations, modern cell phones, internet and the instant connectivity they
enable are the new freedom and success symbols of the “millennial” generation.

This disinterest in cars is generalized throughout developed countries. Even in
countries like the USA or Japan that are among the biggest car market, this trend
can be observed.

For instance a 2013 survey by the economic newspaper “Nikkei” indicated
that young people in the city of Tokyo were less and less prone to own a car.
Only 13 % of young Tokyo habitants own a car while they were 23 % in the
early 2000. Worst for car manufacturers, only 25.3 % said they would want to
buy a car against 48.2 % in a similar 2002 survey. This survey conﬁrmed that
young Japanese prefer to spend their money on ﬂat screen television, digital
cameras and other high tech electronic products.

358

6 New Transportation Business Models

6.11.2 Commoditization of Cars

Car manufacturers spend billions every year on marketing campaigns to position
their products according to social trends and values that allow their brand to dif-
ferentiate themselves from others.

The automotive industry is one of the industries that invest the most in
advertising. For instance in the last few years, automotive spending on
marketing costs represented between 8 and 9 % all spending of
the
$500 billion worldwide advertising market. This money is thought necessary
to maintain attractive brands, but also to help selling higher value cars. As we
all know, the industry members mainly make their proﬁt on their high end
products. Convincing a resident of a megacity that he needs a Ferrari to ride
in gridlocked cities at the outstanding speed of 20 km per hours is all about
selling a dream rather than the reality of jammed cities.

However, by 2030 most cars will be completely or partially driverless,
depending on the rate of unmanned technology adoption. This means that by then,
the special relationship that bonds fast car owners with their vehicle will have
totally disappeared for a simple reason: car performance directly associated to
acceleration and speed will have deﬁnitely vanished from a driverless environment
and with it the values associated with fast or powerful cars. Furthermore, around
2020, speed will most likely be automatically monitored or controlled (at least for
accidents), taking away some of the risks but also the feeling of freedom that drivers
still enjoy. In other words, an entire spectrum of the imaginary space promoted by
the car industry will have disappeared. This doesn’t mean that no space will remain.
Safety will remain a strong selling feature. Comfort and more generally the trav-
eling experience will become increasingly important. No wonder, car manufacturers
are insisting to maintain a close hand on the traveling experience, rather than
agreeing to transfer such experience to the IT moguls. This is for them a matter of
life and death in a ﬁve to ten year period. What is interesting to notice is that when
we look more carefully to these key selling features, they look strangely like values
that a bus or train operator are promoting. This is to say that more and more the
difference between public and private transport will shrink.

6.11.3 Blurring Differences Between Private and Public

Transport

An important question we should ask ourselves is what’s the difference between
public and private transport? The easy answer would be ownership and being

6.11 Change of Car Ownership Business Model

359

driven by somebody else. In fact, it is a little bit more complicated. People associate
public transport most of the time with electric vehicles and thus less pollution.
Safety could also be a differentiator, as cars tend to be involved in many more
deadly accidents, though in many countries taxis are also associated with public
transport. Higher transportation capacity and speed are probably also features
associated with trains. Now, as we’ve seen all along these pages, many of these
features will change.
(cid:129) Electric cars: As cars become electric, pollution will deﬁnitely cease to be an

issue for restricting cars use within inner city boundaries.

(cid:129) Driverless cars: As cars become controlled by software and not drivers, safety

will increase to level comparable to public transport.

(cid:129) Capacity: Capacity will continue to be a differentiator between public and
private transport in megacities. However, with car pooling, platooning and
lower interspacing distances between driverless vehicles, cars will become an
attractive “public transport” solution for mid size cities.

(cid:129) Speed: Speed will remain a crucial selling feature of trains for trips between 50
and 500 km. High Speed Trains will continue to increase their share of the
regional and intercity travel market.

(cid:129) Ownership: People and especially the younger generation are favorable to
sharing their cars or renting by the hour (with insurance by the hour as well).
Will these models become main stream or will they fade away?

6.11.4 Car Ownership Models

Why buy assets such as a car when you can rent it whenever you want one. In fact,
this is probably the worst investment people do. Most cars sit idle 95 % of the time.
Furthermore, brand new cars lose 25 % of their value when they exit the retailers’
door.

New business models such as peer-to-peer car sharing or car rental sharing can
bring huge beneﬁts to the environment, the occasional car users and the car owners
willing to share their assets. Some big car manufacturers have seen both the threat
and opportunity that such new business models could offer and have launched their
own competitive services. The most well known is probably Car2go.

Car2go is a subsidiary of Daimler AG providing services in European and
North American cities. It offers exclusively its small electric car—Smart—for
two people. Users get access via an App to wherever parked cars and are then
charged by the minute. These cars have autonomy of around 120 km after full
reload. Plugging the car into a charging station is only required at the end the
trip, if the charge has fallen under a certain threshold.

360

6 New Transportation Business Models

Fig. 6.8 Example of a
CAR2GO vehicle available at
European airports. Source
Author

Business model: Though rates may vary from city to city, the business model
is similar in all markets. Car2go charges per minute rates (i.e.: $0.41 in a US
city in 2014), with discounted ﬁxed rates for hourly ($14.99) and daily usage
($84.99). This fee covers rental, gasoline, insurances and parking. Sometimes
a low ﬁxed annual fee is also charged. Users can park their car in designated
parking places or standard parking areas with special city permits. Clients can
choose refueling their car to gain free usage minutes (Fig. 6.8).
Business model attractiveness: Though in May 2014, Car2go pulled out of
the UK for a lack of customers after less than 2 years in that market, it has
been extremely successful elsewhere. For instance, in Milano and Roma,
110,000 Italians have decided to use their services. That same year, there was
already 70,000 Car2go members in seven Germans cities. Worldwide more
than 700,000 people had subscribed in 2014 to the car2go services.5

Change in car ownership business models won’t just affect car sales it will also
impact the conventional taxi market. By getting an easy and almost immediate
access to cars, but also reducing the difﬁculty to ﬁnd parking space,
these
peer-to-peer and rental by the minute car sharing models will shrink the taxi market.
However,
taxi services will come in the
immediate future from peer-to-peer hailing companies.

threat for conventional

the biggest

5Automotive news Europe (29/5/14).

6.12 Change of “Public Service Car” Business Models

361

6.12 Change of “Public Service Car” Business Models

As we’ve just seen, cars are today considered private mainly because they are
owned and driven by citizens for their personal interest. Taxis on the contrary are
considered public ﬁrst and foremost because they serve different customers. This
section is dedicated to taxis and their inevitable changes of business models.

6.12.1 Conventional Taxi Business Model

Taxis riding along busy avenues or waiting in line to pickup travelers at airports or
railway stations are part of the standard urban landscape. Everyone can picture the
yellow cabs of New York or the black special London cars. As a matter of fact,
these taxis’ unique features are so well known that they have become themselves
one of the main attractions of these cities.

Taxis’ conventional business model has been the same for many years. Most
drivers are independent contractors owning their car or renting it from an
owner. The driver or the owner will pay a dispatch company a ﬁxed monthly
fee around 300 $. Taxi drivers wait for the dispatcher to tell them to pick up a
customer but will also stand in queues at speciﬁc areas for potential clients to
hop in, or drive along busy roads, hoping someone will hail
them. In
exchange for transporting people from their point of pickup to a speciﬁc
address, they cover a minimum fee to which is added a mixture of cost per
kilometer and time spent in trafﬁc. In some speciﬁc destination such as air-
port, a ﬂat fee is covered to both protect the drivers and the ingenuous
travelers.

Depending on the country, the taxi market is regulated or free for everyone to
operate in. In regulated market such as Paris, taxi drivers pay a hefty license that
can cost as much as 300,000 euro. This license is purchased either from the
municipal authorities or from previous taxi owners. In exchange for such expensive
right to operate, the municipal authorities ensure that the quantity of licenses is
maintained to a minimum to enable taxi drivers to repay the license’s acquisition
and ensure reasonable minimum revenue. Obviously, this maintains artiﬁcially high
prices for those who could afford to buy the license in the ﬁrst place. This also
means that offer is always lower than demand.

In cities like Paris, owning the phone number of a taxi company was con-
sidered in the past an advantage that Directors of big corporation would get as
a personal beneﬁts. For commoners it was almost impossible to ﬁnd a taxi

362

6 New Transportation Business Models

after 22:00. In exchange for tightly regulated markets, drivers are usually
expected to give a public service. This means in theory treating everyone with
equal access and knowing the city sufﬁciently well to make sure that pas-
sengers would receive the fastest and most direct trip possible. For instance,
in London drivers still are expected to know all city roads and the fastest way
to get anywhere in the city. Many candidates postulating to become a taxi
driver still need to pass a very competitive test, where knowing by heart most
city roads is still a prerequisite.

E-mobility technologies are changing all this. GPS is obviously eliminating the
need for taxi drivers to know all the city roads. Worst for taxis, new services such as
real-time trafﬁc update mean that taxi drivers themselves need to use GPS to know
the most rapid way to destination. Commoditization of taxi services is now the rule
in all developed countries. Furthermore, new taxi Apps are increasing this com-
moditization and changing durably the taxi industry’s business model. However
clever these Apps are, they wouldn’t be so popular if it wasn’t for the fact that
potential clients feel frustrated about the poor service provided by conventional
taxis. How many city dwellers around the world had to watch helplessly as several
taxis passed by full of passengers, or found themselves leaving a bar at night
without any way of getting home? How many innocent tourists have been ripped off
by taxis? How many regular taxi users have suffered taxi driver strikes in regulated
markets? Though many frequent travelers may say that this is more the exception
than the rule, few taxi clients have the impression that this is really a public service.
For most travelers, this is a normal business where taxis are small entrepreneurs
who want to maximize their proﬁts. As prices very often are decoupled from costs
in these regulated markets, there is not much sympathy for taxi owners.

6.12.2 New Taxi Hailing Business Model

Peer-to-peer taxi Apps like Hailo, GetTaxi, MyTaxi, and Uber connect passengers
directly to individual drivers using Apps. As both the numbers of mobiles and Apps
have exploded in the last few years, it is now facing strong reaction from local
conventional taxi services. General taxi strikes throughout Europe in June 2014 are
a clear sign that these services are starting to change profoundly the market. In fact
for those countries where they are already available, 5 % of all journeys are esti-
mated to use these services that year. Considering that these services only started
around 2011, it is easy to see that their growth has been exponential. Furthermore,
these Apps are now starting to expand from their home market to the main cities of
this world aiming at cities where inefﬁciencies are the highest: the most heavily
regulated markets.

6.12 Change of “Public Service Car” Business Models

363

New business model: these services use smart phone tools to locate potential
passengers, enter credit card details and provide a map to show the real-time
location of the hailed taxi. Some Apps even send additional information such
as the drivers name, the car registration plate and even the driver’s phone
number in case the driver or the passengers experience problems. In other
words they give accountability in an industry renown for freewheeling.

The companies behind these hailing Apps need to recruit and sign taxi
companies or independent taxi drivers, who accept to receive reservations.
With every day that passes by and the growth in brand awareness of these
Apps, this task is getting easier. Once a network is in place, the power of all
taxi apps comes from their complex algorithms that track which cars currently
the quickest pick
in operation within this network can provide
up. Furthermore, some newer algorithms are being developed to predict how
many more rides will be needed on a rainy day or on any nights with special
events. In big cities, Apps of areas where drivers are most likely to ﬁnd their
next fare are also produced to improve service and increase the likelihood to
ﬁnd nearby clients. In other words, these Apps are enhancing taxis’ avail-
ability in areas of demand and improving the taxi offer.
Remuneration: Hailing companies take a cut on the trip fee of around 10–
15 %. However, it requires a minimum fare per trip (i.e.: around 6 euro in
cities like London or Paris) that all passenger will need to pay, to ensure that
it is worthwhile for drivers. In some cities, services from companies like
Uber’s can cost 30 % less than conventional taxis. As competition intensiﬁes,
price is likely to drop even further. Competition will also ensure that such
services enter less densely populated areas, beneﬁtting other clients. In many
big cities, when everything is added, solutions such as Uber are cheaper than
owning a car.

Conventional companies aren’t looking at the train passing by without
employing themselves these technologies. Dozens of tech companies either
promote taxi Apps that operate alongside existing infrastructure (i.e.:
TaxiMagic or Cabulous) or make it affordable for taxi ﬂeets to launch their
own Apps for passengers to compete with the Uber and Hailo Apps (i.e.:
Fleetbit, MTData, or GoFastCab). However, the point is that by doing this
they are turning themselves also in internet hailing companies.

Impact of hailing service on society: Some experts predict that these services
could renew interest in public transport as people usually take taxis in conjunction
with other transportation means. Furthermore, in many cities and suburbs with
those types of services, it is becoming increasingly easy to organize your life
without a car. This doesn’t mean that suddenly all families will stop owning their
cars. This means that instead of having two or three cars, people will make better
use of their unique car, and use these services for all unexpected events.

364

6 New Transportation Business Models

6.12.3 The End of Taxi Drivers

The shrinking of the conventional taxi market has started and might be perceived by
taxi drivers as a calamity. However, “they haven’t seen nothing yet.” The reality is
that even if drivers start improving their image and their service level, they just
can’t compete on price. This is already the case when competing against online
hailing services, which can be 30 % cheaper. But this price difference is nothing
compared to a driverless cab business operational cost. Three different studies have
calculated that conventional taxi’s operational cost in big North American or
European cities would be about 8 times more expensive than driverless cab. How
long can taxi drivers expect to still be in business? By 2030, a signiﬁcant portion of
new purchased cars will be driverless and most cabs will be unmanned. In fact the
faith of taxi drivers could be played sooner. One of the speciﬁcities of taxi operation
is that they usually don’t run at high speed. When we look at it more closely,
average taxi speed in big cities such as London, New York or Paris is around
15–20 km/h and in most area speed is limited to 50 km or less.

The Google cars introduced in June 2014 are designed to drive at a maximum
speed of 40–50 km per hour. At that speed they would avoid the more
rigorous regulatory requirements that come with higher speed. This is the
perfect speed for unmanned cabs. This probably explains why Google
Venture has poured in August 2013, $257 million in Uber, though relation-
ship between both companies has soured since then. This strained relationship
could be partly the result of Uber’s 2015 announcing that it would invest in
driverless car technologies. It comes as no surprise that the June 2014 taxi
driver strikes were aimed mainly at Uber, even in some European cities where
this company wasn’t even present.

The real potential of Uber for Google is to get into the taxi multibillion dollar
market avoiding the likely damage to its brand that would surely result from
antagonizing taxi drivers. With this investment, Google could be in a position to
propose unmanned taxis reserved via smartphone—that as we’ve seen are so cheap
that they could make car ownership obsolete within inner cities. For a company
that’s investing in driverless technology, acquiring the technology to hail them
makes a lot of sense. It also ﬁts well with this IT’s core strategy of developing
tomorrow’s algorithms, which will become crucial elements of day-to-day
transportation.

Acknowledgments and Disclaimer The use of pictures or references made to studies or com-
panies and their brand does not in any way suggest that the authors of such studies or the
mentioned companies endorse in any way this book or its content. The author endeavors in
respecting the copyright subsisting any of the graphics, and texts that he uses, to use graphics and
texts he has himself created or to use graphics and texts not covered by copyright. All trademarks

6.12 Change of “Public Service Car” Business Models

365

and brand names quoted in the book including those protected by copyright of third parties are
subject unreservedly to the provisions of current copyright law and the rights of ownership of the
registered copyright holders.

Companies and Brands Stated in the Chapter

(cid:129) Mckinsey & Company
(cid:129) BNDES (Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Economico e Social)
(cid:129) Paribas (Banque de Paris et des Pays-Bas S.A)
(cid:129) Deutschbank
(cid:129) UBS Group AG
(cid:129) Blackstone
(cid:129) Apollo Global Management, LLC
(cid:129) KKR & Co L.P.
(cid:129) Carlyle Group L.P.
(cid:129) International Finance Corporation (IFC)
(cid:129) World Bank
(cid:129) Electricite de France S.A. (EDF)
(cid:129) Toyota Motor Corporation
(cid:129) Concessionária Porto Novo S/A
(cid:129) OAS Engenharia S.A.
(cid:129) Norberto Odebrecht
(cid:129) Carioca Christiani-Nielsen Engenharia
(cid:129) Google Inc.
(cid:129) Apple Inc.
(cid:129) Samsung
(cid:129) Facebook, Inc.
(cid:129) Google AdWords is a trademark of Google Inc.
(cid:129) Moovit
(cid:129) TranquilienTM is the trademark of Snips
(cid:129) Bluetooth (Low Energy)
(cid:129) Waze is an App developed by Waze Mobile acquired by Google Inc.
(cid:129) Microsoft Corporation
(cid:129) Carpool World
(cid:129) Zipcar is a subsidiary of Avis budget Group
(cid:129) Ferrari S.p.A.
(cid:129) Car2go is a subsidiary of Daimler AG
(cid:129) Smart is a division of Daimler AG
(cid:129) Hailo
(cid:129) GetTaxi
(cid:129) MyTaxi
(cid:129) Uber Inc.

Chapter 7
E-Mobility Likely Winners and Losers

Acronyms

Dedicated short-range communications

4G/LTE 4th Generation long term evolution
CAPEX Capital expenditure
DSRC
ERTMS European rail trafﬁc management system
EDA
M2M
OPEX
PRT
SOA
TCP-IP Transmission control protocol/Internet protocol
V2I
V2V
VANET Vehicular ad hoc network

Event driven architecture
Machine to machine
Operational expenses
Personal rapid transit
Service-oriented architecture

Vehicle to infrastructure
Vehicle to vehicle

7.1 Who Can Ignore the E-Mobility Revolution?

When we ﬁrst started writing about the megatrends shaping the future of transport,
we asked friends from very different backgrounds what were the main transporta-
tion issues they thought should be addressed. Two points of interests were invoked
very often. When will car ﬂy and will Elon Musk’s Hyperloop initiative be
implemented in the near future? Though both answers would probably require a
dedicated chapter, we will try to give a simple answer on the probability that these
two technologies will one day be popularized throughout the world. Though it
might seem that answering such questions is far from our e-mobility main topic, we
will use these two examples to illustrate how and why e-mobility implementation
and fate will be different.

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
S. Van Themsche, The Advent of Unmanned Electric Vehicles,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-20666-0_7

367

368

7 E-Mobility Likely Winners and Losers

7.1.1 Flying Cars

Why can’t cars ﬂy? After all, planes and helicopters have been around for more
than 100 years with good safety record. Building a solid airframe is surely not the
barrier to adoption of such technology, as the many ﬂying leisure objects prove it.
Obviously costs of owning, parking, and operating such equipment are much higher
than a car but nothing crazy to impede their market introduction. After all a Cessna
plane at around $150,000, is surely more expensive than a popular sedan, but
cheaper than a Ferrari. Furthermore, many companies have claimed over the years
that they were capable to design and build such technology.

The company PAL-V Europe NV is one of them. It recently designed a ﬂying
car with a short takeoff range of 165 m that could ﬂy up to 1200 km at a speed
of 180 km/h on roads and in the air. This two seat hybrid car and gyroplane
would be equipped with three wheels, giving it agility on the road and would
cost around $400,000. This is obviously not for the middle class but mass
production could do wonders in reducing these costs.

If neither cost nor technology is the main barrier to adoption, could standard and
personal requirements be? Not really. First, these cars could ﬂy lower than com-
mercial planes and thus wouldn’t be controlled by visual ﬂight rules trafﬁc. Hence,
drivers could takeoff without ﬂight plans. Some might argue that piloting would be
one of the main barriers to adoption. Though piloting in itself isn’t cheap, anyone
able to buy a 400,000 $ car could easily afford the pilot’s $10,000 license costs. But
earning a license is hard and requires years of time and study and could put off
many potential consumers. True, but technology would most likely soon solve this
problem, with the introduction of autopilot software. In fact, autopilot software for
unmanned drones can already be bought for as little as $500. Moreover, ﬂying
outside of reach of pedestrians, dogs, or even trees is simpler than driving on the
road. With the advent of new software, the piloting barrier should be overcome.

In reality, in the very near future only one barrier will be left but it will remain
huge: safety. In a society adverse to risk and prone to litigation, any accidents that
would most likely kill the passengers and bring fatalities also to the pedestrian or
homeowners on whom the ﬂying car would fall on, is hard to be adopted. Though
unlikely to happen in a near future, if only the legal barriers could be overcome,
ﬂying cars might not become as common a sight as unmanned cars, but they could
be more common than a Ferrari.

7.1 Who Can Ignore the E-Mobility Revolution?

369

7.1.2 Trains and Hyperloops

Crazy transport ideas have been around for years. We remember meeting a few
years ago serious scientists trying to ﬁnd a technology provider wishing to develop
underwater trains running in tubes along the American coast line. Though we might
smile at such an idea, it is not crazier than imagining ﬂying trains. Good science
ﬁction is based after all on sciences. The fact is that true breakthrough technology
does happen but takes time to mature. For instance, the original idea behind the
German Transrapid technology started in 1922 and culminated with a 1934 patent
for a levitation train. Though not a ﬂying train, maglev technology actually allows
trains to run contactless. However, it was only 80 years later that the Transrapid
to Pudong airport, achieving
train system was opened, connecting Shanghai
431 km/h operational speed.

Once breakthrough technology is proven, things usually get easier for their
implementation but not always. It is true that levitated trains have found application
in trains at lower speed (i.e., Korean technology running at 100 km/h). A more
audacious system composed of pods attached to monorail tracks using magnets to
reduce friction (SkyTran Company) could also potentially be implemented in Tel
Aviv. Magnets used to reduce friction have even found new market applications.
Thyssenkrupp, one of the Transrapid founding group, announced in 2014 a faster
walkway based on levitated technology, which is used to solve the difﬁculty of
stepping onto a rapidly moving surface without stumbling or slowing down the
passenger ﬂow. People might have smiled 10 years ago if any scientists would have
mentioned ﬂying carpets…

The reality is that it is extremely difﬁcult to make money out of such break-
through technologies. Germany, the birth place of Maglev trains, hasn’t even been
able to ﬁnance such technology on its own territory. On the other hand, no one in
2014 would doubt that the Japanese Government, 50 years after the opening
anniversary of the world’s ﬁrst high speed train between Tokyo and Osaka, could
build by 2027 a 500 km/h levitation technology between Tokyo and Nagoya (on
test tracks it broke the 603 km/h barrier in April 2015). The point is that crazy ideas
are just visions before an industrial or a country decides to back ﬁnancially the
project. Nowadays almost anything can be built. The problem isn’t technology
related. It comes from the difﬁculty to deliver such complex projects on schedule
and within budget, with the legal authorization to operate.

Will the fate of the hyperloop concept be different from the maglev and be
introduced quickly and successfully on the market? The hyperloop has some things
going for it. First, the idea doesn’t come from just anybody, but from Mr. Musk,
one of the most successful entrepreneurs of these last 20 years. Second, the idea was
already there. Mr. Musk proposes to revive an old science-ﬁction idea from the
1910s called the “vacuum train,” with a few important tweaks. Instead of having a
real vacuum tube with no air as originally envisioned, it is planned to remove
sufﬁcient air from the tubes to keep air drag to a minimum, dealing with it in other
ways, such as pushing it to the sides to create a cushion, reducing friction between

370

7 E-Mobility Likely Winners and Losers

pod and tunnel walls. Third, and though the system would be completely new, it
would rely on propulsion and other known technology (linear induction motor and
booster motors). Finally, at a speed of 1200 km/h, each vehicle carrying 28 people
would cover the route between San Francisco and Los Angeles in little over half an
hour, making such journey attractive enough for passengers, and competitive in
relation to airplanes.

With all this going for it, would we put our own money to invest in such project?
Not really. The main issue as always is that the provisionary budgetary ﬁgure of
around $6 billion will never be met and most likely end up costing twice or three
time this amount. Thus, will this crazy technology ever be implemented? Once
again the problem is that someone or some Government's entity needs to build a
reasonable pilot project to give credibility to the technology. Mr. Musk has men-
tioned the possibility to do just that and build an 8 km prototype in Texas.
However, and until an industrialist such as Mr. Musk or a Government commits
resources, the hyperloop concept will stay just that way: a concept.

7.1.3 Can the E-Mobility Not Happen?

Unlike Maglev when it was ﬁrst introduced or the hyperloop that is still an idea,
e-mobility revolves around proven technologies that have leapfrogged from other
industries (i.e.,
telecom and IT). There is no need for fundamental research
breakthroughs for e-mobility’s implementation. It is true that the improvement of
these
technology would allow earlier
two critical pieces of
e-mobility technologies.
(cid:129) Batteries would beneﬁt greatly from a breakthrough, but progress in perfor-
mance has been steady and should be sufﬁcient to make electrical cars attractive
to the mass market in the very near future.

introduction of

(cid:129) Complex algorithms enabling the perception of the environment are still not
capable of seeing and understanding a vehicle’s surroundings as accurately as a
human being can. Among the issues that IT providers must solve is the infer-
ential thinking that drivers have, because they can combine stored memories and
sensory input to interpret events and anticipate likely scenarios.

One big advantage of unmanned cars is that, unlike for public transport, there is no
money issue involved in bringing all these e-mobility technologies to market. In
fact, it is quite the opposite. The e-mobility revolution will bring tremendous
revenue opportunity for those companies that will be able to anticipate the market
trends and provide product and service offering that new technologies, regulations,
and fulﬁllment of unattended needs will generate. With so much money involved
(by 2020–2025 the market size for the unmanned technologies alone will be around
$200 billion), there is no doubt in our mind that the automotive industry will go the
same way as the railway industry: electric and unmanned. No big IT corporation,
industrial group, car, or railway manufacturer, and infrastructure company can

7.1 Who Can Ignore the E-Mobility Revolution?

371

ignore such a fundamental shift in urban mobility. There will deﬁnitely be winners
but also market losers that will see revenue, relevancy, or brand awareness shrink or
rise as a result of these new offerings.

7.2 E-Mobility Technology Adoption

The railway, bus, and automotive markets are at different stages of their e-mobility
development. We believe there will be many similarities between their evolutions.
Cars and buses will become electric relying on more powerful batteries. At the same
time, tramways will be more and more often seen in free-catenary operation, as the
railway industry can beneﬁt from the battery mass production generated by elec-
trical cars. All transport means will at one point in time become unmanned.

7.2.1 Railway Industry

The railway industry has already started its e-mobility revolution. IP technologies
have been introduced not only on the wayside but also on the onboard environment
at the beginning of this century. Machine to machine (M2M) technology is now
becoming pervasive throughout the railway maintenance sites and yards. Most
railway operators and manufacturers have realized that by associating data mining
capabilities with algorithms able to associate separate events meaningfully, failures
can be detected before they happen. This new discipline called predictive mainte-
nance will be reducing signiﬁcantly the total cost of ownership.

Other signaling technologies based mainly on software are replacing the old
electromechanical solutions. New technologies such as moving block, though not
based on IP technologies, are enhancing the safety and enabling shorter headways.
By reducing time required between two trains to around 60 s, mass transit capacity
can be increased signiﬁcantly. System compatibility is also being pushed at the
European level through signaling software standardization, enabling compatibility
between the various regional levels. ERTMS technology level 3 is indeed enabling
the integration of intercity railway network.

7.2.2 Automotive and Bus Industries

In this book, we have rarely focused on the bus industry. The fact is that on the
e-mobility revolution, automotive and bus industries are following the same path,
almost at the same pace. It is true that the bus industry has for some time promoted
noncarbon fuel technologies. As a matter of fact trolleybuses have been around
for decades relying on electric energy like tramways. However, performance

372

7 E-Mobility Likely Winners and Losers

improvement to electrical buses will leapfrog from better and cheaper battery
generated by mass production in the automotive industry.

Unmanned technology is also most likely to come from the automotive market.
This automotive industry is only starting its e-mobility revolution and, in our view,
will follow the same system approach as the railway industry, adopting similar
safety concepts, as well as being based on a mix of TCP-IP protocols and non-IP
technologies. Many barriers to e-mobility technology adoption exist but are being
lifted or will be.

7.2.3 Lack of Industry Standard

For many years, car manufacturers have decided to go their own way, pushing their
proprietary solutions as a way to differentiate their brands. However, a system
approach requires adoption of standards throughout the industry to enable inter-
the automotive
operability. Finally, after many years of fruitless discussions,
industry has adopted its future product platform around the IP technologies. The
ﬁrst cars to hit the roads with onboard IP network should do so in 2015–2016. Such
an open architecture should enable software developers to develop Apps and new
service offerings across the industry.

7.2.4 Lack of Infrastructure

Unfortunately, not everything is perfect even when e-mobility technology is already
available. For instance, though many manufacturers are investing massively in
electric cars, many early adopters of such technology still complain about the lack
of autonomy and even, more importantly, about the limited recharging infrastruc-
ture. This is a chicken and egg issue. Without recharging infrastructure, potential
customers are discouraged from buying the technology. Without enough electric
cars, potential investors don’t want to equip roads or parking with recharging
infrastructure. Governments and municipalities must at the early stage intervene and
supply the minimum infrastructure to foster this new industry. Faster recharging
technologies should also help, as cars will be able to spend less time at the
recharging station. New charging plugs and high capacity DC recharging equip-
ment are helping reduce charging time from a few hours to a few minutes. In fact,
some manufacturers are working on charging technology which would reduce the
necessary time to only ﬁve minutes. At 5 minutes per recharge, a time comparable
to gasoline refueling, the market dynamics change and allow gasoline stations to
see a beneﬁt in providing electrical plug-in.

7.2 E-Mobility Technology Adoption

373

7.2.5 Unmanned Car Technology Adoption Barriers

Self-driving technologies is still in its infancy, but prototypes such as the Google
car have proven that they can work. What are mainly still missing for truly
unmanned vehicles are the sensor-based technologies at a reasonable price,
connected-vehicle communications, and the fusion of these two technologies.

7.2.6 Sensor Technology

Advanced sensor technology like the ones that equipped Google cars—lidar, radar,
and stereo cameras—are expensive and create a real barrier to adoption of
unmanned vehicles. At a price estimated at around $150,000, the self-driving
technology of a Google car is still far from reaching an acceptable price for its
introduction in ordinary cars. It will require from car manufacturers and their OEMs
hard work and beneﬁts from economy of scale. Specialists forecast that mass
production of these sensors should allow prices to fall to around 10,000 $ by 2025
and to less than $5000 by 2030. At that price, adoption on each and every car shall
be systematic and by then probably legally mandatory. Time isn’t playing against
the auto part manufacturers. Onboard software, and car and wayside telecom
infrastructure won’t happen out of the blue and swamp the market overnight. On the
contrary, car manufacturers will bring to market a continuum of new technologies,
each one more autonomous as time goes by, till vehicles become completely
driverless. Some of these solutions already exist, such as parking assistance,
adaptive cruise control, lane—keeping and warning systems. Many others are in
the manufacturers’ pipeline but will
tested, and
implemented.

take time to be developed,

7.2.7 V2V and V2I Connectivity Solution

(V2I) will

Real-time wireless communication between vehicles (V2V) and between vehicles
and infrastructure
sensor-based technology. Such
complement
safety-critical communication must be reliable, immediate, secure, network and
device agnostic, as well as operate in a dedicated and free or commercial spectrum.
Similar to trains with radio technology, communicating cars will need to blend
multiple networking technologies, including dedicated short-range communication
(DSRC), 4G/LTE cellular wireless broadband (or by 2020 5G technology), mesh
networking, precise mapping, and accurate geo-positioning. All these technologies
already described in this book form a system that goes in the name of VANET.
Some of these technologies already exist and can easily be implemented while
the prototype stage. However, European and American
others are still at

374

7 E-Mobility Likely Winners and Losers

Governments have realized the potential of these technologies and are planning
laws and incentivizing measures that should push by 2017 the spectrum of
autonomous car technology we’ve described thoroughly in this book.

7.2.8 Putting All Pieces Together

To work, unmanned cars will require that many pieces of a large puzzle ﬁt together.
How quickly these pieces will be put together remains an open question because it
depends on how car manufacturers, transport authorities, law makers, and con-
sumers will work together to speed or inhibit progress. In our view, self-driving
technology will follow a very different adoption process to Maglev and hyperloop’s
technology. In fact, such adoption process is more similar to the ﬂying car tech-
nology. Many factors will inﬂuence the adoption pace but unlike for ﬂying cars,
they are much easier to solve. Let us now review how these factors that we’ve
regrouped under three major categories—consumer acceptance, achieving critical
mass, and legal framework—will be solved for self-driving technology to thrive.

Consumer acceptance One of the biggest barriers to adoption is the trust in tech-
nology. We shouldn’t forget that experienced drivers will fear putting their life into
the hands of onboard computers. Obviously, passengers won’t have the same fear
as if their car would be ﬂying but they will still need to trust that received signals
come from the right car, that the cars’ position is reported accurately, and that no
one is hacking the system. Trust will come with time, as the number of accidents
and fatalities will fall drastically. Furthermore, two megatrends we’ve identiﬁed
will facilitate this acceptance. The growing number of senior citizens will adopt
driverless technology massively. The younger generation that doesn’t cherish cars
as much as the older generations, will also be early adopters. These highly computer
literate generations are more than likely to see robot cars as cool.
Critical mass effect To work well, V2V technology requires a large ﬂeet of vehicles
equipped with interoperable communication systems, relying on V2I technology
installed throughout important regional areas. The higher the density of cars using
V2V technology the more reliable the network will become. As some level of
cooperation will be required between cars, the overhaul of existing ﬂeets will be a
key issue to address early, to ease driverless technology implementation.

Legal and regulatory framework Lack of legislation will without doubt impact the
speed of adoption. Some American states (i.e., Nevada, California) or countries like
the UK have already passed restricted legislation allowing licensing and operation
of autonomous vehicle. Governments will need to push for implementation of
standardized V2V technology and safety concepts to allow interoperability between
various car manufacturer systems. Incentives though less compelling than regula-
tion would also have broad effects on the industry. In Chap. 3, we’ve discussed
thoroughly the complex legal issues that come with self-driving cars and have

7.2 E-Mobility Technology Adoption

375

identiﬁed the changes in liability responsibility. Litigation-related issues that come
with widespread use of autonomous vehicles will be a challenge but unlike for
ﬂying car start-up, automotive manufacturers are well prepared to ﬁght back such
issues.

7.2.9 Growing or Shrinking Market?

There is no question in our mind that the global car market will keep growing in the
next 10–15 years in volume, in great part thanks to millions of citizens from
developing countries reaching middle class status and wealth. The semiautonomous
technologies that will be brought to market should make also room for increase in
value proposition with higher prices. In other words, at least for the next 10 years,
the market for semiautonomous technology will grow exponentially and could
reach these $200 billion we indicated earlier.

The issue about market growth or reduction will start being relevant after, when
unmanned car technology will hit the road in signiﬁcant numbers. The key question
for car manufacturers is will consumers see beneﬁts in buying their own car or will
they feel comfortable with public cars? It is a difﬁcult question to answer. Do
people buy goods for their practicality or for their status? Today nobody needs a
watch anymore, but still people love to wear them. Our opinion, which doesn’t rely
on any market research, is that people will still want to own a luxurious car and
continue cruising at 20 km/h in the places to be seen. For leisure or for long trips,
owning a car will probably continue to be the simplest, cheapest, and most com-
fortable form of travel. In the rural and remote areas, it will probably remain the
only way to travel.

In fact, the issue will be restricted to commuting and inner city trips. However,
as the number of city residents will represent more than 75 % of the worldwide
population, this is no small issue for the automotive industry to address. In this
urban environment, self-driving cars could have a signiﬁcant negative effect on car
sales in three different ways:
(cid:129) Family owned car reduction: In many parts of the rich word, families own
more than one car. An autonomous car would be able to drop one family
member and return home to pick-up the other members.

(cid:129) Car ownership reduction: In Chap. 6, we’ve seen that peer-to-peer and rental
business models are becoming popular within the city limits. They ensure that
cars don’t stay idle 90 % of the time but instead be used by several clients during
the day. Since these business models still require some kind of administrative
work and have restrictions such as parking or refueling, the number of clients is
still limited. Now let us imagine that these cars could be summoned whenever
needed or programmed for daily pick-up with the help of some smartphone
Apps. Doesn’t it look like a taxi model promoted by companies such as Uber?
the cost of a ride with an
The big difference, however, would be that

376

7 E-Mobility Likely Winners and Losers

autonomous car would be reduced by around 75 %! At that price it would make
no economic sense to own a car for small trips.

(cid:129) Multi-points to multi-points traveling: Train and buses are limited to
point-to-point transport, following a deﬁned journey with its stopping areas.
Public Rapid Transit allows for point to multi-point transport, where pods can go
directly to the selected bay area without having to stop at intermediary stations.
Autonomous cars with the right Apps will allow for pick-up and drop-off of
several passengers, based on optimization criteria linked to neighborhood or
journey line. This would drop even further “public unmanned taxi” costs.

So how negatively will car sales be affected by these new consumer behaviors?
Some specialists forecast a signiﬁcant drop in sales volume, mainly based on
economical reasons. With autonomous cars providing cheap transport services, it
really doesn’t make any sense to own two or three cars when a self-driving car can
pick-up and drop-off several family members throughout the day.

We will now try to ﬁgure out what could be the impact by 2025. The US
Census Bureau gives us the evolution of American families. From this cen-
sus, we can estimate that there will be 137 million households by 2025. Using
an average of 2 cars per household (2011 study by the Center for Automotive
Research) we could project that by 2025, the total number of cars in the US
would be 284 million.

Furthermore, using the 2007 American Household Survey, we know that
29 % of U.S. households were located in central cities. Using the 2010
census, we could estimate the risk to car sales volume in 2025 to roughly 100
million cars or around 36 % of the entire American ﬂeet. This risk is linked to
the second car owned by urban citizens by 2025. We don’t believe that urban
residents whose sole interests are located within the city limits, represent a
risk for the industry, as they are already not buying cars.

We know that not all these families could live on only one car, but supposing
half the families were to reduce their car ownership, this would still represent a
20 % reduction in car ownership, a percentage that could probably be applied to
other rich countries. This doesn’t mean that such reduction in volume would
necessarily translate into a shrinking market value. Indeed with such savings,
families would have more discretionary money and might decide to buy more
luxurious cars, reducing overall revenue losses for car manufacturers.

Surprisingly, there is a large portion of transport means that will be impacted by
autonomous cars. Our view is the day cars are electric, unmanned, and managed by
a ﬂeet owner there will be no differentiation between public and private transport.
What we think is that taxi drivers will disappear but their services will thrive. By
proposing journeys for one-fourth of the current taxi ride cost, ﬂeets of autonomous
cars will start competing with buses and light metro cars on price. As cars are more

7.2 E-Mobility Technology Adoption

377

comfortable and offer more direct rides, public transport users might decide to
change their transport behaviors. Furthermore and as mentioned, multi-points to
multi-points transport services with mini vans or big cars will drastically reduce bus
attractiveness, as fares could be shared among multi-point passengers. At one point
in time, transport authorities will just conclude that rather than subsidizing big
buses or tramways that run empty, it will make more sense to introduce such
services, especially outside peak hour.

In other worlds, not only can’t car manufacturers ignore the e-mobility revolu-
tion but bus and light train manufacturers are also forced to understand how their
own business will be affected by such revolution in the car industry. After all, one
of the principles we’ve seen is that all transportation means are competing against
each other. The e-mobility revolution will disrupt the transport market and will
bring opportunities and threats for many potential actors. Strategic consultants will
probably claim that under such disruptive forces, car manufacturing might no
longer be the core competency, as it could easily be subcontracted. Consumers
would buy the new self-driving cars based on the proposed “signaling performance
and connectivity solutions.” In order to assess this possibility let us look at the
recent history of two manufacturing industries: railway and mobile phone.

7.2.10 Railway Signaling Business Model

As we’ve seen, the e-mobility revolution already hit the railway industry a few
years ago. However, if we look at the impact on the competitive landscape, we
cannot identify new market entrants that have disrupted the industry. Nowhere is
there to be seen any massive transfer of manufacturing to cheap Chinese manu-
facturers. Though Asian manufacturers have become global market players, they
achieved this status by competing directly with the big European railway manu-
facturers, not as their subcontracting companies.

In fact, it is quite the opposite that has happened. We’ve indeed assisted to a
consolidation of the industry, with mainly independent signaling companies being
bought by the big railway manufacturers.

7.2.11 Smartphone Revolution

Who would have predicted at the turn of the millennium that the major phone
manufacturer Nokia would sell its mobile phone division to Microsoft after getting
ousted of the smartphone market? Who would have foreseen that Research in
Motion would lose its grip on the smartphone market? Probably not many, as it was
difﬁcult to anticipate that IT companies such as Apple or Google would come up
with such creative technology as the I-phone or the Google Android System.

378

7 E-Mobility Likely Winners and Losers

To understand if some IT companies could do the same trick to the automotive
industry, let’s focus on these two companies’ smartphone business model.

Apple designs the I-Phone hardware and develops the software based on a
common platform for all its products. Clients can feel the software commonalities
between the products and the interoperability between the technologies. The
manufacturing is subcontracted to Asian equipment providers. Google on the
contrary develops an operating system that all phone manufacturers can adapt and
personalize to their hardware. They only sell their operating system licenses with
the applications that can run on the phones.

7.2.12 Designer Model

Could we envision that big IT companies such as Apple, Google, IBM, or
Microsoft decide to become a car designer, subcontracting the car building portion,
for instance to a cheap Asian manufacturer? This might seem like a fantasy today,
but let’s not forget what happened in the smartphone business. First, the automotive
market is much more fragmented than the mobile market was. Nokia held a little
more than 50 % market share of the smartphone market in 2007, while the biggest
automotive players Toyota or Volkswagen have less than 10 % currently. Second,
there are loads of cheap Asian car manufacturers that would love to manufacture for
one of these IT companies. Quality for some of the Chinese car manufacturers could
still be an issue, but for most of them gaining brand awareness in and outside China
is more problematical than providing the right level of quality. A Google or Apple
car manufactured by them would solve their problem altogether. Third, many car
manufacturers cannot seem to turn a decent proﬁt. We shouldn’t forget that during
the subprime crisis, most car manufacturers had to be saved from the brinks by their
national Governments. On the contrary these IT companies are huge cash machines
that need to foster growth to maintain their stock valuation.

The competitive landscape is favorable but how likely is it that these IT companies
decide to build unmanned cars? In our view, this is a remote but tangible possibility.
In fact, Google has never ruled out that it wouldn’t manufacture cars. Furthermore, it
decided in 2014 to build its own prototype cars and could follow suit if they were
successful. Apple has also announced that it wishes to enter the unmanned electric car
market, without saying if it would build them or just sell the signaling technology.
Obviously it would be much easier for Google and Apple to team up with one second
Tier player from the rich or the developing world. If successful such an alliance could
then sweep out through the world. Another interesting option that would save time
and energy would be for these IT companies to buy one of the second-tier car
manufacturers when the technology would be more mature. Any of these IT com-
panies could certainly afford easily to acquire a car manufacturer.

Finally, we shouldn’t forget that as time goes buy, it will become increasingly
difﬁcult for these big IT companies to ﬁnd new markets attractive enough to make a
difference in their annual turnover. With 2014 worldwide sales around $1.6 trillion

7.2 E-Mobility Technology Adoption

379

(i.e., 82 million cars at $20,000 per car), the automotive market would deﬁnitely
qualify as big enough to make a signiﬁcant impact on these companies’ ﬁnancial
results.

7.2.13 Licensing Model

Google has already pulled off such a strategy with its Android operating system.
This model is also probably a less risky strategy for an IT company with no real
manufacturing or mechanical competency. This safer market approach can still
bring tremendous beneﬁts for any IT company. Assuming a cost between $2000
and $5000 for the driverless operating system, this would still represent a market
opportunity of $160–$400 billion, not
including Apps and additional service
offering directly related to cars. Furthermore, we shouldn’t forget that IT companies
can beneﬁt enormously from a strong position in the car environment with potential
huge additional sales due to search queries or download of infotainment content.
Major carmakers would most likely resist letting Google or Apple control the
driving OS and signaling layer of their vehicles. Indeed many big car manufacturer
companies have spent decades working on driverless cars. General Motors has a large
driverless car testing facility outside of Detroit. Toyota opened its laboratory for
self-driving car near Mount Fuji. Furthermore, the joint acquisition of Nokia's map-
ping solution by Audi, BMW and Daimler can clearly be associated with the perceived
risk associated with these big IT companies. But, even if some carmakers could match
Google’s or Apple’s technology proﬁciency, it is doubtful that every carmaker could.
Furthermore, it is unlikely that those that couldn’t would easily team up to develop
such technology, as this a pretty divided industry. An OEM such as Bosch could
maybe try and if successful would anyhow replicate such licensing model. So in fact it
is quite possible that smaller players would turn to IT companies as a white knight in
response to capabilities developed by these bigger automotive manufacturers.

7.2.14 Service Model

Unmanned vehicles could be dispatched by taxi and car service companies. In this
model, companies that manage efﬁciently ﬂeets of vehicles would be well posi-
tioned to capture a signiﬁcant portion of the automotive market. Three types of
companies with such capacities come immediately to mind:
(cid:129) Rental companies that already do that for a living for more than 50 years, as well

as the newer version that rents by the hour;

(cid:129) Hailing service companies such as Uber, which announced its interest in the

driverless technology; and

(cid:129) Service providers of car ﬂeet management for the big corporations.

380

7 E-Mobility Likely Winners and Losers

What is less evident but also possible is that bus or railway operators could also
decide to acquire such driverless ﬂeet and bundle their services together. Why not
imagine these operators providing self-driving services at bus stops or train stations
for an extra fee to enable passengers to do the last kilometers quickly and com-
fortably. They after all are in close relation with many potential clients and have the
most to fear about such service model. We shouldn’t also lose sight that many of
these companies are State owned. This would give them the political clout to be
attributed the management of “public” transport taxi ﬂeets.

7.3 E-Mobility Likely Losers

In the previous chapter, we’ve seen that the conventional taxi industry is the ﬁrst
likely fatality of the e-mobility revolution. It won’t be the only one. In order to
deﬁne who would be the other losers we would need a crystal ball to see which one
of the three models would be dominant. Regardless of these future insights, there
are at least a few industries that we can fairly assess will lose big time. For instance,
in a world of ubiquitous cheap unmanned taxis or family own driverless cars, we
surely won’t need as many parking lots.

7.3.1 Parking Owners and Municipalities

Conventional cars can stand idle 90–95 % of the time. Making sure they could be
used 24/7, transporting more than just car owners, would reduce signiﬁcantly the
need for parking space. Indeed, a ﬂeet of cheap unmanned taxis could shuttle
maybe 50–100 passengers a day. This would reduce signiﬁcantly the need to park
in inner city areas, where people most often need to park their car. Moreover, to
avoid parking tickets, owned unmanned cars could adopt three strategies:
(cid:129) Continue driving, which would make sense for short-duration visits;
(cid:129) Park in neighboring roads, for longer period visits; and
(cid:129) Go back home or park anywhere without parking obligations for long durations.

Furthermore, as cars proposed in programs such as Car2Go are usually electric and
smaller, fewer parking spaces are even likely to be needed, reducing even further
the need for parking area.

Many people might not know, but this is likely to impact a huge business.
in the
the million commercial parking spaces generate revenues in the

According to the International Parking Institute,
USA alone,
$25–$30 billion range.

is estimated that

it

Parking companies aren’t the only entities that offer parking space that will be
affected. Municipalities that can cover a signiﬁcant portion of their budget with
surface parking will also lose. For example, London city earned in 2012,

7.3 E-Mobility Likely Losers

381

600 million pounds ($1 billion) in parking revenues. And it’s not the only money
that will disappear for municipalities. Fine revenues will shrink, as self-driving cars
will drive till ﬁnding the right available parking slot. On the other hand, parking
space freed could be sold for other usage, compensating for some of this lost.
Though each city is different, this could generate good money or improve quality of
life, as surface parking can represent up to 25 and 10 % of big American and
European cities respectively. Finally, ordinary homes, ofﬁces, and shopping centers
wouldn’t need the vast ﬁelds of parking that are required by law in many cities,
opening the possibility to add more apartments or green areas as well.

7.3.2 Car Manufacturers

On one side, we are saying that the worldwide car market will double by 2025 and
on the other hand, we are including car manufacturers in this section about losers.
The reality is that history has not been kind to those who get stuck protecting the
status quo in face of disruptive changes. Though they have decades of experience in
designing and manufacturing vehicles, as well as in creating emotional bonds with
consumers, they could lose easily their grip on the market to IT companies or as
we’ve seen when unmanned technology becomes universal, see their sales volume
drop as families stop buying their second car.

As in many industries, proﬁts in the automotive industry have migrated down-
stream to the service providers. Car manufacturers haven’t really been able to
transform their business into a service industry like other industries facing such
trends have been able to. Could they transform themselves into a ﬂeet manager to
recapture these proﬁts having control over service, repairs, and every other new
services that e-mobility will enable? Unfortunately, if the past is a sign of the future
this isn’t going to happen.

Among the car manufacturers there will also be winners and losers. The car
manufacturers that could lose the most are the ones that are associated with images
of powerful and fast cars. This doesn’t mean that the Ferraris of this world won’t be
able to thrive in such a world, as rich people still need to ﬁnd a way to splash money
around. However, it will be difﬁcult to sell the image of a fast car, when speed is
limited to 50 km/h in urban environments and 120 km/h on highways and no one
has the hands on the wheel. More generally, all the brands that sell the pleasure of
driving will have to reposition themselves around new concepts. Brands targeting
urban residents are also more likely to lose than those that sell to farmers or to small
city residents. Brands associated with the second family car images are also likely
to see their sales drop as their number will reduce signiﬁcantly. On the contrary,
brands associated with stylish design will thrive, as vehicle will be much less
inﬂuenced by safety feature, such as visibility, window placement, strength and
stiffness of materials, bumpers, etc. With much safer cars, design possibilities will
explode (Figs. 7.1 and 7.2).

382

7 E-Mobility Likely Winners and Losers

Fig. 7.1 Picture of the internal setting of the Mercedes Benz self-driving car presented in 2014.
This unmanned car presented as “Luxury in Motion” F 015 shows some of the potential internal
layouts. Source Mercedes Benz (Copyright of Mercedes Benz and kindly lent for this book)

Fig. 7.2 External view of Mercedes Benz’ driverless concept car showed in January 2015, which
gives a view of the unlimited opportunities for luxurious and stylish designs. Source Mercedes
Benz (Copyright of Mercedes Benz and kindly lent for this book)

7.3 E-Mobility Likely Losers

7.3.3 Body Shops

383

With much fewer accidents, the number of auto body shops will dramatically
decrease, and the jobs inside these facilities will as well.

7.3.4 Current PRT Manufacturers

The few current manufacturers of PRT systems won’t be able to face competition
from all the big players that will want to create this market. This isn’t to say that
PRT will disappear. On the contrary, they will thrive under a different environment,
based on ﬂeets of unmanned cabs. It could be a clever move to acquire these
companies for corporations wishing to position themselves early in this market.

7.3.5 Steel Companies

Steel represents more than 60 % of a car’s materials, offering passengers protection
in a collision. With massive decrease in accidents, cars will likely be redesigned out
of lighter-weight material for greater fuel efﬁciency. This movement will be
strengthened by the need to lower weight to increase electric car autonomy.

7.3.6 Light Rail Vehicle

In cities reaching 250,000 inhabitants, there is a need for public transport. The day
passengers can hop in an unmanned cab for 25 % of the current taxi prices, meaning
a price that is cheaper or at par with current public transport fares, people will start
switching from public tramway or light rail vehicle to public unmanned cars.
Municipal authorities might then decide to lower fares to make it competitive again
but might also decide altogether that the service provided by these unmanned cabs
is more than adequate.

7.3.7 Conventional Bus Operation

By 2025 buses won’t just vanish from big cities, they will have become driverless,
following the same trend as cars and trains. Per se, this isn’t a threat for bus
manufacturers or operators but probably an opportunity to sell added value. The
issue though is that by then ﬂeets of unmanned public taxis will compete directly

384

7 E-Mobility Likely Winners and Losers

with buses. Similarly as for tramway services, bus ticket will be more expensive or
at par. However, unmanned taxis will be able to propose multi-point to multi-point
transportation, adding the ﬂexibility and comfort
that buses cannot for less.
Wherever road capacity won’t be an issue, ﬂeets of unmanned cars or vans will
most likely substitute buses, especially in the evening or on weekends when
demand is low. In fact, electric unmanned cabs could be the most serious threats
that the bus industry has ever faced.

7.3.8 Conventional Car Rental Industry

Three main factors are disrupting the traditional car rental market. Smartphone
Apps are used more and more to book cars, reducing signiﬁcantly the number of
rental over the counter, especially at airports and affecting the proﬁtability of each
transaction. New business models such as car-sharing and peer-to-peer sharing are
reducing the need for short term car rental. Furthermore, renewed interest by car-
makers (i.e., Daimler and Renault) in providing such services is likely to make
competition worst. In the long run, if these companies cannot position themselves
as a service provider of unmanned cars or taxis, they could also lose all their short
term rental business.

7.3.9 Fossil Fuel Industry

Cars will be built from lighter-weight components and run on electric motors.
Furthermore, carpooling and cars driving in convoys to reduce wind resistance are a
few of the e-mobility solutions that will reduce demand for fuel per kilometer
traveled. However, will petrol demand shrink in transportation is a completely
different issue. At least in the short term, this isn’t likely to happen, as the number
of cars is likely to double in the next 20 years. Furthermore, as most car sales
growth is to come from developing countries, it is more than unlikely that the
infrastructure to allow for transport electriﬁcation will be available overnight. What
is clear is that in the long run this electriﬁcation will happen and fossil fuel in cars
or buses will be something of the past.

7.3.10 Health Sector

Throughout the world, emergency rooms will lose millions of patients a year
resulting from less numerous and severe crashes. A consequential damage of the
lower number of deaths of wealthy young men and women is that the number
of transplants will collapse, as the number of potential donors will dwindle.

7.3 E-Mobility Likely Losers

385

Additionally, hospitals and doctors will have much fewer people who will be
hospitalized because of pollution-related diseases. Chiropractic will lose a big
source of revenue as the number of handicapped or crippled people will be reduced
signiﬁcantly.

7.3.11 Personal-Injury Lawyers

Mainly present in the States, injury lawyers would see car-related cases all but
disappear. In fact, the trend has already started as the spread of onboard cameras
makes it much easier to identify the guilty party.

7.4 E-Mobility Likely Winners

In our view there will be more winners than losers in the e-mobility revolution and
society as a whole will beneﬁt greatly from this fundamental change in
transportation.

7.4.1 Electric Car Manufacturers

The e-mobility revolution will be all about electrical cars. If the Service model is to
be predominant, this trend will be quickened as the main present-day impediments
to electric cars—range—will vanish faster. Indeed, most trips in urban areas are
short and thus, building cars with battery big enough for long trips won’t be
necessary. Electrical vehicle manufacturers such as Tesla are likely to see their
market share grow. As a matter of fact, the valuation of such a company is surely
based on this assumption. Furthermore, it should capitalize also on its $5 billion
investment in a new US plant to manufacture 500,000 batteries. Not only will it
lower the current price of batteries helping Tesla’s business model, it will provide
additional proﬁts from sales to traditional car manufacturers (or even grid provid-
ers) with new battery needs.

7.4.2 Environment

Transportation electriﬁcation will have a huge favorable impact on the environ-
ment. Not only are electrical cars much more efﬁcient than fossil fuel vehicles and
thus consume less energy, they also emit far less pollutant, as engine efﬁciency
is highly correlated with pollution emission. This is obvious when considering

386

7 E-Mobility Likely Winners and Losers

but

consumption

taking well-to-wheel

wheel-to-wheel
comparison.
also
Furthermore, all electrical car pollutants are emitted outside of city limits where
power plants are usually situated, reducing pollution’s consequences on city resi-
dents’ health. Furthermore, urban environments where cheap autonomous cabs and
unmanned ﬂeets are predominant will be much greener than today’s cities. Without
as much parking space required, they’d also be denser and more productive.
Moreover, driverless cars and taxis could lower the cost of living in cities and
reduce the environmental footprint of transportation, as car parks could be freed for
green areas or new housing development.

But there could also be some downsides for the environment. As travel becomes
cheaper, faster, and more comfortable, it will lower the cost of being transported
ever further. People will consequently be able to live further from work, facilitating
suburban sprawl. Additionally, those that can’t drive because of physical inca-
pacity, loss of driving licenses, or old age would likely travel more if autonomous
cars were available. Finally, some passengers might decide to have their car travel
until they are ready to hop back to their next activity.

7.4.3

Insurers

We’ve seen that by eliminating the human factor through driverless cars, most
fatalities will be eliminated. It doesn’t mean that accidents will disappear altogether,
which would be obviously a calamity for such an industry. After all, there will still
be potholes, small rocks hitting the windshield, falling branches, hail, snow storm,
etc. It just means that there will be fewer crashes involving two vehicles and more
importantly much less severe accidents. Unfortunately, for insurers this still means
that when all cars will be driverless, premiums on car insurance should drop, as
there is a direct relation between premium and covered risks. But reducing sales
doesn’t always mean reducing proﬁt. In fact till the entire market is unmanned,
somewhere around 2035, insurers are likely to see their proﬁt rise. Indeed, with far
fewer severe accidents, expensive medical reimbursements incurred at emergencies
and during hospital treatments, as well as compensation for life disabilities and
impairments, will be reduced drastically. Thus, during the introduction of
self-driving technology, costs will be reduced much faster than revenue, increasing
proﬁt. Furthermore, the introduction of a no fault policy, which would make sense
with unmanned cars, could reduce accident processing costs, reducing even further
costs.

The risks for current insurers will come from two areas. New insurance models
are likely to arise, with for instance insurance by the hour or even by the trip,
eradicating the conventional brick and mortar insurance companies. Furthermore, if
the Service model were to prevail, a few ﬂeet providers would likely contract global
insurance coverage reducing signiﬁcantly the number of insurances sold and the
negotiated premium value.

7.4 E-Mobility Likely Winners

387

7.4.4 Government Authorities

We’ve just seen that municipalities that generate much of their budgets from trafﬁc
and parking tickets would have to look elsewhere for revenue. State or federal
governments would lose ﬁnes, because cars would all obey trafﬁc laws. At the same
time, though, governments would save by not having to pay police ofﬁcers to write
tickets. The governments could spend less on prisons, because there would be no
such thing as drunk or overspeeding drivers. However, the area where governments
are likely to gain the most is in the social security sector or Medicare for the United
States. With far fewer severe accidents, and lower pollution emission within cities,
health cost will drastically be reduced.

7.4.5 Software Providers

System providers are software-driven companies, such as signaling company in the
railway industry. In the automotive industry, the obvious players are the main IT
companies that have ﬁnancial resources and are well positioned within the mobile
environment, such as Google, Apple, or Microsoft. IBM and the other IT service
providers could also play a role in this market but probably more as an infra-
structure provider.

Google is one of the obvious IT players with the most to win from this
e-mobility revolution. Google’s Pay-Per-Click business model is extremely
competitive, as clients are basically using for free a service paid by adver-
tisers. With the advent of 4G, Google should be in a position to follow its
strategy to go after the potential billion information seekers of the mobile
transportation market.

In the European public transport market, the big railway players have
resisted the temptation to transfer their information system to the IT com-
panies. By acquiring Waze, Google has gained cleverly access to crucial
information, and thus is likely to be the preferred portal for mass transit users.
This should in our view help this company strengthen even further its pre-
dominant position in the search market, providing geo-localized ads to
passengers.

In the private transport markets, Google needs to seek alliances with car
manufacturers to be selected as a service provider in the car dashboard. In
2014, it announced a deal with Audi, which will leverage Google’s Android
operating system giving passengers access to navigation tools, Apps and
music. In this sector, it could face strong opposition from other IT companies
such as Apple with its iOS which can push services enhancing the traveling
experience, such as i-tune. Audi for instance also works with Apple on other

388

7 E-Mobility Likely Winners and Losers

in-car experiences. Blackberry with its QNX software has also a reasonable
presence in the car industry. However, many car manufacturers are likely to
feel unease at the possibility of losing the traveling experience control,
especially knowing that when driverless cars will be predominant this is
likely to be the main buying criterion. The high end car manufacturers may
want to develop an interoperable system independently from Android, iOS or
QNX.

Google is uniquely positioned today to sell Driverless Operational System
licenses. However, repeating the success it achieved with cellular phones and
impose its platform to the car industry will not be easy. Knowing what
Google has done to the Nokia and Blackberry of the telecom world, trans-
portation incumbent companies aren’t just going to sit and wait for Google to
commoditize them. Having said that, Google has strong cards to play. It
possesses Google mapTM, a service that provides views of most streets in the
world. This service relies on frequent picture update of houses and streets and
physical positioning via GPS. Google has also invested in drone technology,
which could be used for territories with bad internet and telecom coverage.
Furthermore, this company has been pouring millions of dollars in developing
its driverless technology. Unlike most of its competitors,
its unmanned
software platform has been tested successfully for years, as their accident free
track record shows. It has invested in Uber, which doesn’t only supply it with
hailing Apps technology but also can give an access to the unmanned taxi
industry. Moreover through collaboration with Uber, information resulting
from datamining could enable new service offering or make them more
attractive, (i.e.: certiﬁcation of drivers, insurance coverage, risks assessment).
As a matter of fact, for those who haven’t yet noticed, Google now proposes
online car insurances!

IT companies have in front of them a very favorable competitive landscape, with
an automotive market extremely fragmented. However, their best opportunity relies
probably on the fact that the automotive industry isn’t software driven. Mechanical
two different beasts. Mindsets and
engineers and software engineers are just
approaches to product development are so different that it is unlikely that such a
software platform could be launched within the main engineering department of the
automotive industry. Fiat, Peugeot, Ford, Hyundai, etc., will probably have prob-
lems getting the skills to develop and sustain in the long term their own software
platform. Moreover, collaboration hasn’t been a strong feature of this industry and
will make it difﬁcult to promote a common standard. As we’ve seen this will be
crucial if, as we believe so, the system approach will prevail, with two-way com-
infrastructure signaling recognition (and thus
munication with satellites, GPS,
picture updates) as well as real-time powerful algorithms that can analyze simul-
taneously thousands of changing environmental conditions.

7.4 E-Mobility Likely Winners

389

7.4.6 System Integration Providers

Our strong belief is that the automotive driverless industry will be based on a
system approach, like in the railway industry. This means that one player, usually
called a system integrator, will need to make sure that all software from the onboard
and wayside environments communicates instantaneously and seamlessly for
unmanned systems to work. There are potentially in our view four types of com-
panies that could play this role alone or in consortium. Though potential players in
these categories are much more numerous than what we will indicate hereafter, the
following companies are the type of corporations with a reasonable chance of
success, if they were to decide to target such market:
(cid:129) IT service providers, such as IBM that have the knowledge to manage big IT
infrastructure project needed for unmanned systems, as well as propose SOA
and EDA software solutions that are likely to be required;

(cid:129) Big security integrators with defense knowledge, such as Northrop Grumann
(USA), Thales Systems (France) that will have the political backing and the
manpower to deal with system integration;

(cid:129) Telecom and network equipment providers, such as Ericsson, Nokia Network
(which is currently acquiring Alcatel-Lucent intending among other things to
position itself on the 5G future market for driverless cars), Huawei, Cisco on
which the V2V technology and other unmanned technology will depend; and
(cid:129) Railway signaling companies, such as Siemens (Germany), Thales (France),
and Alstom (France) that could adapt some of their existing railway technology
to an IP platform and bundle this with wayside equipment. Siemens the world
leader in signaling, which also possesses automotive products and still maintains
strong trafﬁc management activities, is uniquely positioned to play a key role.

7.4.7 Road Infrastructure Providers

Unmanned technology can only work if wayside technology is integrated. These
technologies will need to include smart trafﬁc management system, which will in
our view still require trafﬁc lights for pedestrians or cyclists, intelligent cameras to
identify road blocking objects, and panel systems informing about changes in road
conditions. Most likely, some form of intelligent lane indicator (i.e., cheap balise or
special paint) will be needed to ensure that cars can manage the 2 m GPS impre-
cision level and stay within their lanes, at least in critical junctions or tunnels. Two
types of players are likely to beneﬁt from such position:
(cid:129) Smart trafﬁc light providers; and
(cid:129) Road concessionaires that may decide to bring knowledge from their highway

trafﬁc management control center to normal routes.

390

7 E-Mobility Likely Winners and Losers

7.4.8 Electrical Infrastructure Providers

All companies related to the power generation industry will be obviously clear
winners in the electriﬁcation process of transportation. Besides the big electric
utilities, companies building or supplying equipment for new electric power plants,
be it nuclear or thermal, will see their market grow. The renewable energy market is
also likely to be a huge winner of such process. Not only will its market grow
signiﬁcantly, but electric cars could solve one of this industry’s biggest problem:
with smart grid technology, cars could be used as a storage facility. By storing
electricity when the wind blows or the sun shines and reinjecting it at night or when
power demand is high, cars could help stabilize the electrical grid. We shouldn’t also
forget the electrical equipment providers for smart grids that will provide connecting
and charging infrastructure as well as the software to manage such smart grids.

7.4.9 Society

We would like to conclude this book by transmitting a positive feeling about the
evolution of transportation. For all of us confronted with physical standstill in our
car or squashed on metro platforms, the e-mobility revolution will bring solutions
against
immobility. This revolution is already in movement and has started
changing profoundly the car, bus, and train industries. The day isn’t far when cities
will start breathing again. Millions of deaths from pollution-related diseases will be
avoided with a signiﬁcant positive impact on governments’ health budgets. Roads
will still be noisy but the sound of motors running will be a thing of the past. The
area dedicated to parking spaces will be reduced, allowing for more trees or wider
walkways, creating a virtuous cycle for the environmental and a better quality of
life of inner city residents. Electrical vehicles connected to smart grids will store
energy generated by renewables, helping ﬁght global warming.

The e-mobility revolution has shown that unmanned trains are much safer. Cars
will follow the same path. Unmanned cars will save millions of passengers’ life and
reduce signiﬁcantly the number and severity of injuries. It will also allow our
graying society to live longer in the comfort of our home, as the older generation
won’t need any more to depend on family or friends to commute. New business
models and innovative ﬁnancing solutions, facilitated by e-mobility technology,
will reduce transport infrastructure CAPEX and OPEX. With lower costs and less
demand for newer infrastructure as existing road and rail lines will be optimized,
e-mobility should help bridge the gap between the necessary infrastructure budget
and available funding.

However, not everything will be rosy for everyone. There will be winners and
losers and society will need to support people losing their jobs as the economy
restructures. Some low skill jobs will be lost, such as taxi drivers, but thousands of
new jobs will be created in new service offering that we aren’t even aware of.