The ﬁrst part of this book is dedicated to the study of parts (they should better be
called subsystems, because they are often complex systems, as suspensions) that
constitute the chassis. Their main function is to allow a suitable exchange of force
with the ground, in order to obtain the desired vehicle speed and path.

With reference to the coordinates system that will be deﬁned as vehicle system in

the fourth part, the forces exchanged with the ground can be classiﬁed as follows:

(cid:129) forces perpendicular to the ground (vertical for the motion on a plane road): in
steady-state conditions, they can be considered as constant, but because of the
obstacles on the road, they are variable and they are relevant to the comfort issues
of vehicle passengers;

(cid:129) longitudinal forces: they are mainly due to the propulsion (engine and transmis-
sion) and braking systems and they are relevant to the vehicle speed control; and
(cid:129) transversal forces: they are due to wheel steering angles and they are relevant to

road holding and stability.

All these forces are acting on tires, that because of their deformable structure make
the dynamic behavior of the vehicle on rubber wheels more similar to a ﬂoating or
ﬂying vehicle than a rail vehicle.

Chassis technologies can be deﬁned as mature, but saying so we wouldn’t like to
underestimate the various ongoing evolutions, mainly regarding the application of
controlled or active systems, based upon electronic and informatic technologies.

As a matter of fact, the fast evolution of automotive electronics in terms of per-
formance and cost had and will have a big inﬂuence on improving active safety and
comfort of vehicles.

A last aspect that shouldn’t be forgot is that in many markets the development
and production of chassis systems are leaving car manufacturers in favor of part
manufacturers that are becoming specialists in their business.

2

Wheels, Structures and Mechanisms

This is true, since many years, for brake systems, steering systems, and tires, and
is becoming to be true for suspensions and transmissions. In this situation, it is very
important for both those that will address their career to car manufacturing or to part
manufacturing to develop a good system understanding; the development of these
components is virtually impossible if separated from that of the vehicle.

As we will see, chassis components have received a quick evolution during these
last years: almost all cars feature today radial tires with low aspect ratio (radial
dimension is much smaller as transverse dimension) and need suspension with very
precise elasto-kinematic behavior. Mc Pherson and double wishbone suspensions
share the market as far as the front axle is concerned, while a signiﬁcant percentage
of the rear axles is featuring multilink suspensions.

It is quite unlikely that the kinematic conﬁguration will receive new innovations;
the same can be said for the steering system where the wide diffusion of assistance
systems has almost standardized the rack and pinion conﬁguration.

A similar situation can be seen for car brake systems where disc brakes are widely
diffused with exceptions for the rear axle of economy cars that conserve the drum
solution.

New developments are instead expected for electronic control systems and the
related ﬁelds of sensors and actuators, where electromechanical actuators will give
more opportunities for performance improvements.

Electronic control systems have initially entered the marked as add-on devices.
The case of the brake antilock system (ABS) is typical: it made possible a signif-
icant performance improvement to the brake system at the cost of new and sophisti-
cated components (the electronic control system, the wheel speed sensors, the valve
group able to regulate the pressure on the brake actuators of the wheel independently
of the pedal pressure).

The introduction of this system was initially gradual, but afterward it reached high
volumes, with consistent cost reduction and, now, as a consequence, the diffusion is
nearly total. In parallel, the system performance was improved offering new possi-
bilities, either in the ﬁeld of cost reduction (i.e., giving the possibility to incorporate
the brake distribution valve function and the power function at no cost), or in the
ﬁeld of functions, where, with the addition of some sensor, also the vehicle dynamic
control has been obtained.

A similar story can be told for power steering systems, initially totally hydraulic;
the addition of electronic controls allowed a better regulation of the power assistance
pressure, reducing the sensitivity of the steering wheel torque to the vehicle speed.
The present trend consists in the substitution of the hydraulic electronic system
with an electric electronic system: the power assistance is coming from a controlled
electric motor; from this opportunity comes the possibility of having an active steering
system that can improve vehicle performance while avoiding a sudden obstacle.

In a probable future, all actuators could become electric, with cost reduction and
increased performance; the further step could be to avoid any mechanical linkage
between pilot controls (pedal, steering wheel, etc.) and actuators.

This goal has been already reached for the engine, where throttle position or fuel
injection quantity is no more controlled by the accelerator pedal mechanically, but

Wheels, Structures and Mechanisms

3

through a drive-by-wire system. We can easily foresee for the future a brake-by-wire
system or a steer-by-wire system.

The next step, now discussion topic in many technical congresses, is the corner-by-
wire that is a wheel-suspension group (corner) with total electric actuation (driving,
braking and steering functions); a system like this could have a signiﬁcant result on
vehicle performance and architecture.

Similar evolution processes are also present in the suspension ﬁeld; a ﬁrst step is
the application of the electronic control to the damping properties of shock absorbers
and to the position of the body relative to the ground while the vehicle is standing
still (trim); a possible evolution could lead to a suspension where the body position
is controlled also dynamically. This possible achievement could simplify the elasto-
kinematic requirements of the suspension.

We think that these and other examples could offer a view of the possible ﬁelds

of the chassis evolution.

After the chapter dedicated to the historical evolution, the most diffused conﬁg-
urations for chassis components will be described. The following components will
be considered.

Wheels and Tires

Tires will not be studied from the standpoint of their product and process design
techniques, useful to determine their performance. They will be studied almost as a
black box examining their static and dynamic response that is the base of the vehicle
static and dynamic response.

A good knowledge of the tire performance is fundamental for an effective com-

munication between vehicle and tire specialists.

While studying suspensions, the main kinematic schemes will be considered and
their inﬂuence on the working angles of the tires, on vehicle roll and pitch. The most
important suspension components will be described, as the main elastic elements,
the secondary elastic elements, and the damping elements.

A main mechanism of the steering system will be studied and their mechanical
properties; the main components will be described as the steering box and the most
important power assistance systems.

The most important brake types will be introduced and their actuation and power
assistance systems. The industrial vehicle brake systems will be described separately,
because of the different actuation systems (pneumatic instead of hydraulic power).

As far as chassis control systems are concerned, this volume will describe sensors and
actuators in use and the technical target that these systems should reach mainly on

Suspensions

Steering System

Brake System

Control Systems

4

Wheels, Structures and Mechanisms

vehicle dynamics; the most diffused control strategies will be also described that the
different systems adopt, while the interaction between control system and dynamic
behavior of the vehicle will be afforded in the second volume.

Chassis Structures

Although this topic could better be tackled in a book dedicated to body design, this
chapter will outline the integration of the chassis functions into the body structure
and will offer a short description of the main types of auxiliary frameworks in use on
unitized bodies. A short description of industrial vehicle frameworks is also offered.

Chapter 1
Historical Evolution

1.1 Introduction

It is always arduous to decide if historical notes should come before or after the
description and the interpretation of the state of the art.

In favor of the second alternative there the fact that readers should already have
understood the motivations that lead a design decision. In favor of the ﬁrst alternative,
we have chosen, there is the fact that readers can situate the state of the art in its
context and can better appreciate the effort that has been made by those people that
have contributed to the state of the art.

The unavoidable drawback of this approach is that some considerations are only
superﬁcially introduced on the historic section and are again introduced in a better
detail later on; readers will forgive us for repeating some concept. We suggest that
readers that are very interested in the chassis history will read again the historic notes
at the end of the volume.

We will start in this chapter from suspensions and steering system, to describe
later wheels, tires, brake system and structures. This fact is only due to a larger
impact that suspensions and steering system have on the vehicle architecture and the
consequent evolution; steering system will be described together with suspensions
because these two systems are indissoluble from a designer point of view.

The primary function of a vehicle suspension is to isolate in the best way the
body, the sprung mass, from the disturbances coming from the road uneven surface.
To obtain this result, the wheels and the masses integral with them, the so called
unsprung masses, are connected to the body with mechanical linkages that allow
their relative motion, mainly in the vertical direction; according to this direction
forces are transmitted to the body trough elastic and damping elements.

The elastic characteristics of tires are also contributing to suspension quality.
Because the path of the wheel motion is not strictly vertical with reference to
the car body, but can show also components in the other two directions, a second
function for the suspension can be identiﬁed: it should guide the wheel, during its
displacement (suspension deﬂection) in order to avoid undesired motions, in terms
of:

• steering angle of the wheel (toe-in, toe-out), that can modify vehicle path;
• wheel camber angle, that can affect the cornering stiffness of the tire;
• track variation, because can inﬂuence negatively the tire duration;
• wheelbase variation, because can cause resonances with traction and braking force

application.

These displacements, we will deﬁne as secondary, cannot be completely elimi-
nated, but must be accurately designed while deﬁning the kinematic linkages and the
stiffness of the reaction points (elasto-kinematics); in fact a design variation of these
parameters can positively affect the vehicle dynamic behavior.

This topic will be discussed completely in the suspension chapter.
To tell in advance what will be discussed later on, we can say that:

• the toe angle of the wheel can correct the vehicle understeering (and over steering)

behavior and improve the vehicle stability during braking;

• a camber angle equal but opposite to the roll angle, or, in other words, a constant
perpendicularity of the wheel to the ground can allow the maximum exploitation
of the tire cornering stiffness;

• an appropriate wheelbase variation can improve the contribution of the wheel to
absorb the effect of obstacles, with positive results for comfort; in addition to that
the suspension can be designed to have anti dive and anti squat characteristics,
minimizing the pitch angle variation as a consequence of driving and braking
forces application.

It shouldn’t be forgot that four wheels vehicles are, as far as the exchange of forces
with the ground is concerned, simply hyperstatic systems; therefore a last function of
the suspension is enabling to design forces exchanged with the ground and to make
the wheel contact possible also if the road isn’t ﬂat.

Many of these considerations, that we will better explain later on, were not known
at the beginning of the motor era and have been developed quite recently, as compared
with the hundred years of life of the automotive product, because of the increase of
the vehicle speed and the improvements of the road conditions.

The ﬁrst two sections of this chapter trace the evolution of the mechanical linkages
of the suspension and of the steering system in an attempt to understand, according
to documents and drawing of that time, the motivations and the ideas of the engineers
that developed them.

1.2 The Rigid Axle Mechanical Linkages

We include under this title the articulated and elastic systems of both suspension and
steering mechanism.

1.2 The Rigid Axle Mechanical Linkages

7

Fig. 1.1 This coach built around 1650 shows the existence of a suspension; the sprungmass includes
the passengers compartment only and is connected to the unsprung mass with four leaf springs with
leader belts (Automobile Museum of Turin)

The suspension function was already known in the XVI century. Coach bodies
were suspended through a leaf spring set ﬁt to the chassis framework, a rigid structure
bearing wheel hubs. The free end of the springs was connected to the body through
leader belts; Fig. 1.1 offers an interesting example of this kind of conﬁguration in a
coach dated about 1650. The steel leaf springs, present in this vehicle, were introduced
during this time; formerly, they were made of wood. There is no component explicitly
dedicated to damping suspension oscillations; the internal friction of leaf springs and
of belts should have been enough to reach the expected comfort.

Secondary motions weren’t present, because wheels were each other rigidly con-

nected; the system was isostatic because of the play of front steering axle.

Elliot, an English wheelwright, was credited with the invention of the single rigid
axle suspension, using semi elliptical steel leaf springs; also in this case the front
axle can steer on a pivot in the middle of the axle.

This suspension system, in use on coaches and carriages, was also adopted in the
ﬁrst steam road vehicles, in the nineteenth century, before of the internal combustion
engine. Figure 1.2 shows an example of this kind.

The carriage steering system showed the inconvenience of reducing the roll-over
stability of the vehicle, while turning; when lateral centrifugal forces were applied,
the roll-over line (it can be obtained joining the two contact points with the ground
of the wheels of the same side) was shifted closer to the centre of the vehicle.

8

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.2 The Bordino’s steam coach was built in 1854. The suspension system is strictly derived
from that of a horse carriage. The rear axle is shaped as a crankshaft, where the connecting rods of
the two cylinders are directly working (Automobile museum of Turin)

In 1810 Längensberger envisaged a steering system where the front axle was
always parallel to the rear axle but the front wheel hub only were articulated to the
axle using a king-pin; the two stub axles were connected through track-rod arms and
a track rod, shaping up an articulated parallelogram. Using this device the vehicle
roll over stability was unaffected in turns.

In 1818 a patent was ﬁled in London in name of Ackermann; this patent described
the law the steering angles of the two wheels should follow in order to have wheels
rolling correctly with their symmetry plane containing the local speed vector. This
invention didn’t ﬁnd immediate practical application because there was no real need
on carriages to have a steering system different as the turntable steering and there
was no idea about how to satisfy this law in a simple way.

Jeantaud, again a wheelwright, proposed in 1878 a mechanism perfected from the
idea of Längensberger, where the two track-rod arms were slightly inclined to the
middle of the vehicle in such a way as to have their axis crossing near the middle of
the rear axle.

This mechanism obtains with acceptable approximation the Ackermann’s low and

is today still in use on steering rigid axles.

Independently from the Jeantaud’s idea, the solution presented by Bollée in his
Mancelle, again in 1878, was not very far away from the Ackermann’s low. We like
to remember this steering system, because it is probably one of the ﬁrst bound to an
automobile: Fig. 1.3 shows the scheme of the front axle; it should be noticed that it
is an independent suspension with transversal leaf springs, equivalent to the double
wishbone mechanism.

We shouldn’t, in fact, think that independent wheel suspensions were invented in
the ‘940s, at the end of an era that saw only rigid axle with leaf springs; independent

1.2 The Rigid Axle Mechanical Linkages

9

Fig. 1.3 Drawing of the front steering axle of the Mancelle of Bollée, in 1878; it should be noticed
the independent double wishbone suspension with transverse double leaf springs

wheel suspensions are sporadically present also in the ﬁrst cars. Nevertheless we
should think that the advantages obtained on the existing roads and at those speeds
were negligible as compared with the enormous design complications.

The ﬁrst cars with internal combustion engine, the tricycle of Benz, in 1886 and the
Stahlradwagen (German word for steel wheel car) of Daimler, in 1889 (see Fig. 1.4)
give no evidence of a great attention to the suspension system.

The ﬁrst is in fact a tricycle with a single non suspended front steering wheel; the
second is a four-wheeled vehicle with no suspension, where the front axle is balancing
on a central horizontal pivot, that makes the system isostatic. We can assume that the
undoubted genius of these two precursors was concentrated on developing a reduced

10

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.4 The ﬁrst cars with internal combustion engine, the tricycle of Benz and the Stahlradwagen
of Daimler give no evidence of a great attention to the suspension system. Both have no front
suspension and the second features no suspensions at all with a suspended seat only

weight engine with a signiﬁcant, but light, quantity of energy on board, instead on
the passengers comfort.

Let us see now the most important features of rigid axle suspensions with leaf

springs: axle linkages are in this case integrated with the elastic element.

As far as suspensions are concerned, we should we aware of two typical problems

of suspended axles.

• If the engine is part of the sprung mass (and this has almost always happened with
some exception), it is necessary to develop a mechanism to connect the engine
shaft or the gearbox output shaft with the wheels, that have a variable relative
position.

• Because the steering control (steering wheel or steering bar) must be at reach of
the driver, again mechanisms must be developed that connect stub axles, without
affecting the steering angles with the suspension bouncing motion.

The solution of this two problems should have committed ﬁrst cars designers,
particularly as far as the steering system is concerned; the multiplicity of solutions
of the ﬁrst cars give evidence of the difﬁculty met in ﬁnding an adequate technical
solution to the problem.

On the Benz car the problem is bypassed, considering that there is no front sus-
pension. On Daimler car the steering control is ﬁxed to the balancing axle near the
pivot point.

As far as the transmission is concerned, on the Benz car a leather belt gearbox is
applied, that compensates for the center line variation of the pulleys with a spring-
loaded moving tensioner.

This device is common to other car of this period of time and has the advantage
of integrating transmission functions and gearbox functions; the gearbox function is
obtained by using a number of couples of pulleys with a shiftable belt.

Almost in the same years the idea of using a tooth wheel gearbox was born, in
connection with a chain transmission; the Fiat 3 1
2 HP of 1899 could be taken as
an example of this concept, shown in the phantom view of Fig. 1.5. The sprocket

1.2 The Rigid Axle Mechanical Linkages

11

Fig. 1.5 The Fiat 3 1
2 HP of 1899 features a chain and sprocket transmission, where the sprocket
is set in the center of curvature of the path of motion of the rear axle. It can be noticed on the same
car the Jeantaud steering system

axis was ﬁxed to the sprung mass, almost in center of curvature of the suspension
path, described in the bouncing motion. This design detail allowed the axle to move
without affecting the chain length.

This transmission and suspension architecture will be widely applied in the ﬁrst

twenty years of the car history.

On the same car can be noticed the Jeanteaud steering mechanism connected to
the steering bar through a longitudinal linkage; also in this case the linkage knuckle
mounted on the sprung mass was positioned in the center of curvature of the motion
of the axle in its bouncing movement, to avoid undesirable change of path while
riding on uneven roads.

Almost in the same years, in 1898, De Dion and Bouton introduced the propeller
shaft transmission with universal joints. It is still in use, almost unchanged in its
basic elements, in the today’s cars with front engine and rear drive; it solves in the
best way any problem connected to the suspension motion.

Leaf springs, as we have seen, were already known in the XVII century; they
reached at the beginning of the XX century a satisfactory level of fabrication tech-
nology and application know-how. Leaf springs integrate in a single element the

12

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.6 On the automotive
engineering manual of
Baudry de Saunier of 1900 is
exposed the theory of a leaf
spring with constant leaf
thickness and length reduced
by constant steps. The
structure is practically
equivalent to a uniform
resistance body

elastic function and the structure function; the elasto-kinematic performance of this
component was fully adequate to the needs of the cars of that time.

The spring is made with leaves of different length, reduced by constant steps from
the top to the bottom; this assembly simulates with good approximation the perfor-
mance of a uniform stress structure, granting the maximum value of deformation at
a given stress level. This fact is rationalized in Fig. 1.6, coming from one of the ﬁrst
manual of automotive engineering.

The same structure, ﬂexible on a vertical plane can be quite stiff in an horizontal

plane.

The spring was mounted to the chassis with a ﬁxed eye on the mother leaf and
with a moving eye articulated to a swinging shackle or with a sliding element; this
device allowed the spring to change his length because of the deﬂection. The ﬁxed
eye was on the same side as the ﬁxed point of transmission and steering system,
typically behind the front axle and in front of the rear axle.

The suspension architecture could assume many different variants, according to
objectives of comfort, cost and weight of the unsprung mass. Leaf springs have been
named after their shape, with reference to ideal elliptical shape, made of two mirror
like leaf springs; with reference to Fig. 1.5 front springs are called elliptical, rear
ones are called semi elliptical.

The most diffused solution featured two semi elliptical springs for each axle; on
luxury cars was some time adopted the 3
4 of ellipse solution (Fig. 1.7, top left) where
the side beam of the chassis structure was ﬁt directly to a 1
4 of ellipse spring. This
solution allows an increased ﬂexibility at a higher cost and weight of the unsprung
mass.

Again on luxury cars a 3 semi elliptical spring solution was also adopted for the
4 of ellipse arrangement, where
4 of ellipse springs are integrated in a single element, ﬁt in the middle to the

rear axle; the function is comparable to the of the 3
the two 1

1.2 The Rigid Axle Mechanical Linkages

13

Fig. 1.7 Some application schemes for leaf springs. On the top left is shown a 3
4 of ellipse solution;
on the right the Ford scheme with a single spring for each axle; at the bottom a 3 leaf spring solution
equivalent to the 3

4 of ellipse one

structure of the chassis. In this case, swinging shackles are made with a universal
joint (Fig. 1.7, bottom).

A particular cantilever spring, shown in Fig. 1.7 at the top right, was developed and
diffused by Ford. A single semi elliptical spring is ﬁt to a cross beam of the chassis
structure, at the mid section; it performs like two 1
4 of ellipse cantilever springs,
mounted on the axle; in this case, two swinging shackles must be used. Undesired
motion of the axle in the longitudinal direction is avoided with a couple of dedicated
thrust beams.

A convenient suspension should not only have a deformable elastic member, but
also a damping element; otherwise a permanent oscillation of the sprung mass could
take place as a result of an external force input. This cannot really take place in the
reality, because of the internal friction; nevertheless too many oscillations could be
produced around the static position.

With leaf spring this problem wasn’t considered for long time, because of the high
value of the internal friction due to the relative motion of lives; on the contrary, every
effort was made to improve leaves lubrication in order to avoid annoying squeaks and
permanent sticking, because of oxidation. Nevertheless additional dampers were not
considered for long time. The ﬁrst shock absorbers appeared in the ‘910s, being con-
sidered initially as accessories to be installed after the sale, for demanding costumers
with attitude to sport driving.

Many solutions were considered. Figure 1.8 shows the most interesting. The ﬁrst
four are friction shock absorbers; the ﬁrst and the third work on the extension stroke
only, while the second and the fourth work in the compression stroke too.

14

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.8 Some type of shock absorber, suitable for after market application. The ﬁrst three in the
ﬁrst raw and the ﬁrst in the second row work on mechanical friction; the last of these can be also
adjusted. The ﬁfth example refers to a hydraulic shock absorber

Many engineers thought that damping forces were noxious in the compression
stroke because increased the value of forces applied to the sprung mass; other engi-
neers thought the reduction of danger of oscillation was the most important priority.
Only later, the importance of having a bilateral force proportional to suspension
compression or extension speed was understood and theorized.

A friction shock absorber shows some property negative to comfort. In fact, a dry
friction force allows suspension motion only over a certain threshold value of force.
It can happen that suspensions are always blocked, by roads with small unevenness
or by macadam pavement, and the only working elastic members are tires. For this
reason the fourth type of shock absorber features an adjustment screw suitable to
change the pressure force on the friction discs; this screw can be adjusted by the
driver from the inside of the car, having the possibility to reduce damping on good
road, or low speed and increasing it in the opposite conditions: a ﬁrst example of
controlled suspension!

The last set of ﬁgures represents a hydraulic shock absorber, to be applied on
the side beam of the chassis structure. This shock absorber works bilaterally with
progressive forces depending on the suspension extension or compression speed.
Modern telescopic shock absorbers implement this principle in a simpler way; they
were introduced from the end of the ‘920s.

1.2 The Rigid Axle Mechanical Linkages

15

Coming back to leaf springs, we shouldn’t forget that their success was also bound
to the reliability of the fabrication process of steel leaves. Material microstructure
could be improved easily by plane forging; a rupture of a leave was never catastrophic,
because leaves broke down one at a time and the consequent vehicle trim variation
was easily detected. The consequent repair was simple and could be done by a
competent smith. The arrival of coil springs was delayed by these facts; as a matter
of fact leaf springs were initially applied also to independent suspension.

With the increase of vehicle speed some critical aspects of the rigid axle started
to appear: the most important problems were weight, secondary deformations and
shimmy.

The axle weight was remarkable; the amount of the unsprung mass as compared
with the relatively high vertical ﬂexibility of tires could cause on certain road axle
hopping, very concerning in turns and never suitable for a good ride comfort.

Secondary deformations were caused by braking (S deformation) or by vehicle
roll (different elongations of the two suspension of the same axle). The ﬁrst type of
motion could cause very annoying resonances of the entire driveline while starting
up or braking on a gravel road or on a dirty road.

The roll motion of the body, due to the centrifugal force in a turn, causes a different
longitudinal motion of the two points where leaf springs are joined to the axle; said in
a different way, the rigid axle is steering, while the vehicle is turning. The architecture
dictated by the transmission installation (ﬁxed eye in front and swing shackle in the
rear side) cause the vehicle to oversteer or to increase the path curvature, because of
the deformation; this fact could cause instability or spinning around also in curves
that today appear not demanding.

The scheme on the upper side of Fig. 1.9 illustrates this behavior for a Rolls-Royce
rear suspension; the advantage is that while driving on an asymmetric obstacle a self
aligning steering action can be provided.

To avoid this inconvenience some rigid axle suspensions showed two longitudinal
linkages that modiﬁed the cinematic behavior of the axle; an example is given on
Fig. 1.10, where two rods have the double function of avoiding the S deformation
and of giving the axle an understeering behavior.

The previous Fig. 1.9 explains us, looking at its lower part, the shimmy phe-
nomenon, typical of rigid steering axles; riding over an asymmetric obstacle imposes
a certain roll speed to the axle. Because wheels are rotating and they had in old cars
a signiﬁcant inertia moment, a gyroscopic torque is applied to the steering mech-
anism; the elasticity of the steering wheel driveline (some elasticity was required
to limit steering wheel vibration cause by the engine) could induce very annoying
oscillations. Since obstacles are mainly asymmetric this phenomenon was very well
known; it was solved on steering rigid axle by using additional shock absorbers, to
be applied to the track rod.

A single big advantage of the rigid axle was highlighted after the diffusion of
independent suspensions; on rigid axle the body roll doesn’t affect the camber angle
of the wheel, because the will is always perpendicular to the surface of the road.

16

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.9 The upper scheme illustrate the axle steering of a Rolls-Royce suspension while negotiating
asimmetric obstacles or in a turn. The lower scheme justiﬁes the phenomenon of the shimmy

Fig. 1.10 Example of a rigid axle with leaf springs, showing additional linkages, to reduce axle
steering and S deformation

1.3 The Independent Suspension Mechanical Linkages

17

1.3 The Independent Suspension Mechanical Linkages

Rigid axle suspensions with leaf springs dominated the market for long time and they
started to be substituted by independent suspension on the ‘930s only; nevertheless
many independent suspensions examples are older than this date, starting from the
very ﬁrst, the already cited Mancelle.

Let us consider steering suspension at ﬁrst.
Many example are present of suspensions where the wheel hubs are guided by

vertical tubes; this solution was perfected and produced by Lancia.

Probably the ﬁrst application of this kind was presented in the Stephens of 1898,
shown on Fig. 1.11, where the front wheels are guided by telescopic steering fork,
inspired by a bicycle; they are sustained by a transversal leaf spring ﬁt in the middle
to the body.

This architecture was considered later by Sizaire and Naudin and Decauville that
many authors quote as precursor to Lancia. In any case we should doubt that these
precursors had a clear view of the advantages they could claim.

It is interesting to note that many of the ﬁrst advertisement on independent sus-
pensions were showing the wheel while riding on an asymmetric obstacle and never
on a curve road. That fact suggests thinking that the new architecture was developed
to avoid the shimmy phenomenon and no attention was paid to the camber varia-
tion caused by roll angle; this fact also explains why independent suspensions were
applied to steering axles at ﬁrst.

Fig. 1.11 The vertical tubes suspension was probably introduced for the ﬁrst time by Stephens in
1898

18

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.12 This table is an evidence of the alternatives that were examined by Falchetto while
designing the front suspensions of the Lancia Lambda. The architecture considered are almost all
those existing on present cars

The problem of camber angle variations was studied and solved only later in the

‘940s, when practical speed increased signiﬁcantly.

An other thrust to change, we shouldn’t forget, were the advantages obtainable for
the entire vehicle architecture. The front rigid axle, with its relevant lateral extension,
couldn’t be set to close to the ground; over the axle a certain clearance should be
provided to allow for suspension compression stroke. As a consequence the engine
had to be positioned at a relevant height on the ground; the front part of the body,
the hood started just behind the front axle and had a relevant vertical dimension.

The independent wheel suspension made this layout no more necessary; the engine
could be set down and forwards, between the suspension arms, with advantages of
vehicle length and weight, with reduction on the height of the center of gravity and
consequent improvements in speed because of streamlined aerodynamic shapes.

Lets return to front independent suspensions with vertical tubes. Figure 1.12 shows
a set of sketches drafted by Falchetto, the vehicle engineer which, under the guid-
ance of Vincenzo Lancia, faced the problem of introducing an independent wheel
suspension on the future Lambda.

The solutions considered in that occasion were almost all those that were devel-
oped in the following years; the choice was in favour of the third on the third row
from the top, probably because of the problem of shimmy, but there is no trace of
this decision.

1.3 The Independent Suspension Mechanical Linkages

19

Fig. 1.13 The front view of the Lancia Lambda shows the front suspension and the gate structure
of connection to the body (Automobile Museum of Turin)

Figure 1.13 shows a picture of the ﬁnal vehicle launched in 1922; the most impor-
tant feature of this design, as we saw not completely new, was the solution of the
problem of an efﬁcient lubrication of the sliding tubes by integrating, in a sealed
element, guide, spring and hydraulic shock absorber.

The elastic element is now a coil spring; this is probably the ﬁrst application were

the car weight is entirely sustained by a spring of this kind.

An interesting variation of this suspension family was presented by Cottin-
Degouttes on a car shown on Fig. 1.14 and introduced in 1927; the vertical tubes
suspension was modiﬁed, but we don’t know the reasons for this decision.

The tubes are slightly inclined with the top closer to the center of the car, while
the elastic element is again a cross leaf spring, like in the Stephens. The leaf spring
is articulated to the sliding strut; because the path of the tip of the spring is about a
circle and the strut it coupled to the tube with spherical element, we can assume that
the wheel can partially recover the camber angle variations caused by the body roll.
The kinematic properties of this suspension can be similar to a double wishbone

suspension; but this kind of architecture didn’t have an industrial follow-up.

A different scheme of front independent wheel suspension is attributed to Dubon-
net, an important independent car designer, and was exploited by many car manu-

20

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.14 This front suspension was presented by Cottin-Deguttes in 1927. No other examples of
this kind were developed

facturers, among them by Fiat that applied this solution to production starting from
1935.

The suspension includes a sealed bearing element (cartridge) that integrates the
helical spring in the same oil of the shock absorber, as shown on the detail on the far
right of Fig. 1.15; spring and damper work on a ﬁnger crossing through the cartridge.
This ﬁnger is connected to one of the arms of a double wishbone mechanism.

The cartridge can be integrated on the suspension in two different ways. As we can
see on the left of the same ﬁgure, the cartridge can be mounted on a non suspended
rigid axle through a king-pin; in this case the entire suspension is steering with the
wheel and the steering mechanism is the same as for a rigid steering axle, being
the motion of wheels completely independent. The kinematic behavior is almost the
same as a vertical tube suspension, but the spring and shock absorber unit is easier
to be manufactured. The architecture is similar to that of a double trailing arms
suspension.

The second alternative is shown on the right of the same ﬁgure, in this case
the cartridge is ﬂanged to a front cross member of the chassis structure and the
suspension arms can swing but not steer; the wheel strut is mounted with knuckles

1.3 The Independent Suspension Mechanical Linkages

21

Fig. 1.15 Two version of independent front suspensions designed by Dubonnet and produced by
Fiat, starting from 1935. The suspension includes a bearing sealed cartridge, integrating the elastic
element and the shock absorber

Fig. 1.16 The Porsche suspension is made with two double trailing arms elements; it was developed
in 1931 and produced by Volkwagen till the ’970s

to the oscillating arms. As a double wishbone suspension the steering mechanism is
different and the track rod is substituted by an articulated system.

A suspension similar to the ﬁrst scheme of double trailing arms is attributed to
Porsche and is shown in Fig. 1.16; it was developed in 1931 and applied till the ‘970s
on the Volkswagen Beetle and other car of this company.

The two articulated parallelograms are mounted at the end of a double tube struc-

ture building up also the front cross member of the platform.

Upper arms are ﬂanged to the same torsion bar, contained in the upper tube; this
bar limits the roll angle. Lower arms are ﬂanged to two different torsion bars, each
of them being ﬂanged at the other end to the tubular structure; they act as elastic
elements. The dimensions of this suspension are therefore very contained in the
three directions.

22

1 Historical Evolution

When these suspensions were very effective in reducing shimmy, they showed
later on an undesired feature: they caused the wheel to have, during turns, a camber
angle equal to the roll angle of the body.

Bearing in mind the roll angle, due to the centrifugal force, is leaning the body to
the outside of the curve, the wheels are assuming a camber angle such as to reduce
the cornering stiffness of the tire. It would be better if the camber variation would be
opposite, but the ideal behavior is to have no variation in every condition.

To improve this undesired feature double wishbone suspensions were developed
with arms of unequal length; the shorter upper arm is increasing the camber angle
when the suspension is compressing and decreasing when the suspension is extend-
ing. The value of camber angle is such as to compensate partially for the effect of
the roll angle.

One of the ﬁrst examples of this concept has been introduced by Studebaker in
1939 and followed by many car manufacturers till present days. A drawing of this
suspension is reported in Fig. 1.17.

We would like to point out that the elastic element is integrated with the lower arm
and is still made with a transversal leaf spring; as a matter of fact many manufacturers
weren’t so keen to abandon leaf springs. Reasons were many: ﬁrst reliability, but we
can also see in this application that the leaf spring integrates the function of two ele-
ments: arms and spring. Also the reliability of the production process was important
and last but not least the existing investments for high volume of production.

There is an interesting patent of Fiat on this subject, that was applied to cars with
rear engine, starting from 1955; it provided that the leaf spring was ﬁt to the body
through two symmetric bearing points. With a suitable distance between the bearing
points it is possible to obtain a different elastic characteristic on symmetric and
asymmetric suspension strokes; in this way with a single spring element is possible
to obtain the function of the main elastic element an of the anti roll bar.

We can also observe in Fig. 1.17 that the Jeantaud mechanism has disappeared,
which was present on previous steering systems; the track rod cannot be applied
anymore, because the distance between the articulation points of track rod arms is
changing with the suspension stroke.

Before the coming of the rack steering system, applied starting from the ’960s,
a small articulated parallelogram was employed whose rods were articulated to the
body and were rotated by the steering box; to a suitable point of these rods were
connected the two steering linkages.

Also this mechanism approximates with some error the ideal Ackermann law;
the presence of sideslip angles always increasing, because of the increasing speed,
makes this error less important.

The theorization of the behavior of tires under the application of side forces and

the deriving concept of sideslip angle was also developed during these years.

The double wishbone suspensions with different length arms are diffusing quite
rapidly in the following years and became almost totally applied to the front axles
during the ’960s.

1.3 The Independent Suspension Mechanical Linkages

23

Fig. 1.17 Front suspension made by Studebaker in 1939. The mechanism is double wishbone type
and features an upper arm of reduced length. The lower arm integrates the elastic function being
made with a leaf spring

Figure 1.18 represents a suspension with stamped steel low thickness steel arms
and coil springs launched by Fiat in 1950 on the 1400 and applied with minor
modiﬁcation on smaller models in the following years.

McPherson, a design engineer of American Ford , introduced this front suspension
in 1947 that was called after his name (Fig. 1.19); it can be considered as a double
wishbone suspension with different length arms, where the length of the upper arm
is inﬁnite.

It shouldn’t be confused with a simple simpliﬁcation of the double wishbone
suspension for cost reduction; this suspension later contributed to the diffusion of
modern front wheel driven cars, because the avoidance of the upper arm left the
necessary space for the engine transversal installation. This suspension had a rapid
diffusion starting from the end of the ’960s not only on front wheel driven cars born
in those years, but also on many cars with longitudinal engine.

24

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.18 Double wishbone suspension adopted on Fiat cars in 1950; this solution is almost totally
applied in the following years because of fairly good elastokinematic behavior

The second advantage of this suspension is that it simpliﬁes the body structure

because of the more rational distribution of the connection points.

The reduction of kinematic performance, as compared with the double wishbone
solution is not very relevant and, therefore this solution is also applied to contempo-
rary sport cars.

Honda in the ’980s introduced a last evolution to the front suspension architecture.
It conceived a swan-necked wheel strut (see Fig. 1.20), which allowed the double
wishbone suspension to be also installed on transversal front wheel driven cars. The
descendants of the Mc Pherson and Honda suspension are sharing now the present
market, with the introduction of many improved details the we will drop for sake of
simplicity.

The rear suspension history should be much more complicate; the attempt to

identify an evolution trend risk to oversimplify the explanation.

It should, ﬁrst of all, be pointed out that the rigid axle, receiving elastic member
more sophisticated than the leaf springs and additional linkages, had a very long life
either on the front driven cars and on the rear wheel driven cars. On front wheel
driven cars the weight of the axle was not relevant; the simpliﬁed function, because
of the absence of the differential and ﬁnal drive, in fact, allowed the use of tubular
structure quite light.

1.3 The Independent Suspension Mechanical Linkages

25

Fig. 1.19 McPherson introduced on American Ford cars this kind of suspension starting from 1947.
The kinematic equivalent of this suspension is a double wishbone suspension where the upper arm
has inﬁnite length

On rear wheel driven cars, particularly on luxury and sport cars adopting the rigid
axle, the weight was reduced with suspended differentials and a good kinematic
behavior was obtained with coil spring and more complicated linkages.

An example of rigid rear axle particularly elegant is given by Alfa Romeo. This
scheme was adopted on different cars starting from the ’970s. It can be considered as
an improvement of the De Dion-Bouton suspension. Figure 1.21 shows this example.
A triangular structure building up the rigid axle is linked to a spherical joint in
the front, which determines a precise position for the roll axis; suspension stroke

26

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.20 Honda front suspension with high double wishbone; high is referred to the position of
the upper arm as compared with the conventional case

Fig. 1.21 An example of rigid rear axle particularly elegant is given by Alfa Romeo. This scheme
was adopted on different cars starting from the ’970s. It can be considered as an improvement of
the De Dion-Bouton suspension

1.3 The Independent Suspension Mechanical Linkages

27

Fig. 1.22 One of the ﬁrst application of an independent rear suspension with trailed arms appeared
on the Lancia Aprilia in 1937

and body roll do not affect axle steering thanks to the guidance given by a Watt
mechanism in the back.

The need to obtain a regular and large space for the trunk, imposed the development

of rear suspension different from the rigid axle.

One of the ﬁrst application of an independent rear suspension with trailing arms
appeared on the Lancia Aprilia in 1937. This suspension, presented on Fig. 1.22,
is adapted for a rear wheel drive and consists of two longitudinal arms with the
articulation point in front of the wheel; in this case the elastic element is still a
transversal leaf spring with the addition of a transversal torsion bar.

Being an independent suspension, the differential and ﬁnal drive is suspended to
the body. This kind of suspension, in connection with the application of coil springs,
had a considerable diffusion, lasting on present cars, essentially with front wheel
drive.

It enjoys the advantage of a reduced space for linkages and elastic system; the

disadvantage is the modest performance and the weight of the trailing arms.

The rear wheel driven cars with rear engine had a signiﬁcant diffusion between
the ’940s and the ’960s; today they are no more applied, making an exception for
some niche sport cars.

The reason for the diffusion of this architecture was the very good interior roomi-
ness with contained exterior dimensions, thanks to the absence of the propeller shaft,
when economic and reliable component for the front wheel drive were not available
yet.

28

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.23 The rigid axle couldn’t be applied for compatibility with the rear powertrain. On the Fiat
600 of 1955 the semi trailing arm suspension was chosen because it allowed to use very simple
constant velocity joints

The rigid axle couldn’t be applied because of the short distance between power
train and axle; the so called semi trailing arms were usually selected, because of the
compatibility with cheap constant velocity joints.

On Fig. 1.23 is shown a scheme of the Fiat 600 of 1955. The traced dotted lines
show how it was possible to have the suspension roll axis crossing the differential;
this condition is mandatory to avoid the application of sliding constant velocity joints.
The camber angle relative to the ground doesn’t change because of the roll of the
body, but features remarkable variations because of payload variations; the look of
the unloaded car is characterized by a sensible positive camber (wheel mean planes
cross under the ground). In this conditions rod holding is quite approximate. In

1.3 The Independent Suspension Mechanical Linkages

29

Fig. 1.24 In 1969 Volkswagen conceives a new rear suspension quite suitable to front wheel driven
cars: the so called semirigid axle or twist axle; in short time it will become one of the most diffused
architecture

addition to that on bumpy roads the track is changing continuously, because of the
suspension stroke, leading the tires to premature wear.

This kind of suspension was also adopted with many rear wheel driven cars with

front engine, because of its limited height; today is abandoned.

In 1969 Volkswagen conceives a new rear suspension quite suitable to front wheel
driven cars: the so called semirigid axle or twist axle; in short time it will become
one of the most diffused architecture.

Figure 1.24 shows the original application and demonstrates quite clearly the
advantages given on the car; tank an spare wheel ﬁnd their place between the arms
and the cross member and leave the trunk bottom low, ﬂat and wide.

From this point of view only, trailing arms are slightly better. They don’t allow
any camber angle variation relative to the body, during suspension stroke; the wheel
wells steel sheets can be closer to the tire proﬁle and leave more space to the trunk
at a given car track. Their elasto-kinematic behavior is lower, as far as the cornering
stiffness of tires is concerned, as we already explained.

On twist axles the gate structure bearing wheels is characterized by a cross beam
made with a steel bar with open cross section, like a horizontal U, for example, open
to the back. With this feature the gate is ﬂexible to torsion (differential suspension
strokes), but is stiff to ﬂexion (side forces). Wheels are, therefore, very effectively
guided and don’t change their camber angle respective to the ground very much
during body roll.

We can conclude this historic overview of car suspensions mentioning the mul-
tilink architecture, which represents the top evolution of suspension mechanism. It

30

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.25 Multilink rear suspension were applied for the ﬁrst time to mass production cars by
Mercedes in 1982

was introduced during the ’960s on competition and sport cars, but it was applied
for the ﬁrst time on mass production by Mercedes in 1982; it is represented on the
drawing on Fig. 1.25.

If we consider the suspension from a geometric point of view only, we can say that
the suspension mechanism must leave to the wheel one degree of freedom only, the
stroke, not considering the wheel rotation around his hub. If we consider cinematic
linkages with spheric joints only, we can apply a maximum of ﬁve linkages to reduce
the six degree of freedom of a free body in the space to one. The multilink suspension
features ﬁve linkages to obtain the maximum number of adjustable parameters to
approximate the ideal behavior in the best way.

With this arrangement we can minimize camber variation with reference to the
ground, we can also induce too angle variations able to optimize steering behavior
and longitudinal ﬂexibility, for optimum comfort, can be obtained with no drawback
on steering.

The multilink suspension family is very large; it is now applied to almost all rear
wheel driven cars with front engine; many application are already present on large
and medium front wheel driven cars.

1.3 The Independent Suspension Mechanical Linkages

31

The independent wheel suspension chapter covers the last sixty years of the car
history; but evolution hasn’t stopped. If it would be difﬁcult to think about new
conﬁguration of mechanisms many efforts are made on the ﬁeld of controls: but this
topic will be covered on chapters dedicated to the state of the art.

1.4 Wheels and Tires

In consideration of the importance of wheels on cars, we will extend our historic
outline to much more ancient times.

For hundreds of thousands of years man did live without using any particular
means of transportation. When he had to move an object, he simply lifted and carried
it, if he was strong enough. If the object was too heavy, he arranged to drag it along.
It is well possible that occasionally branches or other round objects were slipped
under the load to reduce friction, but no evidence of this practice remains.

With the Neolithic revolution the need for transportation greatly increased and,
on the other hand, the practice of taming animals opened new perspectives. The
development of agriculture caused the need to transport seeds to the ﬁeld and crops
back to the homestead and the number of objects which were considered important
and which men needed to carry with them increased as a result of the new exigencies
of village life.

It is given for sure that sleighs were used in northern Europe before 5000 B.C., and
their use at that time in other places can be inferred. Sleighs and drags can actually
be used for transportation not only on snow and ice, but also on grassland (American
Indians used the travois well in the XIX century) and even in deserts and sometimes
on rocks.

It is impossible to state when a drag was for the ﬁrst time mounted on a pair of
wheels or who operated this technical revolution. Ancient wheels were made mainly
of wood, and little direct archeological evidence could remain.

About 3500 B.C. the potter’s wheel was introduced in order to produce pots with
axial symmetry. The use of the potter’s wheel can be inferred from the marks left
on pots made with it. The supporting wheel for vehicles is thought to have been
originated about the same time.

The most ancient evidence of a wheeled vehicle is from a pictogram on a tablet
from Inanna temple in Erech, Mesopotamia. Such document dates back to slightly
later than 3500 B.C., and includes a small sketch of a cart with four wheels, together
with that of a drag (Fig. 1.26a).

The vehicle shown in Fig. 1.26b has two features typical of all vehicles of its
times for more than a thousand years: The wheels are discs made from three planks
of wood and the animals are harnessed to a central shaft. This uniformity of types
of wheels and of driving systems, particularly if compared with the great variety
of vehicle structures, has led to the opinion that the wheel was invented, or better,
developed, in a certain place and then started a slow diffusion in all the ancient world.

32

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.26 a Pictogram on a tablet from Inanna temple in Erech, Mesopotamia. Such document
dates back to slightly later than 3500 B.C., and includes a small sketch of a cart with four wheels,
together with that of a drag. b Copper model of a war cart, driven by four onagers, found in the
tomb of Tell Agrab, from the third millennium B.C.

In various places where it was introduced, the local type of sleigh was adapted to the
new vehicle, by using the standard wheels and harness.

The place where the wheel was ﬁrst developed is not known, but it is possible to
infer that it was in Southern Mesopotamia, where the wheel was for sure used about
3500 B.C. The diffusion of the wheel was quite slow. Evidence of its use dates from
3000 B.C. in Elam and Assyria, 2500 B.C. in Central Asia and Indus Valley, 2250
B.C. in northern Mesopotamia, 2000 B.C. in southern Russia and Crete, 1800 B.C.
in Anatolia, 1600 B.C. in Egypt and Palestine, 1500 B.C. in Greece and Georgia,
1300 B.C. in China and about 1000 B.C. in northern Italy. Some centuries later it
reached northern Europe.

It is not possible to understand from ancient pictures whether the axle did turn
together with the wheels or was stationary. The fact that the central hole of the wheel
disc was round has little meaning as a circular hole can also be explained by the ease
of construction. It is likely that both solutions were used, as there are still people
who use those primitive technologies nowadays.

It is however likely that the wheel did not derive from the roller: The types of
wheels used would rule that out, and it is likely that, in the mind of the ancient wheel
maker, the wheel and the roller had little in common.

The need to build lighter wheels for war chariots probably led to the development
of the spoked wheel, which is much more efﬁcient for such use. The wheel with
spokes was ﬁrst used probably at about 2000 B.C. and by 1600 B.C. it reached its
fully developed form, particularly in Egypt. The central part of a wheel of that type
(with 8 spokes) is shown in Fig. 1.27a. It is a part of a chariot dating back to 1350
B.C., found in a tomb near Thebes. The spokes are ﬁtted in the hub; the felloe is
usually built in various parts but some examples of felloes in one piece, bent in a
circular shape, were found as well.

1.4 Wheels and Tires

33

Fig. 1.27 a Cross section and view of the center part of a wheel of an Egyptian cart from 1350
B.C. found in a tomb near Tebe. b Wheel found in Mercurago, on the River Po ﬂat, probably dating
to about 1000 B.C.

A wheel which seems to be a stage in the evolution between the disc and the
spoked wheel is shown in Fig. 1.27b. The time this wheel was built has however led
one to think that it was simply an attempt to copy a spoked wheel by a wheelwright
used to disc wheels; but wheels of the same type are represented on more ancient
Greek paintings.

In many cases, even in very ancient times, wheels had a hoop or tire or at least
some device to strengthen the rim. Some disc wheels have a wooden rim, in one or
more pieces. Sometimes the rim of the wheel is inlaid with copper nails, to reduce
wear or perhaps to keep in position a leather tire. Certainly many Egyptian war
chariots had wheels covered with leather. In some pictures, even very ancient ones,
something which looks like a metal tire can be seen. The evidence of such practice is
however much more recent, dating back to about 1000 B.C. These metal tires were
built in various parts, welded together and then shrink-ﬁt to the wheel.

As it was already stated, only after animals were tamed could wheeled vehicles
be propelled in a proper way. In Mesopotamia both transportation vehicles and war

34

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.28 Egyptian war chariot found in a tomb near Tebe (XV century B.C.)

chariots were pulled by onagers. Also oxen were without any doubt used for trans-
portation.

The spoked wheel, that appeared about 2000 B.C., was accompanied by the use of
horses to drive war chariots. It is not known where horses were ﬁrst tamed and used
for that purpose, but the scarce archeological evidence indicates that it should have
happened in north-east Persia, and that from that region the use of horses spread to
the whole ancient world, from China to Egypt and Europe.

The structure of an Egyptian chariot of the XV century B.C. is shown in Fig. 1.28.
It represents without doubt the best of the state of the art of its times, and remained
unchanged for centuries.

The progress from the Sumerian vehicle shown in Fig. 1.26b is great, and if the
greater power of the two horses compared with that of the onagers is considered,
it is easy to understand why some historians ascribed to the use of this weapon
the expansion of the Hittites in Anatolia, the Achaei in Greece and of the Hyksos
who in the XVIII Century B.C. invaded Egypt, teaching the new technology to the
Egyptians.

Chariots became obsolete when the knowledge of riding became wide-spread.
Donkeys were used as pack animals and for transportation of persons in the third
millennium B.C. and surely also horses were occasionally used in the same way.

In Europe only the Celtic tribes continued to use war chariots, which at the begin-
ning were carried north of the Alps by Etruscans. Celtic wheelwrights learned the
art of building wheeled vehicles and made signiﬁcant progress.

The remains of the wagon found at Dejbjerg are shown in Fig. 1.29a. It is the
ﬁrst example of a wagon with steering on the front axle, but it can be considered
an articulated vehicle made by two chariots. It is however unlikely that the solution
was actually used for transportation; it looks more an insulated solution, for ceremo-
nial (burial) purposes. At any rate it incorporated other interesting features, like the
wooden roller bearings in the hubs.

1.4 Wheels and Tires

35

Fig. 1.29 Celtic carriage from the I century B.C. found near Dejbjerg: a picture, b wooden roller
bearings in the wheel hub, c cross section, d view

The wheel shows construction details we will ﬁnd on more modern vehicles:
particularly interesting are the roller bearings, completely made of wood, in wheel
hubs, shown on detail b.

Wheels commonly applied to carriages and coaches at the end of nineteenth
century and on many of the ﬁrst cars were the so called artillery wheels; the hub of
this wheel is shown on the upper part of Fig. 1.30.

The wheel is made by wooden spokes, whose base is shaped like a sector of the
hub. They are clamped by two metal ﬂanges which build up also the outer ring of
the bearing; the rim is made of wooden arches pressure ﬁtted in a steel ring which
forces the spokes into the hub. Spokes are perpendicular to the hub with a certain
inclination according to a bevel structure.

36

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.30 So called artillery wheels were common on carriages and on the ﬁrst cars. Wheel spokes
are perpendicular to the wheel axis but are slightly inclined, according to a bell shape. This shape
required the wheel to be mounted with a certain inclination, respect to the vehicle, to have spokes
working correctly. This angle was called camber angle (carrossage in french)

This kind of design increase the lateral robustness of the wheel and gives to the

wheel the necessary radial ﬂexibility to allow for rim hot pressure ﬁtting.

This shape required a suitable inclination of the wheel rotation axis to have spokes
working correctly under the vehicle weight; this angle (lower sketch) was called
camber angle (carrossage in french).

On metallic wheel this kind of inclination didn’t have anymore reason to exist,

but the name remained.

On this kind of wheel a solid rubber rim could be mounted. Other application
showed a cycle type wheel with solid rubber tire, like the cars of Daimler and Benz,
shown on Fig. 1.4.

1.4 Wheels and Tires

37

Fig. 1.31 Evolution of the car tire wheel. The ﬁrst two in the upper row are made of wood with
metallic reinforcements, the second one has dismountable rim. The third is the Sankey wheel,
entirely made of steel and separable from the hub, solution chosen also on present wheels. On second
raw two solution are shown with cycle type spokes, where the second has a rapid dismounting ﬁt.
Finally the Michelin disc wheel scheme, used also on present cars

In Fig. 1.31 many of the fundamental evolution stages of the pneumatic wheel are

reported; we will speak of the tire itself later on.

The ﬁrst wheel on the upper raw, in use till the ’910s, were similar to the artillery
wheels, we have referred about; instead of the metallic rolling rim, they presented
a channel ring able to receive the pneumatic tire. These wheels cannot be easily
dismounted form the hub; initially, a punctured tire was changed only directly on the
lifted car, with enormous difﬁculty.

The separable channel rim, shown on the second ﬁgure makes the tire change

easier, having one or more spare rims with inﬂated tire on board.

First solid metal wheels appeared in the ’920s; the mechanic resistance was
impressively increased. On this occasion the wheel was modiﬁed in order to be sep-
arable from the hub through a bolted ﬂange, the so called Sankey wheel. Punctured
wheel substitution was made quite easier.

Cycle type spoke wheels were applied till the ’950s for their low weight, especially
on sport and luxury cars; the ﬁrst type shown present a conventional ﬂange hub, while
the second features a rapid dismounting Rouge Whitworth joint. This is characterized
by a spline coupling, between wheel and hub, held in place by a big butterﬂy nut;
this feature became a style sign of ﬁne cars.

38

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.32 Spoke wheel with Rouge Whitworth nut; spokes are arranged in two rows. The ﬁrst
inside raw has spokes with only radial inclination; these spokes transmit braking and driving torque
and their inclination is motivated by. The second outside row provides for spokes on a bevel surface
to carry on lateral forces

In comparison with the ﬁrst car of Daimler and Benz, we can observe on more
modern cars, like on Fig. 1.32, a different spokes arrangement, now on two rows,
with different geometric conﬁguration.

The ﬁrst raw, inside with reference to the car, has spokes with only radial incli-
nation; these spokes transmit braking and driving torque and their inclination is
motivated by the fact that the spoke can only transmit forces along its axis.

The second outside row provides for spokes on a bevel surface and their orientation
is suitable, together with those of the ﬁrst raw to carry on lateral forces applied to
the wheel.

Coming back to Fig. 1.31 we see, as a last example, the Michelin wheel; this
wheel includes a stamped steel disc, welded to the channel rim; this solution, after a
number of improvement, is still in use.

Is it is now unconceivable our everyday life without a car, it would be unconceiv-

able a car without the existence of a tire.

The tire invention isn’t as old as the wheel invention, but is, anyway, older as the

automobile invention.

Thomson is remembered as the inventor of tires, described in an English patent
of 1845; the invention was ﬁnalized to improving the ride comfort of coaches and
to reduce their rolling resistance; the initial proposal provided for a leather sewed
lining and a cloth tube treated with rubber.

This idea wasn’t put to practice, but was proposed again by Dunlop, who ﬁled
a similar patent in 1888, without knowledge of Thomson’s priority; this time bicy-

1.4 Wheels and Tires

39

cles could take proﬁt of this invention that started to be applied extensively. As
happened for the legal dispute of Otto, regarding the internal combustion engine,
Dunlop patents were invalidated in 1890, because of Thomson priority; going on
with the comparison of the two cases, this fact didn’t affect Dunlop’s business nega-
tively, but was beneﬁcial to those who wanted enter the same market and contributed
to a rapid development of this technology.

Only in 1980 semi tubular tires were introduced; they could be adapted to a channel

rim by a steel cord circle and allowed an easy dismounting.

Michelin Brothers started to diffuse dismountable tires on cars, starting the ﬁrst

time on the Paris-Bordeaux race of 1895.

This could be thought as the starting point of the tire life on automobiles, receiving

many technology contributions by several manufactures.

A base invention for the diffusion of tires was rubber vulcanization, after a patent
of Goodyear of 1844. Before the invention of this chemical treatment, probably
discovered by chance, rubber didn’t have stable shape and wore-out very quickly
because of the temperature.

Many further improvements allowed to reach present performance; we recall the
application of synthetic ﬁbers to tire clothes, initially of line and cotton, made of
rayon in the ’930s, later of polyesters and of kevlar, from the ’970s. A second major
evolution refers to the radial texture of clothes, formerly diagonal, starting from the
’960s.

Other improvements concern the chemistry of rubber and the introduction of

synthetic elastomers; on this subject we will not supply further details.

A last evolution regards the geometric dimension of tires, characterized by the
channel diameter D, by the tire section width W and by the so called aspect ratio,
we will explain later, as ratio between the radial dimension of the tire and its section
width; aspect ratio wasn’t standardized, but was set around 100%; later, to improved
comfort tires became wider and the need to reduce car height and weight reduced
the tire diameter. Aspect ratios started to reduce.

Figure 1.33 shows the evolution of these dimensions for a series of Fiat cars, with
curb mass in the range of 1000 kg; the rim diameter decreases from 25(cid:2)(cid:2) in 1910 to

Fig. 1.33 Evolutionary
trend of tires dimensions on
a car with about 1000 kg of
mass; the evolution is shown
by the rim diameter D ((cid:2)(cid:2))
and by section dimension W
(mm)

40

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.34 Tweel: elastic non pneumatic wheel recently presented by Michelin

13(cid:2)(cid:2) in 1970, increasing slightly in the following years; the section width doubles
from an initial value of 90 mm to about 180 mm on modern cars.

The aspect ratio, not shown in this diagram had a stepped evolution; from an
initial value of about 100% has gone to 80% in the ’940s, to descend again to 50%
in the ’970s; in these years tires have conserved their outside diameter, increasing
gradually the rim diameter.

On more recent cars outside diameter tend to increase.
We should ﬁnally point out that from the beginning of motor history many patents
on elastic wheels have been ﬁled, where elasticity was obtained my mechanical
elastic means, rather than by the elasticity of the tire; they are often called non
pneumatic tires. Diffusion of tires has made this kind of wheel to disappear for about
one century, except as for the wheel of the LRV of the Apollo Project (see Appendix
C). Quite recently Michelin has presented an elastic non pneumatic wheel, called
tweel (contraction of tire and wheel) that could introduce a real innovation in the
future (Fig. 1.34).

1.5 Brakes

Brake evolution is bound to top speed growth and to trafﬁc density increase, that
impose the need of stopping the car in short space; it is reasonable to think that
braking ﬁrst cars in their contemporary trafﬁc wasn’t a serious concern.

First cars show brakes that work on the external surface of the wheel with moving
shoes, like on horse drawn carriages and on railway cars; this very simple device was
no more suitable for tired wheels, because of the potential wear.

1.5 Brakes

41

Fig. 1.35 Band brakes and external shoes brakes, to be applied on transmission line before the
differential and ﬁnal drive

For this reason external shoe brakes and band brakes, like those shown on Fig. 1.35
were introduced; they worked on the transmission line only. They choice was moti-
vated by the need to exploit the differential for braking force uniform distribution
too, very difﬁcult to be achieved with mechanical linkages control. They were also
almost insensitive to machining tolerances.

Brake liners were missing, but some example of Ferodo liners, synthetic mate-
rial developed by Frood were already present on coaches shoe brakes; this practice
diffused on large scale in the ’920s.

Drum brakes were developed later on and they were applied on rear wheels only;
they were more difﬁcult to be machined but showed a superior capability of dis-
sipating heat generated during long braking distances. Band and shoe brakes were
initially not abandoned, but they continued to be applied on the transmission as
supplementary or parking brake.

Disc brakes were introduced by Jaguar in series production in 1953.
Drum brakes were controlled by pedal and were usually designed to stop the
vehicle; the transmission brake, vice versa, was controlled by a hand lever which
could be stopped in the desired position and was usually designed for continuous
braking on downhill slopes and a parking brake.

It should be noticed that position and function of driver controls was standardized
informally only in the ’930s and the solution initially adopted could be very different;
a system that received a certain diffusion which appears unjustiﬁed today, provided
for a combined control of brake and clutch, to avoid stalling the engine at the end of
braking.

The application of brakes to front axle started only in 1910, thanks to a luxury car

manufacturer: Isotta Fraschini.

42

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.36 Completely
mechanical control of front
wheel brakes; the contact
point of the cam, actuating
the expansion of shoes is
near the king pin axis of the
wheel

This innovation didn’t regard the brakes per se, similar to other rear brakes, nor
the discovery of their usefulness, but the control system for steering wheels, shown
on Fig. 1.36.

Brake controls were in fact mechanical, as already shown on Fig. 1.35 and were
made by linkages and cables put in tension by pedal; in drum brakes the internal
shoes were expanded by a cam. What should be avoided, at any rate, was that wheel
steering could affect braking; the patent of Isotta Fraschini consisted in rounding the
cam in such a way as contact points were always on the king-pin axis.

In this way brake control was insensitive to steering; this patent was overridden
by other mechanical solutions and four wheel braking was state of the art at the end
of the ’920s.

What we said about steering motion, can be also applied to the suspension motion

of both axles.

The distance between the articulation points of tie rods had not to change, over a
certain threshold during the suspension stroke; if this had happened brake could be
actuated by road bumps or tie rods could have been broken by excessive pull.

For this reason, as we can see on Fig. 1.37 articulations point between levers and
tie beams had to stay on center of instantaneous rotation of axles, during suspension
stroke that were located nearby the ﬁxed eyes of leaf springs.

Tie rods must have adjustments for their length, to recover for wear of shoes; it
should be noticed that also distribution of braking force is inﬂuenced by the length
of rods.

These problems were completely solved by the application of hydraulic controls;
this kind of control spread during the ’930s and was proposed by Lockeed and
introduced on a car for the ﬁrst time by Duesemberg in 1921.

Another important evolution for braking systems was the application of auxiliary
power, to increase the driver’s thrust on the hydraulic lines; this device was introduced

1.5 Brakes

43

Fig. 1.37 Mechanical control for four wheels braking system; articulations point between levers
and tie rods had to stay on center of instantaneous rotation of axles, during suspension stroke that
were located nearby the ﬁxed eyes of leaf springs

using the engine vacuum as energy source and was applied for the ﬁrst time on a
Ford car in 1954; it allowed also weakest drivers to brake efﬁciently.

Already in 1910 Rolls-Royce applied on its cars a completely mechanical power

brake, showed on the drawing of Fig. 1.38.

The mechanical energy necessary to operate brakes is derived by the engine
through a power take-off; this energy is transferred to the braking system through
a clutch kept constantly sliding in controlled way by the brake pedal. The energy
coming from the propeller shaft is contributing to slow down the car too.

1.6 Chassis Frame

To speak of chassis structure we must say something about car body manufacturers.
At the dawn of the motor industry era, people who dedicated their ﬁnancial and
intellectual efforts to this product preferred, understandably, to concentrate on the
most peculiar problems of cars development that are, particularly, engine, transmis-
sion, suspension and steering system. In other words they became chassis manufac-
turer, according to a french name.

The body, according to technical rules known at the end of the nineteenth century
was not considered a critical technology and was totally imported by coaches and
carriages, as it was; many wheelwrights became also car body manufacturer.

This fact caused an initial separation of these two kinds of industry.
Chassis manufacturers used metallic materials mainly and their plants were able
to cast, to stamp and to machine; due to the precision of couplings they worked
according to drawings and produced small series.

Body manufacturers used mainly wooden structures and they worked as carpen-
ters, using ﬁxtures and tools to produce single pieces, often with no drawings. This

44

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.38 Mechanical power brake adopted by Rolls-Royce; the necessary energy derives from the
propeller shaft and is transferred to the braking system by a clutch, operated by the brakes pedal

tradition came from the fact that wood was much more suitable than metal, to obtain
curved shapes that already followed elaborated aesthetic rules.

Also painting, vital to surface protection and nice appearance, was again in favour
of wood, considering the existing oil paints and varnishes and justiﬁed a complete
separation of the chassis and body fabrication to avoid damages during the complicate
assembly process of mechanical parts.

It should be remembered that a complete treatment of a body required more than

400 h of work; to this time the drying time of any layer had to be added.

The chassis had, therefore an important technological value, required by the indus-
try organization. It allowed the car manufacturer to produce a ﬁnished product that
could be delivered to the body work, relieving the car manufacturer of any respon-
sibility; it could also be driven, in fact, to be tested and to show the customer its
performance.

The ﬁnal customer bought, therefore, a chassis that was put in charge of a coach
builder to have the car completed; also example were available where coach builders
bought chassis on their own and sold ﬁnished cars and car manufacturers that had
permanent agreement with coach builders to produce and sell complete cars.
This was the situation in Europe at the beginning of the ﬁrst world war.

1.6 Chassis Frame

45

After the world mass production started and many manufacturers introduced their
internal body shop. This fact determined also a gradual transition from wood to steel,
with intermediate solutions, we could deﬁne as hybrid, with wooden skeleton and
external panels made of wood or partially of steel sheets.

Synthetic enamels shortened the painting time of an order of magnitude and made

possible a better integration of body and chassis fabrication.

The organization of the production cycle didn’t change very much either because
of tradition and because customers still requested special bodies that had to be assem-
bled on a ﬁnished chassis.

The integration of chassis and body manufacturing was mainly developed in the
United States and imitated in Europe by major manufacturers, starting from the ’920s.
The frame which is the bearing structure of the chassis had to carry on all mechan-
ical components, the complete body and the payloads. In addition the frame was the
assembly support of all chassis components, including the engine, to obtain a rational
organization of the fabrication process of the car.

Frames of ﬁrst cars were made either of wood or of steel; this last solution was
far more applied. Figure 1.39 shows an example of a complete chassis of a car of the
beginning of the twentieths century, where the frame can be easily identiﬁed.

The frame is made by a ladder structure, showing two longitudinal side beams

with particular shape.

In the front side the distance between the two beams is reduced to allow for the
necessary space to steer the front axle wheels, while the rear side is larger to better
install the car body; in this area the distance between side beams is determined by
the track and by the dimension of the transmission.

Front and rear ends are often curved on the side view, to better match the leaf
springs shape and allow for suspension compression stroke. The curvature of latest
cars was increased to reduce ﬂoor car height between the wheels.

Side beams are connected by a number of cross members, shaping the ladder

structure.

Side beams and cross members are bolted in our example, but in other cases the

were heat riveted and, later, lap welded.

This kind of structure has been maintained for years and is still in use on many
industrial vehicles; the choice of bolts or rivets instead of welding was imposed by
the dimensions of the structure, such as to induce unacceptable residual stresses after
welding, because of the quantity of applied heat.

Torsional stiffness of this kind of frame is not particularly high, because it is
determined by the cross section of side beams, almost always of open type to make
the assembly with cross members and chassis components easier. Also bending
stiffness is low because of the limitations on side beams height.

Chassis frame deformations became an important issue because of their effect on

body; the problem became more evident by increasing of maximum speed.

The body was made by a wooden skeleton structure which was quite stiff after
the completion of fabrication, considering the carpentry joint that could be applied;
but these joints couldn’t withstand the task of making the entire car stiff.

46

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.39 Complete chassis of a Fiat car of 1905. The chassis structure made of a ladder frame is
similar to that of many cars of those years

Chassis deformations applied to a stiffer body resulted in loosening or ruptures of
the body skeleton joints; these facts built up plays between body parts and, therefore,
annoying squeaks and rattles.

Body joints were perfected abandoning carpentry solutions in favour of more
ﬂexible metal joints that avoided contact between parts; to this purpose also fabric
structure were developed, according to Weymann’s patents, coming from the aero-
nautical technology of those years, that allowed for a very ﬂexible, but silent body.
The ﬁnal solution came by using steel sheets, at least for outside body panels; on
one side the increased ﬂexibility better matched chassis deformations; on the other
side it could contribute to the entire structure stiffness, being able to carry on an
increased stress.

Chassis frames of some car from the ’930s changed also aspect and showed more

elaborated schemes, as can be seen on Fig. 1.40.

We can see at ﬁrst on this ﬁgure that frame elements are made with stamped parts.
Side and cross members, for their complicate shape are deep-drafted using dedicated

1.6 Chassis Frame

47

Fig. 1.40 Central beam frame structure of Fiat 1500 of 1935; the structure is made of steel sheet
pieces stamped and riveted each to the other

stamps; on previous example, on Fig. 1.39, same components were cut from proﬁled
steel bars and were bent in open stamps.

The advantage of this innovation is a better control of structure weight, because
every part of the frame is designed according to local stress; the disadvantage is
obviously the higher amount of dedicated tool investments.

Instead of the already shown ladder frame, we have now a cross frame, where side
beams are shaped to build an X; cross members instead of connecting side members
shape up cantilever beams to carry on the ﬂoor and the body. The two side members
are joined together in the middle building up a tubular structure much torsionally
stiffer; the scheme of the frame allows the ﬂoor to be in a lower position with beneﬁt
for the car height.

Front cross member is a cast element bolted to the frame, able to receive the

independent suspension shown on Fig. 1.15.

Most joints are riveted.
This kind of chassis is connected to the body through robust bolts. The body was
made by stamped steel panels, invested on a wooden skeleton; the assembly is not
particularly stiff but it should contribute to the total torsional stiffness.

A further step is shown on the Volkswagen Beetle, almost contemporary of the
cars previously shown, but produced for longer time; the chassis structure is shown
on Fig. 1.41.

In this case the structure is made by a central beam to which ﬂoor and front and
rear cross members are welded, to carry on front suspension (shown on Fig. 1.16)
and rear suspension and powertrain.

The ﬂoor is bolted to an integral full steel sheet body completely welded; the
solution can’t be called a unitized body, but its structural behavior can be comparable
when assembly is completed.

This kind of chassis structure, called chassis platform, was still in use in many

cars till the ’950s.

48

1 Historical Evolution

Fig. 1.41 Platform chassis structure of Volkswagen Beetle of 1936. This structure is separated
from the body during the assembly process of the chassis, but after body assembly shapes up a
closed structure, whose torsional stiffness can be compared to that of a unitized body

Fig. 1.42 Complete chassis with parts of the unitized body of the Lancia Lambda of 1922. This
picture has only communication purpose; in fact mechanical components were assembled to the
structure only after the completion and painting of the body

It shows the advantage of being still compatible with the assembly process orga-
nization already described; this solution was obviously suitable to produce different
car variants on the same chassis.

The unitized body was considered to obtain optimum structural performance with
a reduced weight; the considerable distance, existing in a sedan car, between chassis
side members and longitudinal roof reinforcements allows to have a very stiff struc-
ture, if these elements are connected with vertical members (pillars) sufﬁciently stiff
and well joined to longitudinal and cross members.

In addition to this body panels, if shaped for this purpose, can contribute to the
structure stiffness by limiting angular deformations of pillars side beams and cross
members.

The ﬁrst car to try this way was the Lancia Lambda of 1922, whose chassis is

shown on Fig. 1.42.

1.6 Chassis Frame

49

Fig. 1.43 Phantom view of the unitized body of the Fiat 1400 of 1950; darkened areas put in
evidence body structure. Chassis is no more existing (as physical subassembly) and all components
(powertrain, suspension, steering system, etc.) are bolted to the body

The body is made by rived panels put in such a way as to build up boxed areas;
many parts of the structure are over side beams, integrating seats, ﬁre wall and trunk
and contributing impressively to the total stiffness.

Front suspension is connected with a gate structure surrounding the cooling radi-

ator, as already shown on Fig. 1.13.

We are not able to comment quantitatively on structural performance of this solu-
tion, but the result on volumes layout of this car is impressive and allows the modern
and slender shape characteristic of this car as compared with contemporary ones.

This structure could ﬁt a convertible kind of body; the sedan type didn’t take

advantage of this structure, featuring a Weymann’s semi hard top.

The crucial step was made about ﬁfteen years later when spot welding was devel-
oped and deep stamped steel sheets were available; it should be noticed the every
cut and bent of the Lambda structure is made by open and general purpose stamping
tools.

One of the ﬁrst examples in Europe of this technology developed by Budd in the

United States was the Fiat 1400 of 1950, represented on Fig. 1.43.

All body panels are shaped in such a way as to build boxed beams in the junction

areas; these boxed beams shape up a space frame carrying on all structural tasks.

For example the space frame carrying on the power train is made by two members
shaped like an U (in the upper side) that together with the wheels side walls build up
closed section beams.

The chassis, as physical subassembly of certain mechanical components, is no
more existing and its separation from the car is no more possible; nor is possible
to identify its structural function. Nevertheless the structural function of the body is
very well evident by looking to the darkened elements of the phantom view.

50

1 Historical Evolution

The production process is completely different; the body is stamped, welded and
painted and chassis components, grouped by small sub assemblies are assembled
only afterwards.

The role of body manufacturers has been completely revolutionized.

Chapter 2
Wheels and Tires

2.1 Description

Vehicle wheels have essentially two functions:

• to carry on the vehicle weight by exchanging vertical forces with the road surface;
• to exchange with the road surface longitudinal and side forces, able to move the

vehicle and to control its path.

As we have seen in the previous chapter the ﬁrst function was already present on
antique wheels that had to carry weights but only occasionally were demanded to
brake the vehicle or to withstand signiﬁcant side forces.

With speed increasing the bearing capacity for side and longitudinal forces

becomes more and more important.

Road vehicle wheels include two elements: the rim and the tire.

2.1.1 Rim Characteristics

A peculiar characteristic of a rim is the possibility to allow a fast and simple substi-
tution of the tire. A mean average tire life should be set in the range between 30,000
and 60,000 km, according to the heaviness of the mission. In addition, tires can be
punctured and require immediate substitution.

These facts justify the particular shape of the rim and the fact that its dimensions

are standardized in order to be exchanged with other of different manufacturers.

The wheel is made by a disc and a ﬂange; these are shown on the right side of
Fig. 2.1; on the same ﬁgure can be seen the undeformed section of the tire (on the
upper side) and the deformed section (on the lower side) of the contact.

Disc and ﬂange are usually integral; the wheel is ﬁxed to its hub with bolts.
Flanges show a particular shape suitable to keep the tire in place. The ﬂange is
characterized by the diameter d and shows a dropped center useful to assemble and
Fig. 2.1 Schematic section of a complete wheel including rim and tire and their main dimensions

disassemble the tire; in fact the bead cable of the tire is quite inextensible and must
be set initially in the dropped center from one side, to cross the ﬂange and to be
ﬁnally installed.

The j dimension between the two ﬂanks of the ﬂange determines the mounting
width of the rim; dimensions d and j are usually always measured in inches and
must be identical to those of the tire.

The wheel size measurement is usually written like in the following example:

5

1
2

J × 15,

(cid:2)(cid:2) (139.7 mm) and a d diameter of 15(cid:2)(cid:2)
to show a rim with a j dimension of 5 1
2
(381 mm); J letter is showing the type of adopted rim proﬁle, almost always J type.
Groups of letters can be added to this indication to show the hump type of the
ﬂange; the hump is the shape of the area matching with the internal diameter of the
tire; a particular tapered shape is used to improve the air sealing for tubeless tire or
to avoid sudden tire removal after puncturing. No letter stands for conical rim for
tube tires.

Rims can be made by stamped and welded steel or by cast aluminum or magne-
sium; this last alternative, initially addressed to weight reduction, is also justiﬁed by
aesthetic reasons.

The rim disc is characterized by windows suitable to improve brake cooling down
and by a central hole able to sustain the wheel before bolts tightening; wheels ﬁt the
disc in a tapered area to increase disc elasticity; this has the function of reducing the
statistical pull dispersion after tightening.

2.1 Description

53

Rim discs show usually a bell shape addressed to give a correct position to the
symmetry plane of the tire (equator plane) with respect to the car and to allow the
necessary space for hubs and brakes installation.

Today many cars can be ﬁtted with tires of different size, according to the engine
power of the version and of customer desire; usually more performing versions have
a wider tire with the same rolling radius. As a consequence the aspect ratio is reduced
to increase cornering stiffness with compromise on comfort.

The rim disc shape is usually such as to maintain the outside proﬁle of the tire in

the same position.

2.1.2 Tire Characteristics

The rigid structure of the wheel is surrounded by a ﬂexible element made by the
tire and its tube, used to maintain the inﬂation pressure. This last can be missing, as
in tubeless tires, where the tire is hermetically ﬁtted to the wheel; this more costly
solution is today preferred because of the improvement on safety, since punctured
tubeless tires are slower in loosing their pressure.

The tire is a quite complex composite structure, where many layers of rubberized
fabric (plies) with reinforcements cords; the orientation of warp and weave and of
reinforcement cords is peculiar to give a tire its mechanical design characteristics.

The angle between the direction of the cords with respect to the circumferential
direction of the tires is usually referred to as the crown angle. As a general rule,
plies with a low value of the crown angle enhance the handling characteristics of the
vehicle, while those with a high value, up to 90◦, of the crown angle enhance ride
comfort.

Each tire is designated by a group of letters and numbers, like the following

example:

175/65 R 14 82 T.

We report the meaning of this designation with reference to Fig. 2.1.

• The ﬁrst ﬁgure (175) shows the dimension W , usually measured in mm; it is
separated by a bar from the following ﬁgure. Because the tire is a deformable
structure, this measure must be referred to an undeformed situation with correct
inﬂation pressure and no load applied.

• The second ﬁgure (65) refers to the aspect ratio of the tire, given by the ratio H/W
between the radial height and the width; usually aspect ratios are expressed as a
percentage: in the given example H is 65% of W . If this ﬁgure is omitted it should
be assumed to be 80%, for long time a standardized value.

• The following letter shows the type of tire plies; R stands for radial, otherwise it

is omitted.

• The third ﬁgure is showing the rim diameter in inches.

54

2 Wheels and Tires

Table 2.1 Letters showing the maximum allowed speed of a tire
Speed (km/h) 80

180

150

160

130

170

Letter

F

M

P

Q

R

S

190

T

210

H

240

V

270

W

• The fourth ﬁgure in the load factor, which determines the allowed vertical load at a
certain assigned inﬂation pressure; this ﬁgure is the row order of a standardization
table where maximum allowed vertical loads are shown as a function of the inﬂation
pressure; this ﬁgure has therefore no physical meaning.

• The ﬁnal letter indicates the maximum allowed speed for the tire, as shown on

Other no more up-to-date standardized designation survive on non recent publi-

Table 2.1.

cations; for instance:

P 225/50 S R 15.

In this case, the ﬁrst letter stands for vehicle category (P is for cars), the ﬁrst
two ﬁgures indicate tire width in millimeters and aspect ratio, the following letters
shows the maximum allowed speed and the next letter the tire type (R for radial, B
for belted, D for cross-ply); the last ﬁgure is the rim diameter in inches.

Independently of their application, the structure of a tire can be made according
to different fundamental schemes; these schemes regarding the tire carcass, that
is the organization of plies, can be classiﬁed according to two categories: cross or
conventional ply and radial ply. A radial ply tire is shown on Fig. 2.2; an intermediate
category could be that of belted tires.

On cross ply tires reinforcement cords are crossing the equator plane with a
crown angle of 35◦–40◦; on radial tires some plies running perpendicular to the
circumferential direction (carcass plies, with a crown angle of 90◦) are surrounded
by other plies (belt plies) with a much smaller angle, in the range of 15◦. On cross
ply tires, plies are extending from bead to bead, while on radial tires belt plies are
limited to the region that comes into contact with the ground, while the carcass plies
keep the sides of the tire into shape.

Conventional tires have a less vulnerable structure in the ﬂanks but are more
ﬂexible in the belt region; on the contrary radial tire are very ﬂexible and vulnerable
in the ﬂanks, being stiffer in the belt region: this arrangement improves cornering and
comfort behavior with penalty on the ﬂank vulnerability (shocks against sidewalk
steps).

For their better characteristics radial tires are the most common type; conventional

tire are in use for more demanding applications such as off-road driving.

Tires main function is to distribute the vertical load on a surface which should be
large enough to absorb road irregularities. It is vital that the ﬂexibility, according to
different directions, is distributed in a certain way: on radial tires, for example, vertical
deformation is high, because of high deformation of the sides, while circumferential
deformation is low, because of the almost straight direction of belt cords. Superior

2.1 Description

55

Fig. 2.2 Radial tire structure: there are plies with circumferential cords (belt) and plies with radial
cords (ﬂanks) and two reinforcement cables in the bead for the part of the tire contacting the rim

comfort behavior and high capability of side force generation are a direct consequence
of this ﬂexibility distribution.

Particularly relevant to the tire behavior is the tread of the tire, essentially made by
vulcanized ﬁlled rubber; it is the contact surface with the ground and determines fric-
tion of the tire-ground coupling. Treads are featuring sculptures of different designs;
circumferential and transversal grooves have the essential purpose of making water
to drain easier from the contact area, when the road is wet and improve friction on
incoherent soils; thinner transversal grooves improve friction on slippery ground.
If the vehicle drive was limited to well paved and dry roads, sculptures would be
unnecessary, as for slick tires.

2.1.3 Wheel Reference System

While studying forces between tire and ground, it is useful to use the wheel reference
system X (cid:2)Y (cid:2) Z (cid:2) shown on Fig. 2.3. The system origin is the center of the contact patch,
deﬁned as the theoretical contact point between the undeformed equatorial plane and
the ground; X (cid:2) axis is the intersection of such plane with the ground and its positive

56

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.3 Reference system used to study forces exchanged between tire and ground. Deﬁnition of
positive direction of forces, moments and side slip angle

direction is the same as for vehicle speed. Z (cid:2) axis is perpendicular to the ground1
and, as a consequence Y (cid:2) axis lies on the ground and is pointing to the left.

The total force is supposed to be applied in the center of contact and can be seen as
three components acting along X (cid:2), Y (cid:2) and Z (cid:2) axis, as vertical force Fx , lateral force
Fy and normal force Fz. In the same way the total moment can be broken down in
three components that are the overturning moment Mx , the rolling resistance moment
My and the self aligning moment Mz. A wheel torque T can be applied by the vehicle
along the tire rotation axis.

The angle between the X (cid:2) Z (cid:2) plane and the direction of the wheel hub speed is
called wheel side slip angle α, while the angle between the X (cid:2) Z (cid:2) plane and the wheel
equatorial plane is called inclination or camber angle γ . Positive directions for angles
are shown on the same ﬁgure; in particular the inclination angle is positive when the
highest part of the wheel is oriented to the right of the driver (in other words, left
wheel has a positive inclination angle if the top is pointing to the car interior). While

1The terminology we are going to use is that suggested by SAE (Society of Automotive Engineers)
in his document J670e Vehicle Dynamics Terminology, published in 1952 and revised on July
1976. Nevertheless in some cases the Authors have decided not to follow some suggestion, as for
the positive direction of Z (cid:2) axis, which, in this document, is pointing downwards.

2.1 Description

57

the inclination angle is referred to the road, the camber angle is usually referred to
the car and has positive directions opposite for the two vehicle sides.

In this book we will assume that inclination and camber angle are coincident.2

2.2 Tire Operation

While explaining tire operation, we should identify two different situations:

• prepared ground, when the tire is in contact with paved or concrete grounds;
• unprepared ground, when the tire is in contact with natural grounds or dirty roads.

The ﬁrst situation is typical of on-road driving, while the second one is typical
of off-road driving; the physical phenomenon discriminating the two situations is
that ground deformations should be considered or neglected: ground deformation
are neglected on dry paved roads.

2.2.1 On-road Driving

In this case two different aspects are to be considered:

• the adhesion between rubber and ground; thanks to this phenomenon, tires can
exchange with the ground also forces which are contained in the contact patch
plane;

• the elasticity of the tire structure, which gives to the tire certain absorption capabil-
ities as far as road asperities are concerned and are the main reason for having tires
slipping in the two direction of the contact patch, when longitudinal and lateral
forces are applied.

Rubber-Ground Adhesion

We deﬁne adhesion the result of physical phenomena that allow a specimen of rub-
ber set on the ground and pressed with a certain vertical force to withstand forces
contained in the ground plane, without any relative motion.

Adhesion is caused by two different phenomena, which have, anyway, similar

results:

• physical adhesion and
• local deformation.

We can put in evidence the physical adhesion phenomenon considering a piece
of rubber pressed on a completely smooth and rigid ground. Rubber molecules and

2This is a further deviation from SAE recommendations.

58

2 Wheels and Tires

ground molecules apply certain attraction forces; these attraction forces refer to dis-
tances in the range between 10 and 10,000 Å (equivalent to 0.001–0.01 µm). Impu-
rities present between the two contact surfaces limit the adhesion phenomenon to a
certain number of adhesion sites, on both surfaces.

Adhesion forces will develop between adhesive sites. If we now imagine to apply

a lateral force to our rubber specimen, it will be balanced by adhesion force.

This force will be maintained till a certain distance is reached between the adhesive
sites and will become zero, when the distance will be greater than a certain value;
when the adhesion force is destroyed, molecules layers are instantaneously left free
from stress and they start oscillating in the material. Because of internal material
damping this fact will dissipate a certain amount of energy; the dissipated energy
divided by the displacement between rubber specimen and ground will result in
reaction force, opposing this displacement.

Adhesion force is therefore controlled by the following parameters:

• surface energy of contacting materials;
• damping properties of those materials, where rubber plays the most important role;

they are controlled by temperatures, bound to relative speed;

• deformation of contacting surfaces, because of lateral forces which can cause also

instability as in case of stick and slip.

Adhesion force measurement can be made by pressing a rubber specimen on a

perfectly polished mirror-like surface.

It should be noticed as adhesion is bound to material damping properties.
Local deformations are, instead, caused by road asperities; if we don’t take into
account adhesion, as it could happen putting our rubber specimen on a perfectly
lubricated but rough ground, we will have areas where rubber is deforming and
afterwards is loosing its deformation.

Again, mechanical work dissipated by damping will build up forces along the

contact surface.

Also now friction and damping are bound each other.
Local deformation forces can be measured by having a rubber carpet specimen
sliding on a low resistance plane, such as a plane equipped with rollers or spheres
free to rotate.

Orientatively adhesion force is about 70% of the total friction force in case of

rubber on dry paved road.

These phenomena change their mechanism radically in case of watered ground;

we again distinguish three fundamental cases.

• Water layer thickness is so high to establish a permanent lubricated meatus between
tire and ground (aquaplaning); in this case adhesion and local deformations cannot
take place and tangential forces can be calculated, according to the lubrication
theory, starting from liquid viscosity.

• Water layer thickness isn’t such as to establish permanent lubrication, but enough
to avoid adhesion forces; in this case we can still have local deformation forces if
the ground is rough.

2.2 Tire Operation

59

• Water is completely removed from the contact patch area and in this case the

behavior of rubber is as it was explained.

This last case is what we would like to obtain by mains of tire grooves and draining

pavement.

In a real case it can happen that the ﬁrst part of the patch will receive a lubrication

hydrodynamic lift, when the areas behind are in intermediate or dry conditions.

We deﬁne friction coefﬁcient μ the ratio between the lateral force and the vertical
force; as forces, it can be broken down in longitudinal friction coefﬁcient, the ratio:

μx = Fx
Fz

μy = Fy
Fz

(2.1)

(2.2)

between force along the X (cid:2) axis and vertical force along the Z (cid:2) axis and longitudinal
friction coefﬁcient, the ratio:

between force along the Y (cid:2) axis and vertical force along the Z (cid:2) axis.

Friction coefﬁcient can be deﬁned globally, as we did, or locally as ratio between

tangential and vertical pressures.

Elastic Behavior

The tire can be compared to an elastic deforming structure with internal damping.

Without inﬂation pressure tire rigidity will be modest and not adequate to practical
use. On the contrary, by neglecting mechanical contribution of cloths and cords, the
tire could be thought as a perfect membrane with internal constant pressure and
where a certain vertical load is applied on a part of its structure.

This membrane could withstand vertical load only by its internal pressure; tire
surface should ﬂatten for an area as big as to generate a pressure-area product able
to equal the vertical force. This surface is the contact patch of the tire.

Contact patch area is decreasing if the inﬂation pressure is increasing.
If the tire is rolling previously deformed patch areas must return round, while new

material ha to be ﬂattened as to withstand vertical force.

It can be imagined that this process is implying energy dissipation, because of
rubber damping properties. These damping properties are not only due to the internal
material damping, but also to the relative motion that must take place between cloths,
cords and rubber, to allow for local bending deformation.

If the ground isn’t rigid also the anelastic ground deformation is playing a role in

determining roll resistance.

The membrane model can easily justify why lateral and longitudinal forces can
induce local deformation of the contact patch; what is more difﬁcult is to understand
what is going on when lateral and longitudinal forces are applied to a rolling wheel.

60

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.4 “Brush” simpliﬁed
model of a tire; the tire is
reduced to a discrete number
of springs, featuring vertical,
lateral and longitudinal
ﬂexibility and bearing a
specimen of tire rubber on
their tip

To predict, only in a qualitative way, what will occur we will use a simpler model,

represented on Fig. 2.4.

The tire is reduced to a discrete number of springs, featuring vertical, lateral and

longitudinal ﬂexibility and bearing a specimen of tire rubber on their tip.

Let us assume, for sake of simplicity, that the number of springs is such as there
is a position where one only of them is contacting the ground; they are ﬁt on a rigid
rim with a uniform angular displacement ξ .

Spring tips are free to move, according to applied forces, with no connection with
near springs. Simpliﬁcations can be removed, without affecting the nature of the
results we are going to study. We will call this model, extremely simpliﬁed, brush
model.

Under the application of the vertical force, contacting spring will assume a certain
radial deformation, as in a real tire; if we associate to the spring a suitable damping
coefﬁcient, the model is also able to simulate rolling resistance, proportional to the
mechanical work dissipated by any contacting spring, when leaving the contact patch,
because of rolling.

In addition to that, rolling radius, because of the applied vertical force will assume

a value smaller as the unloaded value.

Let us assume that the tire is withstanding a longitudinal force Fx in driving direc-
tion (in the middle of Fig. 2.5) or in braking direction (at the right of Fig. 2.5); accord-
ing to the proposed model an angular deformation ζ , proportional to the applied force
will be applied to the contacting spring and by the tire.

It is easy to understand that if the tire has a rolling speed (cid:6), each contacting
spring will returned straight, when leaving the contact patch, while a new spring will
assume the angular displacement ζ . To the initial tire speed (cid:6) a new deformation
speed will be added, equal to the ratio between the angular deformation ζ and the
time ξ/(cid:6), needed to put the following spring in contact with the ground.

2.2 Tire Operation

61

Fig. 2.5 Brush model: static representation of radial and circumferential deformations of a tire,
with contemporary application of a vertical and of braking or driving force

Under the action of a driving force the wheel should roll faster as when rolling
free of force; on the contrary, if the wheel is braking, it should roll slower as when
rolling free.

If our model was accurate speed variation should be proportional to applied lon-

gitudinal force; this speed variation is called longitudinal slip speed.

When braking or driving force should go over the friction limit, a new added
speed would be generated depending only on mass characteristics; over this value
longitudinal forces cannot increase anymore.

Let us assume, ﬁnally, that our tire is withstanding vertical and lateral force, due,
for example, to a centrifugal force applied to the vehicle in a bend. In this case,
the spring in contact with the ground will assume a lateral displacement in the Y (cid:2)
direction. The phenomenon is shown on Fig. 2.6.

If the wheel is rolling, each spring will contact the ground as shown on the upper

part of this ﬁgure, relative to the side view, on a certain point of the X (cid:2) axis.

The initial contact point will receive a lateral displacement (cid:7)y, shown on the
lower part of the same ﬁgure; this displacement again is proportional to the lateral
force; when next spring will contact the ground it will assume the same displacement,
that will be added to the wheel hub. As a result the wheel hub will receive a lateral
motion, whose speed will be given by the ratio between this displacement and the
time needed to have the next spring in contact with the ground, that is ξ/(cid:6).

If the model would be accurate, because deformation is proportional to the force,
we would expect the wheel hub to deviate its path from the initial one of an angle
α, proportional to the lateral force; this deviation is called side slip angle. It should
be better called wheel side slip angle, to be not confused with the vehicle side slip
angle, we will explain later on.

When lateral force should go over the friction value of rubber, again the added
speed will be only controlled by masses and the side force could not have any further
increase.

The brush model has given us the possibility to understand and predict in a very
rough way the concepts of longitudinal slip and side slip, we will examine in a better
detail in the following paragraphs.

62

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.6 Brush model; graphic representation of a rolling tire with contemporary application of
vertical and longitudinal force

2.2.2 Off-road Driving

On off-road driving, besides of the phenomena we have described, which remain
unchanged also in this case, ground deformations should be taken into account and
they could predominate in certain situations.

Some kind of vehicle is designed not only to be driven on paved roads, but also on
natural grounds, on country and forest roads, with their surface only roughly levelled.
Prevailing factors limiting vehicle mobility are the deformation of the surface and
the shape of the ground which can interfere with the mechanical parts of the chassis.
We will discuss in the following paragraphs about ground deformation only. In
fact, also on a level road, the mechanical behavior of an untreated ground can have
a severe impact on vehicle motion. The shape has a purely geometric impact on
geometric chassis design, concerning:

• wheelbase,
• track,
• wheel diameter,
• available suspension stroke,
• clearance of the chassis from the ground and
• attack angles.

We will refer to natural soils and to fresh snow, which for certain reasons shows

a similar behavior.

2.2 Tire Operation

63

Natural soils are the last result of the effect of wind and water erosion on the rocks

from which they have been originated and are made by tamped down powders.

Mechanical properties of soil are determined by the solid incoherent particles
which are its main component; main particles characteristics are their granulometry,
their apparent density and the content of water or humidity. We distinguish between
apparent and real density to take into account for the space separating contiguous
particles. The ﬁrst is deﬁned by the ratio between weight and volume of an average
lump cut from the ground and measured as it is; the second represent the limit that
can be obtained by compressing this lump in order to eliminate any space between
particles; in other words it is the average density of single particles.

The forces that can be exchanged by near particles and that oppose deformations
caused by external forces that may be applied, are cohesive forces which are usually
increasing as particle size, or granulometry, is decreasing; in fact, if granulometry is
decreasing the contact surface between near particles is increasing.

The most relevant contribution to soil deformation is given by making particles
to slide along their contact surface; the higher the cohesion force the lower will be
deformation. Cohesion forces are also inﬂuenced by the presence of water trapped
between near particles.

On the other side a signiﬁcant contribution to limit particles displacement and
consequent soil deformation is the friction force at the contact between particles;
friction coefﬁcient too is inﬂuenced by the presence of water.

For low contents of humidity, soils feature a good value of mechanical resistance

which is decreasing as the quantity of trapped water is increasing.

The liquid limit takes place when water is so abundant as to completely eliminate
the cohesive effect between particles and therefore the shear resistance of the soil;
this limit is expressed by the quantity of water divided by the dry residual.

The plastic limit is instead reached, when the soil is loosing is capability to be
shaped, being too brittle and, also in this case, is expressed by the quantity of trapped
water, divided by the dry residual.

The difference between the to said limits is called plasticity index, while the ratio
between the actual water content of a given soil and the quantity referred to the plastic
limit, is called relative content of water of the soil.

For our purposes we propose the following classiﬁcation of soil types.

Cohesive Soils

Cohesive soils contain variable quantities of clay, mixed with very ﬁne granules of
sedimentary rock, with a mean diameter between 0.05 and 0.10 mm. They can be
classiﬁed in lightly clayey, clayey soils and clays, according to the quantity of clay.
In these soils cohesion is particularly relevant and is dominated by relative humidity;
for this purpose solid, plastic and ﬂuid states are identiﬁed.

Relative humidity is therefore an important parameter to describe the mechanical
properties of cohesive soils; these soils are stable only if relative humidity is in
the ﬁeld between 0.4 and 0.65; over those values mechanical properties deteriorate

Sandy Soils

Swampy Soils

Snowy Soils

64

2 Wheels and Tires

severely. A peculiar characteristic of these soils is that of draining water with high
difﬁculty; vehicle mobility will result particularly difﬁcult during rain season and
ice melt.

Cohesive soils occupy a large part of the earth surface.

In sandy soils particles have higher dimensions and clay is practically missing; a
possible classiﬁcation of these soils can take into account particles diameter and
apparent density. The mechanical resistance to deformation of sandy soils increases
initially as the water content increases, while it decreases rapidly at higher contents;
as a difference with clayey soils, they have a very good draining capacity: they are
diffused on see and river shores and in some deserts.

Swampy soils are characterized by the high content of peat, where most diffused con-
stituent are residuals of animal and vegetal organic matter, at the end of an anaerobic
decomposition process; they can be classiﬁed in solid swampy soils, when pit lies
directly on a rock layer, saprofelic soils, when the peat lies over a layer of materials
in decomposition and ﬂoating soils when peat ﬂoats over the water.

These grounds are diffused in Central Europe and Siberia.

Snow is particularly abundant during winter season of the Northern Hemisphere.
Vehicle mobility on snow depends mainly on snow layer thickness, on his density,
on temperature and on the snow structure. Fresh snow density lies between 0.075
and 0.20 g/cm3, while seasoned and compacted snow density is between 0.30 and
0.40 g/cm3; the process of transformation of fresh to seasoned snow is irreversible.

Soil Deformation Because of Vertical Load

Vertical load application to soils originate deformation; we will take into considera-
tion the application of uniform loads, as we could ideally have by an inﬁnite ﬂexible
tire (membrane model). Let us consider Fig. 2.7, which represents in a qualitative
way what could happen by pressing a pad, applying a pressure p, deﬁned as the ratio
between the applied load and the pad surface.

This pad simulates the effect of the contact patch of a tire, pressed against the soil

by the vehicle weight.

2.2 Tire Operation

Fig. 2.7 Main phases of
deformation of an ideal
homogeneous soil, expressed
by sinking h as a function of
applied pressure p. Lower
diagrams shows qualitatively
the distribution of stress in
the soil

65

There is no difference in this description considering the different types of soils

we have classiﬁed.

By relatively small pressure, the soil is cut along the perimeter of the pad and
is tamped down; pressure reaction of soil concentrates on the edge of the cut and
is increasing as soil cohesivity is increasing. A nucleus of tamped down soil is
building up below the pad and moves in the direction of the applied load, loading
lower layers of soil. In a ﬁrst phase deformation is almost proportional to applied
pressure; soil reaction pressure is shown qualitatively below the diagram, showing
the corresponding part of the h( p) diagram.

As pressure is increased more signiﬁcant volumes of soil reach plasticity, as
is shown in the central picture, relative to phase 2. When the entire volume of soil
displaced by the pad has reached the plastic condition it reacts with the same pressure
at any value of sinking. The position and extension of phase 2 depends on initial soil
constipation.

Figure 2.8 shows some diagram of sinking h as function of applied pressure p,
for some kind of soil, characterized by the qualitative behavior we have described.
Diagram A refers to a cohesive soil (a: humid soil, b: plastic soil); diagram B refers
to a sandy soil (a: loose sand, about 200 mm thick; b: compacted layer); diagram C
refers to a layer of peat (a: pressing pad of 4 m2 of surface; b: pressing pad of about
0.4 m2); diagram D refers to a snowy ground (a: fresh snow, density of 0.15 g/cm2,
b: compacted snow, density of 0.20 g/cm2).

Diagram C shows haw the surface of the pad can inﬂuence the value of sinking
at the same pressure. In particular the bigger the surface, the higher the sinking; this
happens because bigger surfaces increase the amount of soil interested by costipation.

66

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.8 Diagram of sinking h as function of applied pressure p, for some kind of soil. Diagram
A refers to a cohesive soil (a: humid soil, b: plastic soil); diagram B refers to a sandy soil (a: loose
sand, about 200 mm thick; b: compacted layer); diagram C refers to a layer of peat (a: pressing
piston of 4 m2 of surface; b: pressing piston of about 0.4 m2); diagram D refers to a snowy ground
(a: fresh snow, density of 0.15 g/cm2, b: compacted snow, density of 0.20 g/cm2)

Please take note of the different order of magnitude for pressure of cohesive soils,
which demonstrates their superior mechanical properties; considering a tire with
a patch pressure of about 0.2 MPa, we can draw immediately ﬁrst approximation
conclusions about possibility of driving a vehicle on different kind of soil.

Only for the case of fresh snow, we show on Fig. 2.9 some sinking curves for
√
different average dimension d of the pad (d = 2
A, where A is the pad area). Curve
a corresponds to a pressure p = 0.1 MPa; curve b to p = 0.08 MPa, curve c to p =
0.06 MPa and curve d to p = 0.04 MPa.

Similar diagram shapes can be found for different kind of soil, even if, sometimes,

there is a minimum point for low values of d.

In the ﬁrst part of the curve in Fig. 2.7a (phase 1), where the soil behaves as an
elastic material, it is possible to deﬁne a coefﬁcient of proportionality, sometimes
called the stiffness or the bedding number of the soil of the soil

67

(2.3)

(2.4)

(2.5)

2.2 Tire Operation

Fig. 2.9 Effect of the
average piston dimension d
on sinking h, for different
value of pressure p, on snow
(curve a: p = 0.1 MPa; curve
b: p = 0.08 MPa; curve c:
p = 0.06 MPa; curve d:
p = 0.04 MPa)

k = p
h

.

The stiffness k does not depend only on the elastic characteristics of the ground
(its Young’s modulus E and its Poisson’s ratio ν), but also on the area and the shape
of the loading pad.

Consider a pad exerting a constant pressure p on the soil. In Phase 1 the sinking

h reduces to the elastic sinking he deﬁned as
h0 = p
k

.

The sinking h in the subsequent phases 2 and 3 may be expressed as

h = he p0
p0 − p

= he

1
1 − p/ p0

,

where h and h0 have the meaning of effective deformation and of contribution, to total
deformation, of elasticity, interpreted by previous formula; p0, plasticity pressure, is
the value of pressure over which plasticity takes place, as in phase 3. Obviously this
formula is valid for p (cid:2) p0 only.

Soil Deformation Because of Shear Forces

Simultaneous presence of side forces applied to the pad causes an increase of sinking
at the same pressure; some experimental behaviors are reported on Fig. 2.10.

Diagrams report pad sinking h due to contemporary presence of normal pressure
p and shear pressure τ , for a sandy soil (Figure A) and a clayey soil (Figure B).
Curves a, b and c correspond to pressure p of 0.02, 0.03 and 0.04 MPa.

The tangential force the pad can exert on the ground is limited by cohesive and
friction phenomena occurring at the soil-pad interface. If the pad dopes not sink into

68

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.10 Piston sinking h due to contemporary presence of normal pressure p and shear pressure
τ , for a sandy soil (ﬁgure A) and a clayey soil (ﬁgure B). Curves a, b and c correspond to pressure
p of 0.02, 0.03 and 0.04 MPa

the ground, the maximum tangential force is

Ftmax

= AC0 + Fn tan (cid:10)0 ,

(2.6)

where C0 is the contribution of cohesion, or cohesivity and (cid:10)0 is the friction angle
between particles; it can be practically measured by evaluating the semi-aperture of
the cone which approximates the shape of a pile of this soil at the loose state.

The shear resistance of the considered soil τo is then

τ0 = Ftmax
A

= C0 + p tan (cid:10)0 .

(2.7)

If the pad sinks into the ground, a further component of the force, the bulldozing

force, must be added to those due to cohesivity and friction.

Mechanical Properties of Different Soils

Figure 2.11 shows the main parameters of identiﬁcation of the mechanical behavior
of a natural ground:

• elastic modulus E,
• plasticity pressure p0,
• friction angle (cid:10)0,
• cohesivity C0,

to calculate sinking h as a function of normal pressure p and shear pressure τ . In
addition, τ0 allows to predict the maximum longitudinal force (driving or braking)
that the ground can withstand.

2.2 Tire Operation

69

Fig. 2.11 Main identiﬁcation parameters of the behavior of a natural ground, as a function of the
relative content of water i; curves with number 1 refers to a sandy loose soil, with 7 to a clayey soil,
while numbers from 2 to 6 refer to sandy soils with increasing sand content

These parameters are function of the relative content of water i; curves with
number 1 refer to a sandy loose soil, with 7 to a clayey soil, while numbers from 2
to 6 refer to sandy soils with increasing sand content.

The deterioration of these parameters for increasing water content can be noticed;
as a reference a ploughed and hoed soil in Northern Europe can contain till 100% of
water at the end of ice melt and 30% of water in summer season.

Also the higher cohesivity of clayey soils and the higher friction angle of sandy

soils can be noticed.

Table 2.2 illustrates the main mechanical properties of snow, as a function of its

state and external temperature.

What we have reported allows to solve the following problems:

• to understand if a certain ground can withstand vehicle wheel pressure, without

interference with the chassis;

• to predict the sinking of the contact patch;
• to deﬁne the maximum longitudinal or side force, by calculation of the shear

resistance τ0.

70

–
−5
−10
−5
−10
−5

−10

Table 2.2 Main mechanical properties of snow, as a function of its state and external temperature
T (◦C)

Physical state

Compressed

Fresh

2 Wheels and Tires

Density (g/cm3)
0.2
Cohesivity (MPa) 0.05
Cohesivity (MPa) 0.06
Friction angle (◦) 18
Friction angle (◦) 19
Elastic modulus
(MPa)
Elastic modulus
(MPa)

0.4–0.6

0.6–0.8

2.5–3.0

Compacted by
wind

0.4
0.07
0.09
22
23
1.5–2.0

0.6
0.19
0.22
31
26
∼7.5

∼10

Table 2.3 Values for f0 for
different kinds of natural
grounds

Type of road

Flat snowy road
Natural ﬂat ground
Flat sandy ground

f0
0.025–0.040
0.08–0.16
0.15–0.30

The contributions to tire patch displacements (vertical deformation, longitudinal
and side slips) will be described in the following paragraphs; such contributions are
relevant on paved roads, but can be neglected on natural grounds.

In addition, it is necessary to add some consideration on rolling resistance. A tire,

rolling on unpaved roads or natural grounds, is submitted to the following forces.

• Resistance due to elastic hysteresis of the tire; it is the same we will describe on
next paragraphs and is caused by the energy dissipated by the deformation of the
contact patch.

• Resistance due to elastic hysteresis of soil; it is caused by the mechanical work of

plastic deformation, we have described.

• Bulldozing resistance due to the fact that a certain amount of soil is moved in front

of the contact patch of the tire.

The resistance due to tire hysteresis is slightly different as that measured on paved
grounds, because the patch ﬂattening is lower; other contributions could be calculated
starting from the physical properties of the soil in question: they can increase rolling
resistance of an order of magnitude.

Table 2.3 reports some values of rolling resistance f0

3 for most common types of
natural ground. We invite to compare those values with those reported on Table 2.4
for paved roads.

The following chapters will refer to the tire on paved roads only.

3Rolling resistance coefﬁcient f0 will be deﬁned later on.

2.3 Rolling Radius

Table 2.4 Values of f0 for
different kinds of roads

71

Type and conditions of road

Very good concrete
Very good tarmac
Average concrete
Very good paved road
Very good Mc Adam
Average tarmac
Bad concrete
Good paved road
Average Mc Adam
Bad tarmac
Dusty Mc Adam
Good stone paved road
Very good dirty road
Bad stone paved road

f0
0.008–0.010
0.010–0.0125
0.010–0.015
0.015
0.013–0.016
0.018
0.020
0.020
0.018–0.023
0.023
0.023–0.028
0.033–0.055
0.045
0.085

2.3 Rolling Radius

Consider a wheel rolling on a level road with no braking or tractive moment applied
to it and its mean plane perpendicular to the road. While the relationship between
the angular velocity (cid:6) and the forward speed V of a rolling rigid wheel of radius R
is simply

V = (cid:6)R,

Re = V /(cid:6) .

for a pneumatic tire an effective rolling radius Re can be deﬁned as the ratio between
V and (cid:6):

(2.8)

The effective rolling radius is deﬁned as the radius of a rigid wheel which travels

and rotates at the same speed of the pneumatic wheel.

The wheel-road contact is far from being a point-contact and the tread band is
compliant also in circumferential direction; as a consequence radius Re coincides
neither with the loaded radius Rl nor with its unloaded radius R and the centre
of instantaneous rotation is therefore not coincident with the centre of contact A
(Fig. 2.12).

Owing to longitudinal deformations of the tread band, the peripheral velocity of
any point of the tread varies periodically. When it gets near to the point in which it
enters the contact zone it slows down and consequently a circumferential compression
results. In the contact zone there is very limited sliding between tire and road.

The peripheral velocity of the tread (relative to the wheel centre) in that zone
coincides with the velocity of the centre of the wheel V . After leaving the contact
zone, the tread regains its initial length and its peripheral velocity (cid:6)R is restored.

72

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.12 Tire rolling on a ﬂat road; geometric conﬁguration and peripheral speed on contact area

As a consequence of this mechanism, the spin speed of a wheel with pneumatic
tire is smaller than that of a rigid wheel with the same loaded radius Rl and travelling
at the same speed:

Rl < Re < R .

The centre of rotation of the wheel lies then under the surface of the road, at a

short distance from it.

Owing to their lower vertical stiffness, radial tires have a lower loaded radius Rl
than bias-ply tires with equal radius R but their effective rolling radius Re is closer
to the unloaded radius, as the tread is circumferentially stiffer.

For instance in a bias-ply tire Re can be about 96% of R while Rl is 94% of it; in

a radial tire Re and Rl can be respectively 98% and 92% of R.

The effective rolling radius depends on many factors, some of which are deter-
mined by the tire as the type of structure, the wear of the tread, and by the working
condition as inﬂation pressure, load, speed and others.

An increase of the vertical load Fz and a decrease of the inﬂation pressure p
lead to similar results: A decrease of both Rl and Re. With increasing speed, the
tire expands under centrifugal forces, and consequently R, Rl and Re increase. This
effect is larger in bias-ply tires while, owing to the greater stiffness of the tread band,
radial tires expand to a very limited, and usually negligible, extent. As it will be
shown in the following sections, any tractive or braking torque applied to the wheel
will cause strong variations of the effective rolling radius.

The diagram of rolling radius as function of speed for tires 155 D 15 with cross
ply and 155 R 15 with radial ply is shown on Fig. 2.13. Diagrams are obtained by
having the tire to roll inside a 3.8 m diameter steel drum. As it will we shows later
any variation in tractive or braking force is affecting rolling radius.

2.4 Rolling Resistance

73

Fig. 2.13 Rolling ratio Re as function of V for a cross ply tire 155 D 15 (a) and for a radial ply
tire 155 R 15 (b)

2.4 Rolling Resistance

Consider a wheel rolling freely on a ﬂat surface. If both the wheel and the road were
perfectly undeformable, there would be no resistance and consequently no need to
exert a tractive force. In the real world however perfectly rigid bodies do not exist
and both the road and the wheel are subject to deformation in the contact zone.

During the motion new material enters continuously into this zone and is
deformed, to spring back to its initial shape when leaving it. To produce this defor-
mation it is necessary to spend some energy which is not completely recovered at
the end of the contact zone due to the internal damping of the material.

This energy dissipation is what causes rolling resistance. It is then clear that it
increases with increasing deformations and, mainly, with decreasing elastic return. A
steel wheel on a steel rail has a lower rolling resistance than a pneumatic wheel and
the motion on compliant soil causes greater resistance than that on a rigid surface.
From this viewpoint, a wheel on compliant soil is always in the situation of a wheel
that attempts to climb out of the pit it is digging by itself (Fig. 2.14a).

In the case of pneumatic tires rolling on tarmac or concrete, the deformations
are almost only localized in the wheel and then the energy dissipated in the tires
governs the phenomenon. Other mechanisms, like small sliding between road and

74

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.14 a Rolling tire on a deformable surface: ground deformation and spring back. b Forces
Fz and Fr and contact pressure σz in a rolling tire

wheel, aerodynamic drag on the disc and friction in the hub are responsible for a
small contribution to the overall resistance, of the order of a few percent.

The distribution of the contact pressure, which at standstill was symmetrical
with respect to the centre of the contact zone, becomes unsymmetrical when the
wheel is rolling and the resultant Fz moves forward (Fig. 2.14b) producing a torque
My = −Fz(cid:7)x with respect to the rotation axis. Rolling resistance is due to this
torque, together with the small contributions of the resistance in the hub and aero-
dynamic drag.

The two mentioned ways of seeing rolling drag are equivalent since resultant Fz
is displaced forward to the centre of the contact owing to the energy dissipations
occurring in the deformed parts of the wheel and possibly of the ground.

Rolling resistance is deﬁned by the mentioned SAE document J670 as the force
which must be applied to the wheel at the wheel centre with a line of action parallel
to the X (cid:2) axis so that its moment with respect to a line through the centre of tire
contact and parallel to the spin axis of the wheel will balance the moment of the tire
contact forces about this line.

Here this deﬁnition is used, with two small modiﬁcations.
First thing the force is changed in sign, so that a true resisting force, i.e. a force

acting in a direction opposite to the speed, is obtained.

Second the aerodynamic drag moment on the wheel and the resisting torque
applied to the hub are included, in order to include also these two effects in the
overall rolling resistance.

To maintain a free wheel spinning a force at the wheel-ground contact is required
and then some of the available traction is used: On the idle wheel, to supply a torque
which counteracts the total moment My, and on the driving wheels which must supply
a tractive force against the rolling resistance of the former.

On driving wheels the driving torque is directly applied through the driving shafts
to overcome rolling resistance moment. Rolling resistance of driving wheels thus
does not involve forces acting at the road-wheel contact and does not use any of the
available traction.

2.4 Rolling Resistance

75

This is particularly important in the motion on compliant ground, which is usually
characterized by high rolling drag and low available traction: If all wheels are driving
wheels, rolling drag can be overcome directly by the driving torque; if some of the
wheels are idle, the traction the driving wheels can supply may not be sufﬁcient to
overcome the drag of idle wheels and motion may be impossible, even on level road.
Consider a free rolling wheel on level road with its mean plane coinciding with
X (cid:2) Z (cid:2)-plane, i.e. with α = 0, γ = 0 (Fig. 2.14). Assuming that no traction or braking
moment other than moment M f due to aerodynamic drag and bearing drag is applied
to the wheel, the equilibrium equation in steady state rolling, solved in the rolling
resistance Fr , is:

Fr =

−Fz(cid:7)x + M f
Rl

.

(2.9)

It must be noted that both rolling resistance Fr and drag moment M f are negative.
In the case of driving wheels, moment M f must be substituted by the difference:

Mm − |M f | ,

between the driving and resistant moments.

If such difference is positive and greater than moment Fz(cid:7)x, force Fr is positive,

i.e. the wheel is exerting a driving action.

Equation (2.9) is of limited practical use, as (cid:7)x and M f are not easily determined.

For practical purposes, rolling resistance is usually expressed as:

Fr = − f Fz ,

(2.10)

where the rolling resistance coefﬁcient f must be determined experimentally.

The minus sign in Eq. (2.10) comes from the fact that traditionally the rolling

resistance coefﬁcient is expressed by a positive number.

Coefﬁcient f depends on many parameters, as the travelling speed V , the inﬂation
pressure p, the normal force Fz, the size of the tire and of the contact zone, the
structure and the material of the tire, the working temperature, the road conditions
and, last but not least, the forces Fx and Fy exerted by the wheel.

Effect of Speed

The rolling resistance coefﬁcient
vehicle, at the beginning very slowly and then at an increased rate (Fig. 2.15).

f generally increases with the speed V of the

The law f (V ) can be approximated by a polynomial expression of the type:

f =

fi V i .

n(cid:2)

i=0

(2.11)

76

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.15 Diagram of rolling resistance f as a function of speed V . a Measured on a cross ply tire
175 14 and on a radial tire 185 R 14; b experimental curve (radial tire 135 R14, inﬂated at 190 kPa,
with vertical load of 340 kN) compared with Eq. (2.13)

Generally speaking, two terms of Eq. (2.11) are considered sufﬁcient for approx-
imating experimental data in a satisfactory way, at least up to the speed at which f
starts to grow at a very high rate (Fig. 2.15). The following expressions can be used:

or:

f = f0 + kV

f = f0 + K V 2 .

(2.12)

(2.13)

The second is generally preferred; it will be used throughout this book. The
values of f0 and K must be measured on any particular tire; as an example the tire of
Fig. 2.15b is characterized, in the test conditions reported, by the values: f0 = 0.013,
K = 6.5 × 10−6 s2/m2.

On more recent tires rubber mix and ﬁllers have been developed able to reduce

rolling resistance; values of f0 = 0.008 can be reached.

The speed at which the curve f (V ) shows a sharp bend upward is generally said
to be the critical speed of the tire. Its presence can be easily explained by vibratory
phenomena which take place in the tire at high speed, as the ones clearly visible in
the pictures of a tire rolling at high speed against a drum reported in Fig. 2.16. The
standing waves which propagate along the circumference of the tire from the contact
zone are clearly visible. The tread band vibrates both in its plane and in the direction
of the axis of the wheel.

The increase of rolling resistance which is linked with the occurrence of standing
waves is easily explained by the fact that their wavelength is not much different from
the length of the contact zone (Fig. 2.17). In the trailing part of the contact zone the
tread then has a tendency to lift from the ground, or at least to decrease its pressure
on it. The pressures concentrate consequently in the leading zone of the contact and
their resultant moves forward, with an increase of the moment Fz(cid:7)x.

The critical speed of the tire, i.e. the speed at which such vibrations become
important, must be considered as the speed at which the tire stops working in a

2.4 Rolling Resistance

77

Fig. 2.16 Stationary waves on a rolling tire over its critical speed

Fig. 2.17 High speed
stationary waves (A. Morelli,
Costruzioni
automobilistiche, in
Enciclopedia
dell’ingegneria, ISEDI,
Milano, 1972.)

regular way and consequently it should never be exceeded or even approached in the
normal use of the vehicle. Above that speed strong overheating takes place; as most
of the increase of the rolling power is converted into heat, the increase of temperature
can quickly cause the destruction of the tire itself.

The critical speed is inﬂuenced by many parameters and it is one of the factors
which must be taken into account in the choice of the tires for a particular vehicle.

78

2 Wheels and Tires

Effect of Material Nature and Structure

The type of structure and the material used for the construction of the tire play an
important role in determining the rolling resistance and the critical speed. Gener-
ally speaking, radial tires show a value of f about 20% lower than bias-ply types
(Fig. 2.15) and a higher value of the critical speed.

Even between tires of the same type, it is possible to observe signiﬁcant differences
in rolling resistance, as it is possible to optimize the structure (number of plies,
their orientation etc.) in order to obtain suitable characteristics for any particular
application.

On Fig. 2.18 some typical curve is reported, as an example, referring to conven-
tional cars, sport cars and race cars. It can be seen that critical speeds are quite
different in the three cases.

Notable differences can be seen between car and industrial vehicle tires. These
last present value of f0 much lower, down to 0.005–0.008 and a limited increase of
f with speed (K ≈ 0), sometimes a slight reduction (Fig. 2.19).

The nature of the material used has a great importance, as different rubber compo-
sitions are characterized by different values of the internal damping and by different
dependence of the latter with the loading frequency. Natural rubbers have gener-
ally low damping, if compared with synthetic rubbers. This results in lower rolling
resistance but also in lower critical speed.

Also the type and quantity of the other chemical components added to rubber
have an important inﬂuence on damping and consequently on rolling resistance. On
Fig. 2.20 two curves are shown for same size tires one made by natural rubber, the
other by synthetic one.

Fig. 2.18 Rolling resistance
coefﬁcient f and speed V
for different purpose tires

79

2.4 Rolling Resistance

Fig. 2.19 Diagram of f
with V on industrial vehicle
tires 300 20, pressure p =
750 kPa

Fig. 2.20 Rolling power as a
function of speed. Tires 135
l4, p = 175 kPa, Fz = 3,7 kN.
Curve 1: synthetic rubber;
curve 2: natural rubber

Effect of Tread Wear

On Fig. 2.21 curves f (V ) are reported for two tires, cross ply and conventional, in
new conditions. To simulate tread wear part of the tread has been artiﬁcially removed
and tests repeated.

In the case of bias-ply tires the rolling resistance decreases with wear, and its
behavior at high speed improves. This behavior can be ascribed to the fact that defor-
mations are localized in a small zone surrounding the contact zone and consequently
hysteresis losses take place mainly in the tread band. Also vibratory phenomena
interest mainly the zone immediately near the tread band. A decrease of the vibrat-
ing mass has the consequence of increasing the natural frequency and hence the
critical speed.

In radial tires rolling resistance decreases with wear, but the behavior at high speed
can get worse. In radial tires deformations are more evenly distributed in the whole
structure, as the stiffness of the sidewalls is low; with a decrease of the mass of the
tread band, the centrifugal stiffening of the whole structure decreases, and vibratory
phenomena become more important.

80

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.21 Effect of wear on
f

Effect of Operating Temperature

Internal damping of rubber decreases with increasing temperature and consequently
rolling resistance, which is mainly due to hysteresis losses, decreases. Also that
small part of rolling resistance which is due to localized sliding in the contact zone,
decreases for the decrease of the friction coefﬁcient.

The decrease of rolling resistance tends to stabilize the temperature of the tire as an
increase of the temperature causes a decrease of power dissipation and consequently
of the rate at which heat is generated within the tire.

Some curves f (V ) obtained at constant temperature are reported in Fig. 2.22a,
while in Fig. 2.22b the rolling coefﬁcient of the same tire maintained at each speed
at the equilibrium temperature is shown. The curve is compared with that obtained
by maintaining the tire at a temperature corresponding to low-speed running, as it
occurs at start-up of the vehicle, before equilibrium temperature is reached.

The decrease in time of the rolling resistance and the increase of the temperature
in a tire rolling at 185 km/h is shown in Fig. 2.22c while in Fig. 2.22d the equilibrium
temperature is plotted as a function of the speed. The last two plots have been obtained
on a Nylon 185 13 radial tire, with Fz = 4 kN and p = 150 kPa, rolling against a
roller of 2.5 m diameter.

The temperature was measured using a thermocouple inset in the carcass and
reﬂects the temperature of the material which is higher than that of the air. As the
tests were performed on a roller, the increase of temperature and the resistance are
somewhat higher than those which would be obtained on the road.

2.4 Rolling Resistance

81

Fig. 2.22 a Rolling resistance coefﬁcient at constant temperature. b Comparison between f (V ) at
constant temperature and at equilibrium temperature for each speed. c Reduction of rolling resistance
coefﬁcient and temperature increase for increasing time at a speed of 185 km/h. d Equilibrium
temperature in function of speed

Effect of Inﬂation Pressure and Vertical Load

Generally speaking an increase of inﬂation pressure or a reduction of the normal
force Fz acting on the wheel cause the rolling resistance to decrease and the critical
speed to increase. Also this effect tends to stabilize the temperature, as an increase of
the latter causes an increase of the pressure which in turn decreases power dissipation
and heat generation.

On Fig. 2.23a the f (V ) curves are reported, for different values of inﬂation pres-
sure p. The behavior of the tire at different vertical loads Fz and at different pressures
p is shown on Fig. 2.23b.

In order to take into account the inﬂuence of both load and pressure on the rolling
resistance coefﬁcient the following empirical formula suggested by the SAE can be
used:

f = K (cid:2)
1000

(cid:3)
5.1 + 5.5 × 105 + 90Fz

p

+ 1100 + 0.0388Fz
p

(cid:4)

V 2

,

(2.14)

where coefﬁcient K (cid:2) takes the value 1 for conventional tires and 0.8 for radial tires.
The normal force Fz, the pressure p and the speed V must be expressed respectively

82

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.23 a Effect of the
inﬂation pressure on f (V ); b
behavior of a 165 13 tire at
different values of Fz and
inﬂation pressure p. Speed
V = 30 km/h

in N, N/m2 (Pa) and m/s. The dependence of coefﬁcient f on the speed V is the same
as the one expressed by Eq. (2.13).

It must however be noted that for each tire the inﬂation pressure p is determined
as a function of the force Fz by design considerations, and that it is impossible to
increase the pressure in order to reduce the rolling resistance.

Effect of Tire Size

The two geometrical parameters which have more inﬂuence on the rolling resistance
are the radius of the tire and the aspect ratio H/W . An increase of the former and
a decrease of the latter cause a decrease of rolling resistance and an increase of the
critical speed.

The decrease of the aspect ratio is favorable as it causes an increase of the stiffness
of the sidewalls and decreases the deformation under load, which in turn lower the
hysteresis losses. Such ratio can be as low as 0.4 on radial tires used on fast modern
cars, while values of 0.7–0.8 were the most common in the past.

Figure 2.24 shows the rolling power dissipated by two tires of different size.

2.4 Rolling Resistance

Fig. 2.24 Inﬂuence of
rolling radius on rolling
resistance power Pr . Fz =
4.75 kN, p = 250 kPa

83

Effect of Road

As a ﬁrst approximation, the nature and conditions of the road are taken into account
by choosing an appropriate value of f0, i.e. by moving the curve f (V ) in the direction
of the f axis. Some values of f0 for different road types are reported in Table 2.4.

Effect of Road Wetness

Wetness of the road surface increases rolling resistance considerably. Everybody has
experienced the sudden slow-down of a car when crossing a puddle at high speed and
also many of the most energy-conscious drivers are aware of the fuel consumption
increase of their car in wet weather. For certain tires and road surfaces in heavy rain,
the rolling resistance increase may be as high as 50%.

Not only the force necessary to remove the layer of water under the contact patch
but also a higher hysteresis loss due to lower tire temperature causes this increase.
See Fig. 2.22 for reference; in the average a rolling resistance increases of about 1%
for each degree of temperature decrease of the tire can be noticed.

Figures 2.25 and 2.26 show4 the changes in rolling resistance f at different values
for the car speed V because of the water thickness s, for two different tires, rolling
on a tarmac ground; the ﬁgures refer to a standard P225/60R16 and a 195R14 M+S
(for winter and light off road operation).

We can observe that:

• The increase in rolling resistance is increasing with water thickness;
• The thread design has inﬂuence on this increase with its different behavior on
removing the water under the contact patch, as can be observed by comparing the
standard tire with the M+S one. While the thread of the last is deeper, the number

4Ejsmont J., Sjögren L., ´Swieczko- ˙Zurek B. and Ronowski G.,
Tire-Pavement Rolling Resistance, Journal of Civil Engineering and Architecture, 9 (2015).

Inﬂuence of Road Wetness on

84

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.25 Effect on rolling
resistance of the water
thickness s for a 225/60R16
tire on a wet tarmac ground

Fig. 2.26 Effect on rolling
resistance of the water
thickness s for a 195R14
M+S tire on a wet tarmac
ground

and density of grooves in the thread pattern is higher on the ﬁrst, which allows
better water removal.

Parallel measurement showed that the water present on the road surface cooled
the tires with a contribution on rolling resistance increase. Since in the atmospheric
conditions existing during the tests tire temperature drop of 6–7 ◦C as compared with
dry conditions, we can estimate an increases in rolling resistance by about 10% for
this effect only.

However, the increase of rolling resistance cannot be explained by temperature
drop alone. It appears that thicker water ﬁlm prompt hydrodynamic effects that
dissipate energy by water turbulences and create a kind of standing wave at the

2.4 Rolling Resistance

85

leading edge of the footprint which moves the vertical reaction force forward the
theoretical contact point.

It was also demonstrated that the size of the inert material inside the tarmac has
also a considerable inﬂuence on the water ﬁlm thickness resulting in different rolling
resistance. It is observed that surfaces with larger size can drain water from surface
more easily, resulting in lower rolling resistance increase during very wet conditions.

Effect of Wheel Side Slip Angle

If the tire travels with a sideslip angle α, as it is the case any time it exerts a side
force Fy or as a consequence of toe angle, a strong increase of rolling resistance can
be expected. The force in the mean plane of the wheel increases but above all the
transversal force Fy has a component which adds to the rolling resistance (Fig. 2.27).
The rolling resistance is by deﬁnition the component of the force due to the road-tire
contact directed as the velocity V ; it can thus be expressed as:

Fr = Fx cos(α) + Fy sin(α) .

(2.15)

If the component in the plane of symmetry of the wheel Fx were independent of
the sideslip angle and the cornering force Fy were linear with it (Fy = −Cα), for
small values of α the rolling resistance would follow a quadratic law:

|Fr | = |Fx | + Cα2 .

(2.16)

Effect of Camber Angle

If the mean plane of the wheel is not perpendicular to the ground a component of
the aligning torque Mz (see Sect. 2.7) contributes to rolling resistance. Equation (2.9)
becomes:

Fig. 2.27 Rolling resistance coefﬁcient as function of the wheel side slip angle α. Tire 185 14, Fz
= 4 kN, p = 170 kPa

86

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.28 Rolling resistance
coefﬁcient as function of
braking and traction force

Fr =

−Fz(cid:7)x cos(γ ) − Mz sin(γ ) + M f
Rl

.

(2.17)

This effect is usually very small, due to the fact that γ is usually small. It is

however dependent on the sideslip angle α through the aligning torque Mz.

Effect of Longitudinal Force

Rolling resistance can also be deﬁned when tractive or braking moments are applied
to the wheel. In this case the power dissipated by rolling resistance Fr V can be
expressed as:

(cid:5)

|Fr |V =

|F f |V − |M f |(cid:6) (braking)
Mt |(cid:6) − |Ft |V (traction)

(2.18)

where Fb, Ft , Mb and Mt are respectively the braking and tractive forces and
moments. Equation (2.18) should be applied only in constant speed motion, since
they do not include tractive (braking) moments needed to accelerate (decelerate)
rotating parts.

The trend of the rolling resistance coefﬁcient as a function of the longitudinal
force Fx is shown in Fig. 2.28. The increase of rolling resistance is not negligible
in case of strong longitudinal forces, particularly in the case of braking. This is due
mainly to the fact that the generation of longitudinal forces is always accompanied
by the presence of sliding in at least a part of the contact zone.

The minimum rolling resistance occurs when wheels exert a low driving force5
and can take a value as low as 75–85% of that occurring in free rolling conditions. The
fact that the rolling resistance decreases initially with the application of a driving

5D.J. Schuring, Energy Loss of Pneumatic Tires Under Freely Rolling, Braking and Driving Con-
ditions, Tire Science and Technology, TSTCA, Vol. 4, No. 1, Feb. 1976, pp. 3–15.

2.4 Rolling Resistance

87

force to increase steeply when the force increases would favor four wheel drive
layouts in which all wheels work under moderate driving forces instead of having
some wheels idle and some working with higher driving loads.

2.5 Static Forces

Consider a small portion of the tire-road contact area. The force per unit area exerted
by the tire on the road can be decomposed into a component perpendicular to the
road and a tangential component. The ﬁrst is the contact pressure σz while the other
can be further decomposed in the directions of X (cid:2) and Y (cid:2) axes giving way to the
components τx and τy. The resultant of the distributions of σz, τx and τy are the
already deﬁned normal, longitudinal and lateral forces Fz, Fx and Fy respectively.
These distributions are not constant and are strongly inﬂuenced by many factors as
tire structure, load, inﬂation pressure etc. Some typical results obtained on a stationary
wheel which is exerting no force in the X (cid:2)Y (cid:2) plane are reported in Fig. 2.29. At the
centre of the contact, the contact pressure σz is close to that of the air in the tire
at the centre of the contact area, while at the sides it is higher. If the wheel is not
rolling the distribution is symmetrical with respect to Y (cid:2) Z (cid:2) plane and the resultant
passes through the centre of the contact. Tangential forces do not vanish locally even
when no force is exerted in X (cid:2)Y (cid:2) plane, i.e. when their resultant is zero. In such case
components τx are directed towards the centre of the contact area and the tire acts to
compact the ground towards the centre of the contact. Component τy has the effect
of stretching the ground outward.

The force-deﬂection characteristics of tires depend on many factors, like travelling
speed, pressure, wear and many other. A strong difference can be found for this

Fig. 2.29 Force distribution in contact patch. a Normal pressure σz. b Tangential pressure τx in
the symmetry plane c τy and in the Y (cid:2) Z (cid:2) plane

88

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.30 Contact force Fz as function of deﬂection (cid:7)Z (cid:2) for some tires in static conditions (load
applied and relieved slowly)

issue between bias-ply and radial tires, radial tires being less stiff at standstill in all
directions.

The characteristics in direction perpendicular to the ground (force Fz versus
deﬂection Z (cid:2)) for some tires are reported in Fig. 2.30. In Fig. 2.30a the curve obtained
when removing the load has been reported together with that related to the applica-
tion of the load. A hysteresis cycle can clearly be identiﬁed, denouncing the presence
of damping in the motion along Z (cid:2)-axis. This damping is usually at its maximum
at standstill and decreases with rolling speed: The practice of neglecting it in the
simulations of the motion of the vehicle is justiﬁed by this observation. In Fig. 2.30b
the curves obtained for a radial and a bias-ply tire are compared.

A static tire rate can be deﬁned as the tangent stiffness in any given equilibrium

condition, i.e. at any given value of the load, inﬂation, pressure etc.

Similar plots can be obtained for forces in X (cid:2) and Y (cid:2) directions and moments
about Z (cid:2) axis versus the corresponding displacements of the centre of the wheel
(Fig. 2.31). In all cases the plots show a nonlinear behavior and a hysteresis cycle;
radial tires are generally less stiff than bias-ply tires of similar size. All characteristics
are inﬂuenced by both the speed of rolling and the frequency of application of the
force.

2.6 Longitudinal Force

Consider a pneumatic wheel rolling on level road. If a braking moment Mb is applied
to it, the distributions of normal pressure and longitudinal forces which result from
that application are qualitatively sketched in Fig. 2.32a. The tread band is circumfer-
entially stretched in the zone which precedes the contact with the ground, while in
free rolling the same part of the tire was compressed.

2.6 Longitudinal Force

89

Fig. 2.31 versus deﬂections (cid:7)X (cid:2) and (cid:7)Y (cid:2) and rotation about Z (cid:2) axis for a radial and a bias-ply
tire at standstill (wheel non-rolling) and in static conditions (load applied and removed slowly)

The peripheral velocity of the tread band in the leading zone of the contact (cid:6)R(cid:2)
e is
consequently higher than that ((cid:6)R) of the undeformed wheel. The effective rolling
radius R(cid:2)
e, whose value Re in free rolling was between Rl and R, grows towards R
and, if Mb is large enough, becomes greater than R.

The instantaneous centre of rotation is consequently located under the road surface
(Fig. 2.33). The angular velocity (cid:6) of the wheel is lower than that characterizing free
rolling in the same conditions ((cid:6)0 = V /Re). In such conditions it is possible to deﬁne
a longitudinal slip as:

σ =

− 1 =

(cid:6)
(cid:6)0

v

V

,

(2.19)

where v is the linear speed at which the contact zone moves on the ground. The
longitudinal slip is often expressed as a percentage; in the present book however the
deﬁnition of Eq. (2.19) will be strictly adhered to.

If instead of braking, the wheel is driving, the leading part of the contact zone is
compressed instead of being stretched (Fig. 2.32b). The value of the effective rolling

90

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.32 Contact pressure distribution for a braking (a) and driving (b) wheel. The rolling radius
R(cid:2)
e is different as that by pure rolling Re (force Fx lies on ground)

Fig. 2.33 a Braking wheel, center of instantaneous rotation and sleep speed. b Position of the
instantaneous rotation center by pure rotation C, by braking C(cid:2) and by traction C(cid:2)(cid:2)

radius R(cid:2)
Rl; the angular velocity of the wheel is greater than (cid:6)0.

e is smaller than that characterizing free rolling and is usually smaller than

The slip deﬁned by Eq. (2.19) is positive for driving conditions and negative for

braking.

2.6 Longitudinal Force

91

The presence of the slip velocity6 v does not mean however that there is an actual
sliding of the contact zone as a whole. The peripheral velocity of the leading part of
that zone is actually V = (cid:6)R(cid:2)
e, and consequently in that zone no sliding can occur.
The speed of the tread band starts to decrease (in braking, increase in driving) and
sliding begins only at the point indicated in Fig. 2.32 as point A. The slip zone, which
interests only a very limited part of the contact zone for small values of σ , gets larger
with increasing slip and, at a certain value of that parameter, reaches the leading part
of the contact zone and global sliding of the tire occurs (Fig. 2.34a).

The longitudinal force Fx the wheel exchanges with the road is a function of σ .
It vanishes when σ = 0 (free rolling conditions)7 to increase with almost linear law,
for values of σ from about −0.25 to about 0.25:

where constant

Fx = Cσ σ ,

Cσ =

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

∂ Fx
∂σ

σ =0

(2.20)

can be deﬁned slip stiffness or longitudinal stiffness of the tire.

Outside this range, which depends on many factors, its absolute value decreases
in braking up to the value σ = −1, which characterizes free sliding (locking of the
wheel). Also in driving the force decreases above the stated range, but σ can have any
positive value, up to inﬁnity when the wheel spins while the vehicle is not moving.
As a ﬁrst approximation, force Fx can be considered as roughly proportional to
the load Fz, at equal value of σ . It is consequently useful to deﬁne a longitudinal
force coefﬁcient:
μx = Fx
Fz

(2.21)

.

The qualitative trend of such coefﬁcient is reported against σ in Fig. 2.34b.
In the ﬁrst part of the curve Fx (σ ), the slip stiffness is roughly proportional to
the load and it is possible to deﬁne a slip stiffness coefﬁcient ∂Cσ /∂ Fz, at least for
limited variation of the load about a given value Fz0

Cσ = Cσ 0 +

(Fz − Fz0)

(2.22)

∂Cσ
∂ Fz

Two important values of μ can be identiﬁed on the curve both in braking and
in driving: The peak value μ p and the value μs which characterizes pure sliding.
The ﬁrst is referred to as driving traction coefﬁcient when the wheel is exerting

6The slip velocity is deﬁned by SAE Document J670 as (cid:6) − (cid:6)0, i.e. the difference between the
actual angular velocity and the angular velocity of a free rolling tire. Here a deﬁnition based on a
linear velocity rather than an angular velocity is preferred: v = Re((cid:6) − (cid:6)0).
7Actually free rolling is characterized by a very small negative slip, corresponding to the rolling
resistance. This is however usually neglected when plotting curves Fx (σ ).

92

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.34 a Slipping area at different values of slip σ . b Qualitative diagram of μx as function of
longitudinal slip σ

a positive longitudinal force and as braking traction coefﬁcient, which is usually
reported in absolute value, in the opposite case. The second are the sliding driving
traction coefﬁcient and the sliding braking traction coefﬁcient.

The part of the curve μ(σ ) which lies beyond the range included by the two
peak values, represented by a dashed line in Fig. 2.34b, is a zone of instability in the
practical use of the vehicle. The equation of motion of a braking wheel is:

J

d(cid:6)
dt

= |Fx |Rl − |M f | .

(2.23)

If a decrease of σ at constant speed V leads to a decrease of the absolute value of
μx , it causes a decrease of the absolute value of Fx , i.e. of the force which maintains
the rotation of the wheel. If this decrease of |Fx | is not quickly followed by a decrease
of the braking moment |Mb| (and it is unrealistic to assume that the driver can react
fast enough to release the brakes) a further slowing down of the wheel takes place,
which in turn causes a further reduction of |Fx |.

Actually, when the optimum value of σ which is characterized by μ pb , is exceeded,
the wheel locks in a very short time. In order to prevent the locking of wheels, devices
generally deﬁned as antilock or antiskid systems are now widely used.

Such devices detect the deceleration of the wheel and, when it reaches a predeter-
mined value, react decreasing the braking moment and avoiding the locking of the
wheel. Antilock devices can operate on each wheel separately or, more often, on both
wheels of an axle. Similarly, to avoid that a wheel slips under the effect of a driving
torque applied to it, antispin devices limit the engine moment when the acceleration
of the driving wheels exceeds a stated value.

The curves usually show a certain symmetry between the braking and driving
conditions and often the maximum braking and driving forces are assumed to be
equal. The values of function μx (σ ) depend on a number of parameters, such as the
type of tire, road conditions, speed, magnitude of the side force Fy exerted by the

2.6 Longitudinal Force

93

Fig. 2.35 Curves of μx (σ ) obtained in different conditions

tire and many others. Moreover there is a signiﬁcant difference between the curves
obtained by different experimenters in conditions not exactly comparable. Some
curves μx (σ ) obtained in different conditions are reported in Fig. 2.35.

The maximum value of the longitudinal force decreases with increasing speed
but this reduction is much inﬂuenced by operating conditions. Generally speaking,
it is not very marked on dry road, while it is greater on wet surfaces. Also the
difference between the maximum value (see Table 2.5) and the value related to sliding
(Table 2.6) is more notable on wet roads (Fig. 2.36). Particularly dangerous conditions
are encountered when the road is only partially wet and dirty: The behavior can vary
from spot to spot and the value at slip can be very much different from the maximum
one.

The values shown in the tables must be regarded only as average indications as they
are much sensitive. Note that in good conditions the longitudinal force can be almost
equal to the load acting on the tire or even larger; the values reported however refer
to standard tires used on passenger vehicles. High performance tires, particularly
those used on racing cars, show peak values of μx which can be as high as 1.5–1.8
but even these tires do not reach very high values of longitudinal force coefﬁcient
in sliding condition; the difference between μ p and μs is even larger. To reach very
high performances particular formulations of the rubber must be used, which are
characterized by a strong wear and consequently are restricted to competition tires.
Note that radial tires almost always show better performances than bias-ply types.

Tread wear has a great inﬂuence on the longitudinal forces, particularly at high
speed. From Fig. 2.37 it can be assumed that the increase of μ pb due to wear can be,
particularly at high speed, quite noticeable. It must however be noted that the ﬁgure
refers to dry roads, as the presence of even a thin water layer on the road can change
drastically these results.

When the road is wet, particularly if the water layer is thick, the tire can lift from
the road surface as a result of hydrodynamic lift (aquaplaning). A thin layer of water
can slip between the tire and the road thus reducing the contact area (Fig. 2.38). With
increasing speed the area of the contact zone further reduces, until a complete lifting

94

2 Wheels and Tires

Table 2.5 Values of μ p for different tires at 30 km/h. Tires 145 15; 150 15 e 165 R 15; Fz = 3 kN,
p = 160 kPa for cross ply tires (conv.) and 220 kPa for radial tires
Tire

Wet

0.99
0.84
0.62–0.83
0.59–0.70

Tarmac
Dry

1.22
1.02
1.00–1.09
0.81–0.89

Wet

1.10
1.07
1.00–1.10
0.78–1.02

Snow

Ice

0.45
0.27
0.36–0.47
0.41–0.48

0.25
0.24
0.24–0.44
0.29–0.37

0.60

0.40

Table 2.6 Values of μs for same tires of previous table
Tire

Wet

0.73
0.62
0.50–0.61
0.47–0.57

Tarmac
Dry

1.03
0.88
0.87–0.99
0.70–0.78

Wet

0.90
0.80
0.77–0.93
0.67–0.84

Snow

Ice

0.43
0.22
0.35–0.45
0.39–0.47

0.16
0.18
0.22–0.41
0.29–0.36

Road
Concrete
Dry

1.19
1.13

Rad.
Conv.
Rad. (snow) 1.04–1.12
0.86–1.02
Conv.
(snow)
Chains

Road
Concrete
Dry

0.95
0.99

Rad.
Conv.
Rad. (snow) 0.88–1.00
0.72–0.90
Conv.
(snow)

of the tire takes place. True hydrodynamic lubrication conditions can be said to exist
in this case and consequently the force coefﬁcient or, better, the friction coefﬁcient
as in this condition sliding usually occurs, reduces to very low values, of the order
of 0.05.

In order to avoid hydroplaning, or at least to postpone its occurrence, it is manda-
tory to evacuate water from the contact zone as quickly and effectively as possible.
This can be done in two distinct ways: By making the road surface permeable or by
using deep groves in the tread in both circumferential and transversal direction in
order to allow a high ﬂow rate.

The assumption, in a way implicit in the deﬁnition of the longitudinal force coefﬁ-
cient, that longitudinal forces are proportional to the normal force acting on the wheel
is only a crude approximation. Actually the longitudinal force coefﬁcient decreases
with increasing load as shown in Fig. 2.39.

The curves μx (σ ) can be approximated by analytical expressions. One of the

formulas which can be used in the range −1 < σ < 1 is:

(cid:6)

(cid:7)

μx = A

1 − e−Bσ

+ Cσ 2 − Dσ ,

(2.24)

where:

2.6 Longitudinal Force

95

Fig. 2.36 Inﬂuence of car speed on μ p and μs on wet and dry road. Cross and bias ply tires 165
l5 e 150 R l5 with Fz = 3.75 kN

Fig. 2.37 Inﬂuence of tread wear on the peak value of longitudinal friction as function of speed

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

1/n

K
α + d

B =

96

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.38 Hydrodynamic lift of a wheel (aquaplaning). a Scheme; b diagram of μs in function of
speed on a wet road. Tire 145-l5 with tread (curve A) and without (curve B); Fz = 3 kN; p = 150
kPa

Fig. 2.39 Inﬂuence of the
vertical load Fz on function
μx (σ ). Tire 150 15, p = 170
kPa, V = 100 km/h

is a factor which takes into account the interaction between the longitudinal slip σ
and the sideslip α (see Sect. 2.8). The derivative in the origin (∂μx /∂σ )σ =0 is simply
AB − D. Coefﬁcients A, C, D, K , d and n must be obtained from the experimental
curves and have no physical meaning. They depend not only on the road conditions
but also on the load. A curve μx (σ ) for a radial tire 145/80 R 13 4.5J obtained through
Eq. (2.24) is reported in Fig. 2.40a, curve A.

A very good approximation of longitudinal force Fx as a function of the slip σ
can be obtained through the empirical equation introduced by Pacejka8 and known
as magic formula. Such mathematical expression allows one to express forces Fx
and Fy and the aligning torque Mz as functions of the normal force Fz, of σ and of
the sideslip (α) and camber (γ ) angles.

The equation yielding the longitudinal force Fx , as a function of the slip σ , is:

8E. Bakker, L. Lidner, H.B. Pacejka, Tire Modelling for Use in Vehicle Dynamics Studies, SAE
Paper 870421; E. Bakker, H.B. Pacejka, L. Lidner, A New Tire Model with an Application in Vehicle
Dynamics Studies, SAE Paper 890087.

2.6 Longitudinal Force

(cid:3)

(cid:5)

(cid:8)

(cid:10)(cid:4)
(cid:9)

97

Fx = D sin

C arctan

B(1 − E)(σ + Sh) + E arctan

B(σ + Sh)

+ Sv ,

(2.25)
where B, C, D, E, Sv and Sh are six coefﬁcients which depend on the load Fz
and on angle γ . They must be obtained from experimental testing and do not have
any direct physical meaning. In particular, Sv and Sh have been introduced to allow
nonvanishing values of Fx when σ = 0.

Coefﬁcient D yields directly the maximum value of Fx , apart from the effect of
Sv. The product BC D gives the slope of the curve for σ + Sh = 0. The values of the
coefﬁcients are expressed as functions of a number of coefﬁcients bi which can be
considered as characteristic of any speciﬁc tire, but depend also on road conditions
and speed:

C = b0

D = μ p Fz ,

where for b0 a value of 1.65 is suggested and:

μ p = b1 Fz + b2 ,

BC D =

E = b6 F 2
z

+ b7 Fz + b8 , Sh = b9 Fz + b10 ,

(cid:6)
b3 F 2
z

+ b4 Fz

(cid:7)

e−b5 Fz ,
Sv = 0 .

Note that product BC D is nothing else than the slip stiffness of the tire.
If a symmetrical behavior for positive and negative values of force Fx is accepted,
this model can be used for both braking and driving. The curve is usually extended to
braking beyond the point where σ = −1, to simulate a wheel rotating in backward
direction while moving forward.

The coefﬁcients introduced in Eq. (2.25) and the results obtained from it are usu-
ally expressed in non consistent units: Force Fz is in kN, longitudinal slip is expressed
as a percentage and force Fx is in N.

A set of curves Fx (σ ) obtained for vertical loads Fz = 2, 4, 6 and 8 kN for a radial

tire 205/60 VR 15 6J is shown in Fig. 2.40b.

Fig. 2.40 a Curves μx (σ ) for a 145 R 13 tire obtained with Eq. (2.24) (curve A) and for a 245/65 R
22.5 tire obtained from Fig. 2.25 (curve B). b Curves Fx (σ ) for some value of vertical load Fig. 2.25
for a 205/60 R 15 V tire

98

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.41 Curves Fx (σ ) for a 195/65 R 15 tire obtained for different values of vertical load Fz

A curve μx (σ ) for a high performance radial tire 245/65 R 22.5 obtained from
Eq. (2.25), is also reported in Fig. 2.40 a, curve B. Note the very high peak value of
the force coefﬁcient.

Using the same equations, on Fig. 2.41 the curve Fx (σ ) is shown for a tire 195/65
R 15: it should be noted, in this case, the ﬂat shape of the curve, after the peak, due
to the high performance kind of rubber mix.

The importance of the model expressed by Eq. (2.25) is mainly linked to the fact
that tire manufacturers are increasingly disclosing the performances of their tires in
terms of magic formulae coefﬁcients. If this trend will consolidate, the magic formula
will prove to be a simple and accurate model for tire behavior and, which is even
more important, one for which the data will be readily available.

Magic formulae have been modiﬁed by the Author in 1996, by the introduction
of additional parameters; the new formulae include the modelling of the combined
effect of longitudinal and side slip, as we will see on a dedicated paragraph.

2.7 Cornering Forces

In the previous section it was clear that a pneumatic tire can exert longitudinal
forces only if deformations are present in the tread band and if the wheel has a
nonvanishing longitudinal slip. In the same way the generation of cornering forces
cannot be understood if no reference is made to the lateral deformations of the tire
and to its sideslip angle: The generation of tangential forces in the road-wheel contact
is directly linked with the compliance of the tire.

2.7 Cornering Forces

99

Fig. 2.42 Wheel-road contact when side slip angles are present. a Contact zone and path of a point
of the tread on the equator plane; b contact zone and slip zone at different values of α (α is not in
scale)

The fact that the wheel has a sideslip angle, i.e. is not in pure rolling, does not
mean that in the contact zone the tire slips on the road: Also in this case, as seen for
longitudinal forces, the compliance of the tire allows the tread to move, relatively
to the centre of the wheel, with the same velocity as the ground. However some
localized sliding between the wheel and the road can be present and, with increasing
sideslip angle, they become more and more important, until the whole wheel is in
actual, macroscopic sliding.

If the velocity of the centre of the wheel does not lie in its mean plane, i.e. if the
wheel travels with a sideslip angle, the shape of the contact zone is quite distorted
(Fig. 2.42). Consider a point belonging to the mean plane on the tread band. Upon
approaching the contact zone it tends to move in a direction parallel to the velocity
V , relatively to the centre of the wheel, and consequently goes out of the mean plane.
After touching the ground at point A, it continues following the direction of the
velocity V (for an observer ﬁxed to the ground, it remains still) until it reaches point
B. At that point, the elastic forces pulling it towards the mean plane are strong enough
to overcome those due to the friction on the road, forcing it to slide on the road and
to deviate from its path. This sliding continues for the remaining part of the contact
zone, until point C is reached. The contact zone can thus be divided into two parts:
A leading zone in which no sliding occurs and a trailing one in which the tread slips
towards the mean plane. This second zone grows with the sideslip angle (Fig. 2.42b),
until it invades the whole contact zone and the wheel actually slips on the ground.

The lateral deformations of the tire are plotted in a qualitative way in Fig. 2.43,
together with the distribution of σz, τy, and of the lateral velocity. The resultant Fy of
the distribution of side forces is not applied at the centre of the contact zone but at a

100

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.43 Lateral
deformation, distribution of
pressures σz and τy, slip and
lateral speed in a cornering
tire

point which is located behind it at a distance t. Such distance is deﬁned as pneumatic
trail.

The moment Mz = Fyt is the aligning moment as it tends to force the mean
plane of the wheel towards the direction of the velocity V . The absolute value of
the side force Fy grows almost linearly at ﬁrst as α increases, then, when the limit
conditions of sliding are approached, in a slower way. Eventually it remains constant,
or decreases slightly, when sliding conditions are reached.

The side force Fy is plotted as a function of α for the cases of a radial and a
bias-ply tire in Fig. 2.44a. Radial tires show a stiffer behavior than bias-ply ones for
what side forces are concerned, as they require smaller sideslip angles to produce
the same side force.

With increasing sideslip angle, τy is more evenly distributed and the pneumatic
trail decreases. The aligning moment is consequently the product of a force which
increases with α and a distance which decreases; its trend is consequently of the type
shown in Fig. 2.44b. At high values of α, Mz can change direction, as is shown in
the ﬁgure.

The side force coefﬁcient

μy = Fy
Fz

is often used. Its maximum value, usually deﬁned as lateral traction coefﬁcient , is
written as μy p and the value taken in sliding conditions as μys .

Both force Fy and moment Mz depend on many factors, besides the angle α, as
normal force Fz, speed, pressure p, road conditions etc. Diagrams of cornering forces
Fy, of self aligning moment Mz and of trail t are shown on Fig. 2.45 as function of
the side slip angle α and of vertical load Fz. The ﬁgure refers to a 145 D 15 tire,
inﬂated at 180 kPa at a speed of 50 km/h.

2.7 Cornering Forces

101

Fig. 2.44 Lateral force Fy and self aligning moment Mz for different tires of the same size 145 D
13 and 145 R 13; Fz = 3 kN, p = 170 kPa; V = 40 km/h

It must be observed that all curves are to be taken as correct only as far as their
shape is concerned, but they are less precise as far as numeric values are concerned;
they depend, in fact, on the kind of test machine, used for measurement, which can
never simulate the on-road behavior correctly. See the following paragraph dedicated
to test machines.

The diagrams we are going to show cannot be never taken as a substitution of
experimental date gathered on real cars, but they are a trend indicator for the inter-
pretation of experimental results.

The lateral behavior of the tire can be summarized in a single diagram, the so-
called Gough diagram, in which the side force Fy is plotted against the self aligning
torque Mz with Fz, α and t as parameters. The Gough diagrams for two different
tires are shown in Fig. 2.46.

Alternatively, the carpet plot can be drawn; the force is plotted against the slip
angle and the various curves at different Fz are just superimposed, translated by a
quantity proportional to the normal force with respect to each other. Also the aligning
torque can be plotted in this way. Carpet plots are shown in Fig. 2.62.

At increasing speed, the curve Fy(α) lowers, mainly in the part corresponding to
the higher values of the sideslip angle. The linear part remains almost unchanged
(Fig. 2.47). Also the pneumatic trail t decreases with increasing speed and conse-
quently the aligning torque shows a decrease which is more marked than that of the
side force.

The decrease of Fy and of Mz as speed increases is higher on slippery roads, as
we can see on Fig. 2.48 where the same curves as in Fig. 2.47 at two different speeds
on dry and wet road are shown.

As far as hydrodynamic lifting (aquaplaning) is concerned, the same considera-
tions seen for the longitudinal force Fx can be repeated for the side force Fy. The
decrease of the aligning torque which goes together with the decrease of the side
force should warn the driver of the approaching of the loss of traction. A poorly
designed tire however could maintain strong aligning moments even in conditions
of reduced transversal traction, leading the driver into error.

102

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.45 Diagrams of Fy, Mz and t as function of Fz and α. Tire 145 D 15, p = 180 kPa, V =
50 km/h

Finally, on Fig. 2.49 we show a carpet plot for cornering forces for three tires
195/65 R 15, 205/55 R16 and 225/45 R 17 proposed for different version of the same
car; on Fig. 2.50 the carpet plot for self aligning torque for the ﬁrst and the last tire.
It should be remembered that even if tire width are different the free rolling radius
of both tires is the same and equal to 317 mm, being used with the same wheel house.
The effect of increased width, combined with the different aspect ratio, can be
seen on cornering stiffness; stiffer tires are justiﬁed for higher cornering force at the
same side slip angle, as on sport version. It can be noticed that the effect on self
aligning moment is not positive; this result can be corrected with a different king-pin
geometry.

The presence of a camber angle produces, even if no slip angle is present, a lateral
force. It is usually said camber thrust or camber force, as distinct from cornering
force, due to sideslip angle alone. The camber force added to the cornering force
give the total side or lateral force. The camber force is usually far smaller than the
cornering force, at least at equal values of angles α and γ . It depends on the load Fz,

2.7 Cornering Forces

103

Fig. 2.46 Gough diagrams. a Radial ply tire for a car 145 R 16; p = 180 kPa, V = 50 km/h; b
cross ply tire for an industrial vehicle 300 20, p = 675 kPa

Fig. 2.47 Qualitative curves of Fy(α), Mz(α) and t (α) at different speeds

is practically linear with it (Fig. 2.51), and is strongly dependent on the type of tire
considered.

The camber thrust is usually applied in a point which leads the centre of the contact
zone, producing a small moment Mzγ . It is usually neglected, owing to its very small
value. Bias-ply tires usually produce greater camber thrusts and moments than radial
ones.

Usually both sideslip and camber are simultaneously present. As an example, the
effect of camber on the force due to sideslip for two different values of the load is

104

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.48 Curves of Fy(α), Mz(α) and t (α) at two different speeds (50 and 80 km/h) on dry and
wet road. Tire 155 R 15, Fz = 3 kN, p = 150 kPa

shown in Fig. 2.52. The camber thrust is more noticeable at low sideslip than when
the sideslip is large, particularly when the wheel is less loaded. The aligning torque
under the combined effect of sideslip and camber for a radial tire is shown in Fig. 2.53.
In theory both side slip angle and camber angle should be zero when cornering
force and self aligning torque are zero. This is not always true in practice, as it shown
on carpet diagrams on Figs. 2.54 and 2.55, respectively for the cornering force and
the self aligning torque.

The reasons for this dissymmetry are the following. Firstly, the lateral behavior of
tires exhibits a hysteresis, in such a way that when the zero sideslip angle condition
is reached from a condition in which a force was exerted on the right, a small residual
force in the same direction remains and the same holds when the wheel is centered
from the opposite direction. This can give a feeling of lack of precision of the steering
system and compel the driver to continuous corrections.

Moreover, the centre of the hysteresis cycle is not at the point in which both angle
and force are equal to zero: Owing to lack of geometrical symmetry, a tire working

2.7 Cornering Forces

Fig. 2.49 Carpet diagrams
of cornering force for three
tires of same diameter but
different aspect ratio: 195/65
R 15, 205/55 R 16 and
225/45 R 17. The parameter
used is vertical load

105

in symmetrical conditions produces a side force. A ﬁrst effect is due to a possible
conicity of the outer surface of the tire: A conical drum would roll on a circular path
whose centre coincides with the apex of the cone. Conicity is due to lack of precision
during the manufacturing process and hence is linked with manufacturing quality
control; its direction is random and its amount changes from tire to tire of the same
model. If a tire is turned on the rim, the direction of the conicity is reversed, as is the
force it causes when the tire is rolled along a straight path.

106

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.50 Carpet diagrams of self aligning torque for two tires of same diameter but different aspect
ratio: 195/65 R 15 and 225/45 R 17. The parameter used is vertical load

Another unavoidable lack of symmetry is linked with the angles of the various
plies and their stacking order; the effect it causes is called ply steer. If the wheel is
rolled free ply steer causes it to roll along a straight line angled with respect to the
plane of symmetry; if the wheel rolls with no sideslip angle the generation of a side
force results. If a tire is turned on the rim the direction of the force due to ply steer is
not reversed. As it is caused by a factor included in the tire design, unlikely the effect
of conicity, that of ply steer is very consistent between tires of the same model.

While conicity can be included into the models of the tire only in a statistical
way, ply steer is one of the peculiarities of each tire and can be accounted for with
precision. Note that while these effects are usually considered as a nuisance, opposite
ply steer of the wheels of a given axle can even be used as a substitute of toe-in;
while the latter increases the rolling resistance the ﬁrst one has no effect on it.

2.7 Cornering Forces

107

Fig. 2.51 Camber force. a Scheme; note that Fy is negative and directed to the opposite as shown.
Camber force as function of vertical load (b) and camber angle (c). Tire 165 13, p = 200 kPa

Fig. 2.52 Cornering force as function of the side slip angle, for different values of camber angle
and for two values of the vertical force. Tire 135 13, p = 160 kPa, V = 40 km/h

108

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.53 Self aligning torque as function of sideslip angle, for different camber angles. Radial tire
185 R 14, p = 230 kPa, Fz = 3.5 kN

Fig. 2.54 Carpet diagrams for cornering force as function of side slip angle, for two industrial
vehicle tires 315/80 R 22.5; the stiffer one has a reinforced belt for steering wheels (single wheel),
while the other is for driving wheels (twin wheels). The parameter is the vertical force

2.7 Cornering Forces

109

Fig. 2.55 Carpet diagram of self aligning torque as function of side slip angle for the same industrial
vehicle tires 315/80 R 22.5 of previous ﬁgure

Generally speaking, the lateral force offset is subdivided into two parts: The part
which does not change sign when the direction of rotation is reversed is said to be
ply-steer force, while the part that changes sign is said to be conicity force.

As already stated, for low values of the sideslip angle the cornering force increases

(2.26)

linearly with α

Coefﬁcient

Fy = Cαα .

Cα =

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

∂ Fx
∂α

α=0

is always negative, since a positive sideslip angle causes a negative side force. The
cornering stiffness or cornering power C is usually expressed as a positive number,
so it is arbitrarily deﬁned and written as the derivative ∂ Fy/∂α changed in sign, and

Fy = −Cα .

(2.27)

110

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.56 Carpet plot of vertical force as function of the cornering stiffness for the two tires of
previous ﬁgures. The parameter is the side slip angle

This relationship obviously holds only for small enough values of α.
Expression (2.27) is quite useful to study the dynamic behavior of vehicles under
the assumption of small sideslip angles, as it actually occurs in normal driving con-
ditions. In particular, it is essential in the study of the stability of linearized models.
Figure 2.56 shows a diagram of this parameter, as function of vertical load and

side slip angle for same tires 315/80 R 22.5, already described on carpet plots.

The ratio between the cornering stiffness and the normal force is usually referred
to as cornering stiffness coefﬁcient (the term cornering coefﬁcient is also used but
SAE recommendation J670 suggests to avoid it for clarity).

Figure 2.57 reports the cornering stiffness value as a function of the vertical load
of two of the tires (205/55 R16 and 225/45 R 17) whose carpet was already shown
in Fig. 2.50.

For bias-ply tires it is of the order of 0.12 deg−1 = 6.9 rad−1 and for radial tires of
the order of 0.15 deg−1 = 8.6 rad−1. As the cornering coefﬁcient changes much from
tire to tire, it is interesting to note the distribution of its value for tires of different
types (Fig. 2.58a).

2.7 Cornering Forces

111

Fig. 2.57 Cornering stiffness as a function of the vertical load of a 205/55 R16 and a 225/45 R 17
tire

Fig. 2.58 Frequency distribution of the cornering stiffness (a) and camber stiffness (b) for different
car tire types

In the same way the camber stiffness can be deﬁned as the slope of the curve

Fy(γ ) for γ = 0:

Cγ =

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

∂ Fy
∂γ

.

γ =0

Note that the camber thrust produced by a positive camber angle is negative and
hence the camber stiffness is negative. The ratio between the camber stiffness and the
normal force is usually referred to as camber stiffness coefﬁcient. This coefﬁcient is
higher for bias-ply tires than for radial tires: In the ﬁrst case an average value is of
the order of 0.021 deg−1 = 1.2 rad−1 and in the second is of the order of 0.01 deg−1 =
0.6 rad−1. Also the distribution of the camber coefﬁcient for tires of different types
is of some interest (Fig. 2.58b).

The value of the camber stiffness is important in the case a wheel rolls on a road
with a transversal slope with its mid plane remaining vertical: in this case there is a

112

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.59 Wheel on a road
with lateral slope αt : camber
force and weight component
along the slope

component of the weight which is directed downhill and the camber thrust which is
directed uphill. The net effect can be in one direction or the other depending on the
magnitude of the camber stiffness coefﬁcient (Fig. 2.59).

The downhill component of the weight is W sin(αt ) ≈ W αt , where αt is the
transversal inclination of the road while the camber thrust is equal to the weight
multiplied by the camber stiffness coefﬁcient and the angle. It is clear that if the
value of the camber stiffness coefﬁcient is larger than one (measured in rad−1), as
it occurs for bias ply tires, the net force is directed uphill; the opposite occurs for
radial tires. This situation occurs when a rut is present in the road: A radial tire tends
to track in the bottom while a bias-ply tire tends to climb out of the rut.

To include camber thrust into the linearized model, Eq. (2.27) can be modiﬁed as:

It can be used with conﬁdence for values of α up to about 4◦ and of γ up to 10◦.
Also the self aligning moment can be expressed by a linear law:

Fy = −Cα + Cγ γ .

Mz = (Mz),αα ,

(2.28)

(2.29)

where (Mz)α is the derivative ∂ Mz/∂α computed for vanishingly small α and γ and
is deﬁned as aligning stiffness coefﬁcient or simply aligning coefﬁcient.

Here again the effect of the camber angle can be included by modifying Eq. (2.29)

as:

Mz = (Mz),αα + (Mz),γ γ ,

(2.30)

where (Mz),γ is the derivative ∂ Mz/∂γ computed for vanishingly small α and γ , but
the second effect is so small that it is usually neglected.

Equation (2.30) supplies a good approximation of the aligning torque for a range
of α far more limited than that in which Eq. (2.27) holds. It must however be noted
that the importance of the aligning torque in the study of the behavior of the vehicle
is limited and consequently a precision lower than that required for side forces can

2.7 Cornering Forces

Fig. 2.60 Cornering
stiffness in function of load
Fz (curve shown as α = 10◦
is a sort of “secant” stiffness)

113

be accepted. Practically, a good approximation of the aligning torque is important
only when studying the steering mechanism.

The aligning stiffness coefﬁcient due to sideslip angle is of about 0.01 m/deg
(Nm/N deg) for bias ply tires and of 0.013 m/deg for radial tires while that due to
camber (aligning camber stiffness coefﬁcient) is approximately of 0.001 m/deg for
the ﬁrst ones and of 0.0003 m/deg for the latter.

A small aligning moment is due to the curvature of the path even if the sideslip
angle is equal to zero; however this effect is not negligible only if the radius of the
trajectory is very small, of the order of a few meters, and consequently it is present
only in low speed manoeuvres. It can be important for the dimensioning the steering
system for the mentioned conditions.

The deﬁnition of the cornering coefﬁcient implies that the cornering stiffness is
linear with the normal load Fz; actually the cornering stiffness behaves in this way
only for low values of force Fz and then increases to a lesser extent (Fig. 2.60).
When the limit value has been reached it remains constant or slightly decreases. It is
often expedient to approximate the cornering stiffness as a function of the load with
two straight lines, the second of which is horizontal. Note that in the ﬁgure the line
corresponding to a sideslip angle of 2◦ refers to the true cornering stiffness while the
other curve (α = 10◦) is related to a sort of secant stiffness.

When the need for a more detailed numerical description of the lateral behavior of
a tire arises, there is no difﬁculty, at least in theory, to approximate the experimental
law Fy(α, γ , Fz, p, V, ...) and the similar relationship for the aligning torque, using
the algorithms which are common in numerical analysis. This approach can be used
with success in the numerical simulations of the behavior of the vehicle, even if it is
often quite expensive in terms of time needed for data preparation and computation. A
problem which is common to many numerical approaches like this is that of requiring
a great amount of experimental data, which are often difﬁcult, or costly, to obtain.

2 Wheels and Tires

114

α, can be used.

Polynomial approximations, with terms including the third power of the slip angle

As already stated, Eq. (2.25) can also be used to express the cornering force and

the aligning moment as function of the various parameters.

In the case of the side force, the magic formula is:

(cid:3)

(cid:5)

(cid:8)

(cid:10)(cid:4)
(cid:9)

Fy = D sin

C arctan

B(1 − E)(α + Sh) + E arctan

B(α + Sh)

+ Sv ,

(2.31)
where the product of coefﬁcients B, C and D yields directly the cornering stiffness.
The values of the other coefﬁcients are:

C = a0

D = μy p Fz ,

where a value of 1.30 is suggested for a0 and μy p

= a1 Fz + a2,

E = a6 Fz + a7 ,
(cid:4)(cid:12)
(cid:11)

(cid:3)

Fz
a4

BC D = a3 sin

2 arctan

(1 − a5|γ |) ,

Sh = a8γ + a9 Fz + a10 ,

Sv = a11γ Fz + a12 Fz + a13 .

Product BC D is the cornering stiffness changed in sign.
To obtain a better description of the camber thrust, the constant a11 is often sub-

stituted by the linear law:

a11 = a111 Fz + a112 .

Coefﬁcients Sh and Sv account for ply steer and conicity forces.
Similarly, in the case of the aligning torque the formula is:

(cid:3)

(cid:5)

(cid:8)

(cid:10)(cid:4)
(cid:9)

Mz = D sin

C arctan

B(1 − E)(α + Sh) + E arctan

B(α + Sh)

+ Sv ,

(2.32)

C = c0 ,

D = c1 F 2
z

+ c2 Fz ,

where a value of 2.40 is suggested for c0,

E = (c7 F 2
z

+ c8 Fz + c9)(1 − c10|γ |) ,

BC D = (c3 F 2
z

+ c4 Fz)(1 − c6|γ |)e−c5 Fz ,

2.7 Cornering Forces

115

Fig. 2.61 Curves Fy(α) and Mz(α) obtained by using the magic formula (2.31) and (2.32). Radial
tire 205/60 R 15 V

Sh = c11γ + c12 Fz + c13 ,

Sv = (c14 F 2
z

+ c15 Fz)γ + c16 Fz + c17 .

Also in this case the units introduced into the magic formula (2.31) and (2.32) are
usually not consistent: The load Fz is expressed in kN, angles α and γ are in degrees,
Fy and Mz are obtained in N and Nm respectively.

The curves Y (α) and Na(α) for values of the vertical load Fz equal to 2, 4, 6 and

8 kN for a radial tire 205/60 VR 15 6J are shown in Fig. 2.61.

The magic formula can be used to model the behavior of the tire in a more complete
way than to express the direct relationship of the side force and aligning moment
with the sideslip angle. As an example, the carpet plots of the side force, the side
force coefﬁcient, the aligning moment, the camber thrust and the camber moment are
reported in Fig. 2.62, together with the Gough diagram, for the same tire of Fig. 2.61.
It is also possible to build structural models of the tire to express the forces it exerts
by taking into account the deformations and stresses their structure is subjected to.
Apart from very complex numerical models, mainly based on the ﬁnite element
method, which allow one to compute the required characteristics but are so complex
that they are of little use in vehicle dynamics computations, it is possible to resort
to simpliﬁed models, dealing with the tread band as a beam or as a string on elastic
foundations.9 These models allow one to obtain interesting results, particularly from
a qualitative viewpoint, as they link the performance of the tire with its structural
parameters, but their quantitative precision is usually smaller than that of empirical
models, in particular of those based on the magic formula which is increasingly
becoming a standard in tire modelling.

9See, for instance, J. R. Ellis, Vehicle Dynamics, Business books Ltd., London, 1969; G. Genta,
Meccanica dell’autoveicolo, Levrotto & Bella, Torino, 1993.

116

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.62 a Gough diagram and carpet plot b of sideslip coefﬁcient, c cornering force, d self
aligning torque, e camber force and f camber moment for a radial tire 205/60 R 15 V, obtained
using the magic formula

2.8 Interaction Between Longitudinal and Side Forces

The considerations seen in the preceding sections apply only in the case in which
longitudinal and side forces are generated separately. If the tire produces simultane-
ously forces in X (cid:2) and Y (cid:2) directions the situation can be different as the traction used
in one direction limits that available in the other.

2.8 Interaction Between Longitudinal and Side Forces

117

Fig. 2.63 Lateral and
longitudinal force
coefﬁcients as function of
longitudinal slip and side slip
angle

Fig. 2.64 Polar diagrams of
lateral force on the wheel at
constant side slip angle and
self aligning torque as
function of longitudinal force

By applying a driving or braking force to a tire which has a certain sideslip angle,
the cornering force reduces and the same applies to the longitudinal force a tire can
exert if it is called to exert also a lateral force.

An example is shown in Fig. 2.63: By setting the tire at a given sideslip angle and
applying a braking torque, the shape of the curve μx (σ ) is deeply changed. While
the value in slipping conditions μs is almost unchanged, the peak value μ p decreases
to a greater extent.

It is then possible to obtain a polar diagram of the type shown in Fig. 2.64 in which
the force in Y (cid:2) direction is plotted versus the force in X (cid:2) direction for any given value
of the sideslip angle α. Each point of the curves is characterized by a different value
of the longitudinal slip σ . In a similar way it is possible to plot a curve Fy(Fx ) at
constant σ .

Strictly speaking, the curves are not exactly symmetrical with respect to Fy axis:
Usually tires develop the maximum value of the force Fy when they exert a very

118

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.65 Polar diagrams of force at constant side slip angle. a Experimental diagrams; b elliptic
approximation

light longitudinal braking force and a slight braking force can actually increase the
lateral force exerted at a moderate sideslip angle.

Together with the curves Fy(Fx ) two other curves Mz(Fx ) are also reported in
Fig. 2.64. An application of driving forces results in an increase of the aligning torque,
while a braking force causes the aligning moment to decrease to the point that it
changes its sign when the braking limit is approached. This effect is destabilizing as
it tends to increase the sideslip angle.

A set of experimental curves Fy(Fx ) at constant α is shown in Fig. 2.65a.
If F is the total force exerted on the wheel by the road while Fx and Fy are its

components, the resultant force coefﬁcient can be expressed as:

(cid:13)

=

μ2
x

+ μ2
y

.

μ = F
Fz

(2.33)

The various curves plotted for different values of α are enveloped by the polar
diagram of the maximum force the tire can exert. If it were a circle, the so-called
friction circle, as in simple models it can be assumed to be, the maximum force
coefﬁcient would be independent of the direction.

Actually, not only the value of μx is greater than that of μy but, as already stated,
there is some difference in longitudinal direction between driving and braking condi-
tions. The envelope, as well as the whole diagram, is a function of many parameters.
Apart from the already mentioned dependence on the type of tire and road conditions,
there is a strong reduction of the maximum value of force F with the speed, which
is particularly strong on wet road.

The three dimensional diagram of Fig. 2.66, limited to driving force Fx , gives an
idea of this reduction. The phenomenon is emphasized by water, as on diagrams of
Fig. 2.67.

A model allowing to approximate the curves Fy(Fx ) at constant α with simple
functions can be quite useful. This can be obtained by using the elliptical approxi-
mation (Fig. 2.65b):

(cid:3)

(cid:4)
2

(cid:3)

(cid:4)
2

Fy
Fy0

+

Fx
Fx0

= 1 ,

(2.34)

2.8 Interaction Between Longitudinal and Side Forces

119

Fig. 2.66 Variation of the
envelope curve of polar
diagrams of force between
tire and road at different
speeds

Fig. 2.67 Envelope curve of
Fy(Fx ) curves, at different
road conditions. a Dry road
and b wet with 0.2 mm; c
0.5 mm; d 1 mm and e 2 mm
of water

120

2 Wheels and Tires

where forces Fy0 and Fx0 are respectively the force Fy exerted, at the given sideslip
angle, when no force Fx is exerted and the maximum longitudinal force exerted at
zero sideslip angle. The envelope curve is then elliptical, the friction ellipse.

If Eq. (2.34) is used in order to express function Fy(Fx ), the cornering stiffness
of a tire which is exerting a longitudinal force Fx can be expressed as a function of
the cornering stiffness C0 (i.e. the cornering stiffness when no longitudinal force is
produced) by the expression:

The cornering stiffness can be expressed by the function:

(cid:3)

(cid:4)
2

(cid:3)

(cid:4)
2

Cα
C0α

+

Fx
Fx0

= 1 .

(cid:13)

C = C0

1 − (Fx /μ p Fz)2 ,

where force Fx0 has been substituted by μ p Fz.

Although a rough approximation, particularly for the case in which the longitu-
dinal force approaches its maximum value (the differences between the curves of
Fig. 2.65a and those of Fig. 2.65b are evident), the elliptical approximation is often
used for all the cases in which the very concept of cornering stiffness is useful.

The empirical model of Eqs. (2.25) and (2.31) has been modiﬁed by Pacejka , to
allow for the interaction between longitudinal and lateral forces in a better way than
that of computing separately the two forces and then using the elliptic approximation.
First of all, formulae for longitudinal force calculation, in absence of side slip

angle, has been redeﬁned; they refer, therefore, to pure traction or braking:

(2.35)

(2.36)

(2.37)

Fx = Fx0(σ, Fz),
Fx0 = Dx sin (cid:13)x + SV x ,
(cid:13)x = Cx arctan {Bx σx − Ex (Bx σx − arctan (Bx σx ))} ,
σx = σ + SH x ,
γx = γ λγ x

Coefﬁcients of previous formulae are calculated according to following expres-

sions:

Cx = pC x1λC x ,
Dx = μx Fz,
μx = ( pDx1 + pDx2d fz)

(cid:6)

Ex =

pE x1 + pE x2d fz + pE x3d f 2
z

(cid:15)

(cid:14)
1 − pDx3γ 2
x
(cid:11)
1 − pE x4

λμx ,

(cid:7)

(cid:12)

σx
|σx |

λE x ,

(2.38)

Bx Cx Dx = Fz ( pK x1 + pK x2d fz) λK x e pK x3d fz ,

SH x = ( pH x1 + pH x2d fz)λH x ,
SV x = Fz( pV x1 + pV x2d fz)λV x λμx .

2.8 Interaction Between Longitudinal and Side Forces

121

Formulae are similar to the previous Eq. (2.25), except the difference on coefﬁ-

cients p and the introduction of scale coefﬁcient λ, in most cases set to 1.

Parameter d fz is given by the following equation:

d fz = Fz − Fz0

,

Fz0

where Fz0 is a reference value for the vertical load.

Also cornering force calculation formulae have been modiﬁed, to be used in case

of absence of longitudinal slip, that is in case of pure side slip:

(2.39)

(2.40)

Byαy − E y

Byαy − arctan

Byαy

(cid:6)

(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:15)

,

(cid:6)

Fy = Fy0(α, γ , Fz),
Fy0 = Dy sin (cid:13)y + SV y,
(cid:13)y = C y arctan
αy = α + SH y,
γy = γ λγ y

(cid:14)

C y = pC y1λC y,
Dy = μy Fz,
(cid:6)
μy =

pDy1 + pDy2d fz
(cid:7)

pE y1 + pE y2d fz

(cid:6)

E y =

Similarly, coefﬁcients of previous equations are given by:

(cid:7) (cid:14)

1 − pDy3γ 2
y
(cid:16)
(cid:6)

(cid:15)

λμy,

1 −
(cid:14)

(cid:18)

(cid:17)
(cid:17)

(cid:7) αy(cid:17)
(cid:17)αy
(cid:15)(cid:9)
·

py3 + pE y4γy

λE y,

(cid:8)
ByC y Dy = pK y1 Fz0 sin
2 arctan
(cid:17)
(cid:17)
(cid:17))λF z0λK y,
(cid:17)γy
·(1 − pK y3
SH y = ( pH y1 + pH y2d fz)λH y + pH y3γy,
pV y1 + pV y2d fz
SV y = Fz[

λV y] +

(cid:7)

(cid:6)

Fz/( pK y2 Fz0λF z0)

+Fz[( pV y3 + pV y4d fz)γyλμy].

Also here, formulae are similar to the previous ones (2.31), made an exception
for coefﬁcients p and for scale factors λ, which, again, are seldom different as 1. The
parameter d fz is given as previously.

In contemporary presence of both forces the longitudinal force has to be modiﬁed

by multiplying the result of Eqs. (2.39) and (2.40), by the correction factor:

Fx = Fx0G xα(α, σ, Fz)

The calculation of the correction factor is made by:

122

2 Wheels and Tires

(2.41)

,

Bxα = r Bx1 cos {arctan (r Bx2σ )} λxα,
Cxα = rC x1,
Dxα = Fx0
cos (cid:10)x
Exα = rE x1 + rE x2d fz,
SH xα = r H x1,
G xα = cos (cid:15)x
cos (cid:10)x
(cid:10)x = Cxα arctan {Bxα SH xα − Exα(Bxα SH xα arctan(Bxα SH xα))} ,
(cid:15)x = Cxα arctan {Bxααs − Exα (Bxααs − arctan(Bxααs))} .

,

Also in this case we have the coefﬁcients r and the scale factor λ.
In the same way:

Fy = Fy0G yσ (α, σ, γ , Fz) + SV yσ .

The correction factor is given by:

(2.42)

(cid:14)
arctan

(cid:6)
r By2(α − r By3)

(cid:7)(cid:15)

,

λxα,

Byσ = r By1 cos
C yσ = rC y1,
Dyσ = Fy0
cos (cid:10)y
E yσ = rE y1 + rE y2d fz,
SH yσ = r H y1 + r H y2d fz,
λV yσ ,
SV yσ = DV yσ sin
(cid:8)
DV yσ = μy Fz(rV y1 + rV y2d fz + rV y3γ ) cos
arctan(rV y4α)
G xα = cos (cid:15)y
cos (cid:10)y
(cid:10)y = C yσ arctan
(cid:15)y = C yσ arctan

(cid:8)
rV y5 arctan(rV y6σ )

Byσ SH yσ − E yσ (Byσ SH yσ arctan(Byσ SH yσ ))
Byσ σs − E yσ

Byσ σs − arctan(Byσ σs)

(cid:7)(cid:15)

(cid:14)

(cid:14)

(cid:6)

(cid:9)

(cid:9)

,

.

(cid:15)

,

This way of modelling the interaction between Fx and Fy is quite complicated

and not very well justiﬁed by theory.

Results are reasonable, better than those obtained by the elliptic approximation
only; nevertheless there are cases where curves Fy(Fx ) have non realistic shapes and
the above formulae must be carefully applied.

Research activities on this ﬁeld are still going on, with the target of obtaining a

simpler and more realistic set of formulae.

A graph similar to that of Fig. 2.65 and calculated with this method is shown on

Fig. 2.68.

2.8 Interaction Between Longitudinal and Side Forces

123

Fig. 2.68 Ellipses calculated with modiﬁed Pacejika formulae for the same 195/65 R 15, tire, used
to calculate carpet plots previously shown

124

2 Wheels and Tires

2.9 Outline on Dynamic Behavior

2.9.1 Vibration Modes

The dynamic behavior of the tire is quite important in determining both comfort
and stability of the vehicle. Although the strong interactions between the vibrational
behavior of the tires and that of the suspensions and of the suspended mass of the
vehicle suggest that the dynamic study should be performed on the complete vehicle,
it is at any rate interesting to study the behavior of the tire alone, at least to obtain
the data which will later be introduced in more complex models.

As the stiffness of the tire is greater than that of the suspension, the behavior of
the former is generally not important in low frequency motions (1–3 Hz), for which
the tire can be modelled as a rigid body.

In an intermediate ﬁeld of frequencies (10–20 Hz) the tire can be considered as a
massless deformable element introduced into the system and it is possible to deﬁne
a dynamic stiffness, in both vertical and transversal direction. It is possible to show
that the tire should be characterized by a low vertical stiffness, in order to minimize
vertical displacements of the suspended mass on irregular road surface, and high
transversal stiffness, to react with small displacements to side forces applied to the
vehicle.

It is evident that there is a notable interaction between the vertical behavior of the
tire and that of the rest of the vehicle, between transversal stiffness and cornering stiff-
ness and, ﬁnally, between vertical and lateral stiffness, because of elasto-kinematic
behavior of the suspension.

On Fig. 2.69 the dynamic vertical and lateral stiffness of two 155 15 tires are
shown, as function of speed. As it can be seen, dynamic stiffness of radial tires is
less as bias ply tires.

Fig. 2.69 Dynamic stiffness
in vertical Pr and lateral Pt
direction of two 155 15 tires
of radial and cross ply type,
in function of speed

2.9 Outline on Dynamic Behavior

125

Fig. 2.70 Deformation of a 155 15 radial tire (a) and same size cross ply tire (b) at different
excitation frequencies

At higher frequencies (over 50 Hz) the tire is vibrating according to its natural
frequencies. On Fig. 2.70 deformation proﬁles are shown in correspondence of forced
vibrations of 155 15 tires of both radial and cross ply type. Angles φr , shown in the
picture are the phase retards between tire and exciting platform vibration. Radial
tires present a peak between 60 and 90 Hz, according to tire dimension and other less
relevant peaks are present at higher frequencies, with a reduced ampliﬁcation factor.
Transmissibility, deﬁned as the ratio between response and excitation amplitudes

for a radial and a cross ply tire are shown on Fig. 2.71.

The ﬁgure shows the vertical response to a contact point vertical motion: in the

same way it is possible to measure horizontal transmissibility.

The resonance of the unsprung mass because of the tire vertical elasticity takes
place at a much lower frequency; the ﬁrst resonance peak of the radial tire shown
on the ﬁgure is bound to a mode where the tread is moving like a rigid body on the
ﬂanks. Higher frequency modes where the tread vibrates according to lobate shapes
are less excited and more dampened.

126

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.71 Transmissibility
for a radial and a bias tire 155
R 15 and 155 15 as function
of frequency. An interval of
frequency between 50 and
200 Hz is shown; the
resonance of the unsprung
mass for tire elasticity takes
place at a lower frequency

Fig. 2.72 Lateral forces
applied to a standing tire then
put in rotation for different
time or distance. Tire 140 12,
Fz = 3.5 kN, p = 138 kPa

2.9.2 Cornering Dynamic Forces

If the geometrical parameters (slip and camber angles) or the forces in X (cid:2) and Z (cid:2)
directions are variable during motion, the values of the side force and of the aligning
moment are at any instant different from the ones which would characterize a sta-
tionary condition with the same values of all parameters. As an example, if a tire is
tilted about the vertical axis at standstill and then it is allowed to roll, the side force
reaches the steady-state value only after a certain time, after rolling for a certain
distance (Fig. 2.72), usually referred to as relaxation length.

This effect is usually not noticeable in normal driving as the time delay is very
small, but the fact that there is a delay between the setting of the sideslip angle and
the force generation is very important in dynamic conditions.

If the sideslip angle is changed with harmonic law in time, the side force and
the aligning torque follow the sideslip angle with a certain delay, function of the
frequency, and their value is lower than that obtained in quasi-static conditions, i.e.
with very low frequency.

2.9 Outline on Dynamic Behavior

127

Fig. 2.73 Lateral force and self aligning torque on a tire having a side slip angle changing with
harmonic law, between −4◦ and 4◦, as function of the ratio V /ω between speed and frequency of
the low α(t), the wave length. Peak value (a), (c) and phase difference (b), (d) of force and moment
are reported. Tire 190 14, Fz = 4.8 kN, p = 165 kPa

If the frequency is not very high, at the speeds encountered in normal driving, the
average values are not much lower than those characterizing static conditions, but a
certain phase lag between the sideslip angle and the Fy force remains (Fig. 2.73).

The plots reported in the ﬁgure have been obtained for a given tire and are not
easily generalized, particularly at high frequency. If a resonance of the tire occurs
(as the phase of the aligning torque seems to suggest in the plot) the response is no
longer dependent on the ratio V /ω but on the frequency and, to a lesser extent, on
the speed separately.

More important for what practical applications are concerned is the case in which
the load Fz applied by the wheel on the ground is variable, as is the case of rolling on
uneven road (Fig. 2.74). The frequency can be very high, if the speed is high enough,
and the decrease of lateral force due to dynamic effects can be large. In the ﬁgure
the law z(t) of the vertical displacement of the hub of the wheel is harmonic with a
frequency of about 7 Hz while the response Fy(t) is more complicated, with even an
inversion of sign occurring at each cycle. The decrease of the average value of the
lateral force at increasing frequency is shown in 2.74b.

128

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.74 a Lateral force on a tire working with constant side slip angle, but with a rim moving
vertically with harmonic low z(t). b Mean value of the force Fy as function of the ratio between ω
(referred to z(t)) and V

2.10 Testing

The characteristics of tires can be measured using road or laboratory tests. The most
common testing machines for tires are based on a drum which simulates the road;
the tire can roll on the outer surface or on the inner surface of the drum (Fig. 2.75a).
The actual conditions are in a way intermediate between those encountered on the
two types of test machines. To avoid the differences between the contact condition
occurring in drum machines and the actual ones, more modern machines use a steel
belt. The belt is kept ﬂat by a hydrostatic bearing, which can be connected to a shaker
to simulate the motion on uneven road. The simulation of the road surface is easier
on drum than on belt machines, on which the surface is usually a plain metal surface.
The belt is kept ﬂat by a hydrodynamic bearing, which can be excited with vibra-
tions to simulate motion on a rough road. The ground simulation is easier in drum
machine as in belt machine, where the surface is usually a steel band.

Other machines use a ﬂat disc: In this case the contact surface is ﬂat but the tire
works with a ground moving along a circular path, generating a side force even with
no sideslip. For low speed and low duration tests the wheel can roll also against

Fig. 2.75 Tire testing machines. a Drum machines with positive and negative drum curvature.
1: drum; 2: tire to be tested. b Belt machine. A: belt bearing; C: belt; R: tire to be tested; V:
excitation

2.10 Testing

Fig. 2.76 Testing machine
where road surface is
simulated through a ﬂat disc

129

a moving platform. With platforms it is possible to simulate easily different road
surfaces (Fig. 2.76).

For low speed test of short duration the wheel can roll on a ﬂat moving platform;

different road surfaces can, in this case, be easily simulated.

In all test machines the tire is ﬁt on a hub able to measure the three force and
three moment components. Different driving and braking conditions can be simu-
lated having two different motors to move the wheel and the road. Wheels can be
maintained at given camber and side slip angles.

Laboratory test and, particularly those with roller machines, must be compared

with those made on the road by means of particular test vehicles.

To test tires on the road wheel mounted on a dynamometric hub and provided
with an independent motor is installed on a vehicle or a trailer. Figure 2.77 shows a
picture of such kind of vehicle, used by the laboratory for vehicle testing of the Delft
University.

Such vehicle feature all the necessary equipment for tire force and moment mea-
surement in every possible condition. A second equal wheel is installed with an equal
but opposite side slip angle, in order to allow the vehicle to drive on a straight line.
A suitable device can wet the road according to a determined water layer thickness.

To measure the rolling resistance only simpler machines can be used.
On a wheel drum machine the wheel can be launched to a given speed, and then

let to coast down by its inertia.

The equation for the motion of the wheel and drum assembly is:

d(cid:6)R
dt

JR + JS
Re

= − f Fz −

|MS|
RS

,

(2.43)

where RS, JS and MS are the drum radius, its moment of inertia, reduced to the
wheel axis and the total resistant moment of the wheel. MS can be determined the
deceleration of the wheel, under the vertical force Fz, which can be obtained with a
simple vertical load.

The (cid:6)R(t) law can be recorded very easily and the roll resistance f can be calcu-
lated using the Eq. (2.43). This method has the inconvenience, common to all methods

130

2 Wheels and Tires

Fig. 2.77 Vehicle for on road tire testing used by the vehicle research laboratory of the University
of Delft. The test wheel is in the middle of the trailer

Fig. 2.78 Fixture to measure rolling resistance of a vehicle or a wheel on the road. C: trailer; G:
trailer skirt; R: wheel under test; T: dynamometric pull bar; V: vehicle under test

starting from the acquisition of a coast down curve, of requiring the measurement of
a magnitude, where the derivative is desired. Because the derivative of a function is
very sensible to errors of the function measurement, this method requires particular
precautions.

Other inconveniences are common to all tests on the drum and, particularly the
difference of the surface, usually of steel and the different shape of the contact patch.
Moreover, as in all coast dawn tests, the measurement is made during a transient,
where many magnitudes are changing during the test, the temperature in particular.
If the acceleration phase is long enough, the tire is reaching the steady state
temperature at a speed lower as that of test start. If the temperature is higher as the
appropriate one, rolling resistance is slightly lower. If the acceleration is higher, on

2.10 Testing

131

the opposite, tire temperature may be too low, bringing to a higher value of rolling
resistance.

On road tests can be performed pulling a vehicle or a single road, put inside a
suitable trailer able to eliminate aerodynamic resistance in its interior (Fig. 2.78).
A dynamometric pull bar connects the trailer with the test vehicle, allowing the
measurement of the rolling resistance.

This method has the inconvenience of being sensitive to road slope: a slope of only
0.1% can bring to errors on 10% on rolling resistance coefﬁcient f . The measurement
can be made more difﬁcult by possible longitudinal vibrations of the system.

Chapter 3
Suspensions

3.1 Introduction

For vehicle suspensions we mean a mechanism which links the wheel to the body
directly or to a frame ﬁxed to the body.

Since a rigid vehicle with more then three wheels is an hyperstatic system, it is
necessary that the vehicle structure is ﬂexible enough to allow the contemporary
contact of the wheels with the ground or that the wheel are connected to a rigid body
through a deformable system, the suspension. This second solution is adopted by
most of the vehicles, while the ﬁrst, widely applied to horse carriages in the past, is
now used on particularly slow vehicles.

In many cases, to suspension deformation must be added the structure deforma-
tion, which plays an important role on handling and comfort characteristics of a
vehicle.

To accomplish its task, suspensions must:

• allow a break down of forces, exchanged by the wheels with the ground, complying

with design speciﬁcations in every load condition;

• determine the vehicle trim under the action of static and quasi static forces.

We shouldn’t, in fact, forget that by introducing on a vehicle a deformable linkage,
geometric variations of the body position are introduced as a function of payload and
payload position; these variations are described through the three coordinates of the
center of gravity and the three angles of the body reference system (yaw, roll, pitch
angle). They are included under the name of vehicle static trim. A complete deﬁnition
of the body reference system is given in the fourth part, in the second volume.

In addition to this function, which is accomplished basically with an elastic system,

there is another one, not less important:

• to absorb and smooth down shocks that are received by the wheel from road

asperities and transmitted to the body.

It should be remembered that this task requires the application of a suitable damp-
ing system; this function is so important that suspensions are applied also to two or
three wheels vehicle which are not hyperstatic bodies.

In theory, tires alone could isolate the vehicle body from forces coming from
the road, but their elastic and damping properties are not sufﬁcient to reach suitable
handling and comfort targets, unless at very low speed and on smooth roads.

Suspensions are therefore peculiar to reach an adequate road holding behavior
(handling) and comfort and determine for each vehicle their own distinctive charac-
teristics.

Wheels must be, therefore, free to move in a direction almost perpendicular to

ground, in addition to their rotation and steering motion.

This vertical motion must be guided through the suspension linkages in order to
guarantee a correct position of the tire with reference to the ground. The capacity of
a tire to react with suitable forces is, in fact, determined by the angles between the
equator plane of the wheel with the ground and with the hub speed.

If the suspension is a kind of ﬁlter between the road and the body, designed to
limit the amount of forces coming from road asperities and maneuvers, this ﬁlter
must not impair vehicle controllability, in possible driving situations. Road holding
depends not only on mass properties of the vehicle (mass and moments of inertia),
on its geometric properties (kind of traction, center of gravity position, wheelbase,
track), on its tires but on suspensions too.

Suspensions are usually classiﬁed in three classes: independent, dependent and

semi-independent suspensions.

The ﬁrst class presents no mechanical linkage between the two hubs of the same
axle; a force acting on a single wheel doesn’t affect the other; while writing this sen-
tence, steering linkages, anti roll bars or auxiliary frames are not taken into account.
Dependent wheel suspensions or rigid axles provide for a rigid linkage between
the two wheels of the same axle; each motion of a wheel, caused by road asperities
is affecting also the coupled wheel.

Semi-rigid suspensions have intermediate characteristics between the other two
families. In these suspensions wheel hubs can’t be considered as independent, be-
cause they are not linked with an articulated structure; on the contrary this structure
has such mechanical characteristics that ﬂexibility cannot be neglected. This category
is practically including the so-called twist axles.

Another important characteristics, within these families, separates steering from
non steering suspension; while independent suspensions can be, in principle, de-
signed to become steering suspensions, dependent suspensions are no more applied
to steering axles, industrial vehicles and off-road vehicles being an exception. The
same applies with no exception to semi-rigid suspensions.

Most suspensions can be applied to driving and idling axles; this aspect has no

signiﬁcant impact on suspension design, except for joint stiffness.

Considering elastic and damping systems only, suspensions can be classiﬁed as
passive or active. In the ﬁrst family the elastic reaction of the suspension system is
determined only by its deformation and the damping system can only waste part of
the received energy; in the second family the suspension system can receive energy

3.1 Introduction

135

from other sources (the engine, or some intermediate storage of the engine energy)
to affect body motion with the objective to limit this motion very close to its static
equilibrium condition.

The objective of this kind of suspension is to limit body displacement to a mini-
mum, necessary to transfer to the driver a sufﬁcient perception of vehicle stability.
We will comment on this kind of suspension in the chapter dedicated to chassis con-
trol systems and we will see that different level of activity are identiﬁed, according
to the fact that the outside energy source is used to correct the static trim only, or the
dynamic trim too. Most vehicle suspensions are passive.

Finally, two additional deﬁnitions.
We deﬁne as sprung mass, that part of the vehicle mass that is free to move with
reference to the ground, because of the suspension application; the part of the mass
that is not changing its position is called unsprung mass.

Some suspension components contribute part to sprung mass, part to unsprung
mass. To evaluate the two contributions, the mass of these elements must be divided in
two parts, concentrated ideally in the suspension joints, in such a way as to conserve
the moment of inertia and the center of gravity position.

3.1.1 Suspension Components

To accomplish the above described functions, suspensions are built with different
categories of components.

Bearing Components or Linkages

They are part of the mechanism linking the wheel to the body and guarantee the
degrees of freedom of wheels and their correct positions with reference to the ground.
They determine the relative motion of the wheel with reference to the vehicle body;
they also transfer to the body part of the loads coming from the tire contact patch.

Primary Elastic Members

They include springs (coil, bar and leaf springs), anti roll bars and stop springs.
These members connect elastically the wheel to the body and they store the energy
coming from uneven road proﬁle. They not only store this energy but determine body
position as function of payload entity and position.

136

3 Suspensions

Secondary Elastic Members

They are elastic bushings of linkages joints. To some of these joints is given a certain
elastic compliance.

At the origin this property was taken as a drawback of the possibility of avoiding

joint lubrication, by using elastomeric joints.

More recently it was understood that his property could be exploited to better
design the elasto-kinematic behavior of the suspension and its comport properties.
The deformation of these joints plays a very important role in determining vehicle

handling.

Damping Members

They are basically shock absorbers, but we should remember that also primary and
secondary elastic members have a non negligible capacity of wasting energy.

Shock absorbers are provided to waste the elastic energy store by elastic members
and allow the oscillation damping of the vehicle body, avoiding stationary vibration
or resonance.

3.1.2 Suspension Inﬂuence on Body Motion

Ideally, the suspensions should allow the wheels to move with respect to the body of
the vehicle in a direction perpendicular to the road, maintaining the plane of the wheel
parallel to itself and constraining all motions in x and y directions1: A suspension of
a single wheel should be a system with a single degree of freedom, the displacement
in z direction or suspension stroke.

It should be remembered that if the wheel is allowed to move along the Z (cid:2) axis
only, linkages should not transmit to the wheel hub body rotation, particularly roll
angle.

However none of the linkages we will examine is able to satisfy this condition
completely and every kind of car suspension has its own characteristic; the approxi-
mation to the ideal characteristic is part of the character of a car.

Wheel position is also affected by joints stiffness which even if considered spheri-
cal joints or cylindrical bushings are rather deformable; sometimes linkages too have
to be considered as ﬂexible members.

Wheel position is not only affected by body motion, but also by external forces.

1Usually the reference system adopted for suspensions is the same as the reference system used on
body drawings; this is the vehicle reference system, explained in the second volume, but the origin
of this system is set in the symmetry plane of the body, through the front wheel centers in the static
load position.

3.1 Introduction

137

Fig. 3.1 Steering geometry

On the following lines we will describe angles and linear dimensions applied to
describe suspensions behavior; these characteristics are described with reference to
a front steering axle.

In a steering suspension, the steering axis or king-pin axis is the axis around which
the hub holder or strut, and therefore the wheel is able to rotate or steer (Fig. 3.1).
Also linkages of non steering suspensions can leave to the wheel a limited freedom
to steer around a king-pin axis, according to body roll angle or applied forces; the
effect of this additional steering angle will be discussed later.

The angle between king-pin axis and the Z (cid:2) axis, projected on the X (cid:2) Z (cid:2) plane is
called caster angle (ν on ﬁgure). As it will be explained later, this angle is relevant
to determine steering wheel return capabilities.

The distance between O, center of the contact patch of the tire, and P, intersection
of the steering axis with the ground, projected on the X (cid:2) Z (cid:2) plane is the longitudinal
trail (dl on ﬁgure).

The angle between the wheel equator plane and the X (cid:2) Z (cid:2) plane is the inclination
or camber angle, while the angle between the king-pin axis and the Y (cid:2) Z (cid:2) plane is the
king-pin angle (λ on ﬁgure).

We should remember that a suspension linking the wheel in such a way as to
remain parallel to the car body (for instance as in longitudinal trailing arms) is
applying to the wheel an inclination angle, with reference to the ground, equal to the
body roll. This is particularly noxious, because the roll angle is such as to decrease
the cornering stiffness of the tire. On two-wheeled vehicles, the behavior is opposite
and brings advantage; the same could happen on variable trim vehicles, that will be
described in the second volume.

The distance between O and P projected on a Y (cid:2) Z (cid:2) plane is the king-pin offset (dt

on ﬁgure).

138

3 Suspensions

But an ideal suspension shouldn’t allow the wheel to change its camber with
reference to the ground; we will deﬁne as camber recovery angle the difference
between the actual camber, with reference to the ground, and body roll. An ideal
suspension should have a camber recovery equal to body roll.

With reference to the vehicle body, we deﬁne as toe angle the angle between the
intersection of the equator plane of the wheel with the ground and the car x axis.
It can be measured either in degrees or in millimeter of difference in transversal
distance of two point on the wheel rim. It is called toe-in when wheel equator planes
are crossing in front of the vehicle and toe-out in the opposite case.

Other dimensions to be considered are the wheelbase, the distance projected on
a x z plane between center of tire contact area of the wheels of the same side and
track, the distance projected on a yz plane between centers of the contact area of the
wheels of the same axle. Quite often, referring to suspension geometrical properties
semi-wheelbase and semi-track are distances of the center of the contact area from
the x z and from the yz planes for the center of gravity of the vehicle.

When the vehicle body is moved in vertical direction (displacement z) or rotates
about its x axis (roll angle φ) the position of the wheel changes, it is possible to plot
camber angle γ, track t, characteristic angles of the steering system, steering angle δ,
etc. as functions of z and φ. These functions are generally strongly nonlinear but they
can be linearized about any equilibrium position and the derivatives ∂t/∂z, ∂t/∂φ,
∂γ/∂z, ∂γ/∂φ, ∂δ/∂z, ∂δ/∂φ, etc.2 can be easily deﬁned. They can be considered as
constant in the small motions about an equilibrium position and deﬁne the behavior
of the suspension.

While outlining the design of a new suspension, mathematical models have today

a fundamental importance.

With a simple approach, (see Fig. 3.2) starting from suspension drawings, a sus-
pension scheme can be built up, where linkages are represented with rigid beams
connected with kinematic couples (spherical joints, bushings, etc.) able to simulate
the kinematic behavior by suspension stroke an wheel steering., taking into account
the contribution of linkages and main elastic members only.

On a second approach, kinematic couples introduced in the model can be changed
with elastic elements; it is now possible to calculate characteristics variations of
the suspension as function of applied forces too. This second way of studying the
suspension means analyzing the elasto-kinematic behavior.

This simple simulation applied iteratively have a fundamental importance in de-

signing suspension with respect to assigned targets.

On following paragraphs we will analyze the most diffused suspension schemes

existing on present cars and their main components.

2In the following the notation (t),z, (t),φ, etc. will be used.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

139

Fig. 3.2 Starting from suspension drawings a suspension scheme can be built up, where linkages
are schematized with rigid beams connected with kinematic couples (spherical joints, bushings,
etc.) able to simulate the kinematic behavior by suspension stroke an wheel steering

3.2 Independent Suspensions

If the wheels are suspended independently, linkages must constrain ﬁve out of the
six degrees of freedom of the wheel (or better, of the wheel hub, because the wheel
is then free to rotate about its axis). The unconstrained degree of freedom should be
the translation in a direction perpendicular to the ground. None of the many devices
which are currently used fulﬁlls exactly this requirement.

As suspensions must restrain ﬁve degrees of freedom, they can be materialized as
a system made of ﬁve bars with spherical hinges at the ends (Fig. 3.3), This layout,
often referred to as multilink suspensions, which has the advantage of allowing a very
large freedom of adjustment by changing the length of the bars by screwing in or
out the joints, has little application outside the ﬁeld of luxury cars for its complexity,
even if simpler multilink suspensions are now more widespread. From ﬁve bars
multilink suspensions almost all conﬁgurations can be obtained by grouping these
bars in different ways.

Note that in general the motion of the wheel is not planar and as a consequence the
study of the kinematic behavior is not easy. Nowadays it is however easy to obtain
the exact kinematics of any suspension by using computer generated trajectories.

If points 1 and 2 and points 3 and 4 coincide with each other the corresponding bars
become triangular elements: The suspension obtained is a transversal quadrilaterals
suspension, often referred to as SLA (short-long arm) or A-arm suspension (Fig. 3.4).

140

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.3 Suspension based upon ﬁve linkages which cut ﬁve of the six degrees of freedom of the
wheel

Fig. 3.4 Low transversal quadrilaterals suspension

If lines 1(cid:2)2(cid:2) and 3(cid:2)4(cid:2) are parallel, the motion of the wheel is contained in a plane
perpendicular to the line 1(cid:2)2(cid:2) and the projection of the mechanism in such plane is
an articulated quadrilateral, whose side 1(cid:2)3(cid:2) is made by the vehicle body. A front
suspension of this type is shown in Fig. 3.80, in which the engine is also sketched
to show that this solution allows to locate the mechanical parts of the vehicle with a
greater freedom than solutions based on rigid axles.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

141

Fig. 3.5 Mc Pherson suspension. The ﬁgure shows the geometric construction to determine the
roll center RC, not taking into account tire deformation

3.2.1 McPherson Suspension

If the upper triangle is substituted by a prismatic guide a McPherson suspension is
obtained (Fig. 3.5). Its simplicity and the fact that it leaves much free space for the
engine has made it a very common solution for cars front axles, particularly small
ones.

The description of this suspension which is by large the most diffused conﬁgura-

tion is divided in three parts.

The ﬁrst part is addressed to deﬁne suspension geometry and its kinematic behav-
ior; a second will follow on advantages and disadvantages implied by this suspension,
as compared with the remaining types.

This explanation scheme will be adopted also for the other suspension types.
A third part is dedicated to the suspension and its most important components

Similar components with adaptations that can be easily imagined are also adopted
on the remaining types. Therefore this section will not be repeated, unless for com-
menting relevant differences with the Mc Pherson suspension.

detail design.

Description

The McPherson suspension is the most diffused one for front axles and is applied
to all small and medium size cars. Some manufacturers adopt this solution also on
large cars an sometimes for sport cars too; it is also applied sometimes to rear axles.

142

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.6 McPherson suspension for the front axle of medium size front driven car; the lower arm
(2) is articulated to the body through an auxiliary frame called also subframe (FCA)

We are going to describe ﬁrst of all wheel linkages. The wheel is guided, during
its vertical motion, by means of a lower arm and of a sliding guide, integral to the
shock absorber. This device is also used as spring installation and an upper pivot
links it to the body.

We refer to a solution applied to the front axle of a medium size car, represented

on Fig. 3.6 and proceed describing the most relevant details.

The lower arm 2 is connect to the body through an auxiliary frame, also called
subframe 1, in two different points, through elastic bushings 3. The lower arm is also
linked to the strut 5 through a spherical joint 4, as shown on Fig. 3.7.

The strut is the element where is machined the seat used to install the outer ring
of the wheel roll bearing. The inner ring is ﬁt to a hub, which is ﬂanged to the brake
disc and wheel. On driving axles the hub is ﬁxed to the drive shaft through a spline,
allowing the torque transmission from the differential to the wheel. On the strut two
ﬂanges are used to ﬁx the brake caliper.

At the base of the body of the shock absorbers 6 (Fig. 3.8) two brackets 7 are
welded, which are bolted to the strut in a rigid way. The spring rests on two seats, a
lower one 8 ﬁxed to the shock absorber and an upper one ﬁxed to a thrust bearing 10;
the upper ring of this bearing rests on an elastic mount, ﬁxed to the body, in wheel
case.

The elastic mount is therefore the interface between the shock absorber piston
and the spring, from one side, and the body, from the other side. The stop spring 13
is ﬁt to the shock absorber piston and acts when the shock absorber tube is touching

3.2 Independent Suspensions

143

Fig. 3.7 The lower arm 2 is connected to the subframe 1 in two different points, through elastic
bushings 3; a spherical joint 4 links the arm to the strut 5

its tip; this stop spring avoids direct metal to metal contacts in connection with large
strokes and makes the elastic characteristic of springing more progressive.

The rack and pinion steering box 14 (Fig. 3.9), is bolted to the subframe and shows

two steering tie rods 15, articulated to the rack through two spherical joints 16.

The anti roll bar 17 is ﬁxed on the subframe, but is left free to rotate; it is connected

to the shock absorber with two rods 18 (Fig. 3.10).

McPherson suspensions are using the shock absorber piston to guide the wheel

along the suspension stroke.

This detail is causing that external forces applied to the wheel in the contact point
with the ground determine, in function of the suspension geometry a lateral force FL
and a momentum M applied to the piston itself.

Reactions R A and RB and the piston rod ﬂexion have a major inﬂuence on shock

absorber characteristics.

As it will be explained, the shock absorber should exert a force ideally proportional
to the suspension extension and compression speed; forces and ﬂexion are, instead,
causing a friction almost constant and independent of speed. This friction together
with other kinds of friction is causing suspension hysteresis, that could be interpreted
as the minimum force, we must apply to the suspension to have it moving.

144

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.8 At the base of the shock absorber 6 two welded brackets 7 are used to ﬁx the strut in a
rigid way; the spring 8 is contained between two seats, one connected to the shock absorber, the
other to the thrust bearing 10; the upper ring of this bearing rests on the elastic element 11, ﬁxed to
the body

Hysteresis is not desired because is causing the suspension to block, when forces
applied are lower than a minimum value. This characteristic of the Mc Pherson
suspension must be interpreted as an inconvenient.3

With reference to Fig. 3.11, reactions R A, RB and deﬂections of the piston rod of

the shock absorber ϑ A and ϑB can be calculated using the following formulae.

It should be noted that the ﬁctitious reaction RT is the sum of the absolute values
of reactions between piston rod and its bushing (R A) and between piston and cylinder
(RB); this force multiplied by the friction coefﬁcient (considered to be the same in the
two couples) will show, neglecting the contribution of rod deformations, the friction
force that reacts to rod motion, that is the hysteresis.

We deﬁne:
E the elastic modulus of the piston rod;
I
We can write:

the ﬂexural moment of inertia of the rod cross section.

3In reality, this inconvenient is not only present on Mc Pherson suspensions, but on all those
suspensions where shock absorbers are partially loaded by wheel forces.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

145

Fig. 3.9 Rack and pinion steering box mounted on the subframe of a front Mc Pherson suspension

Fig. 3.10 The anti roll bar 17 is ﬁxed on the subframe, but is left free to rotate; it is connected to
the shock absorber with two rods 18

R A = 1
b [FL (a + b) − M] ,
(FL a − M) ,
RB = 1
b
RT = |R A| + |RB| ,

(3.1)

146

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.11 Geometric scheme useful to calculate forces on sliding bushings of a shock absorber of
a Mc Pherson suspension

ϑ A = b
3E I
ϑB = b
6E I

(FL a − M) ,
(FL a − M) .

(3.2)

Let us consider now the possibility of introducing an offset e between the rod and
the spring symmetry axis. This offset will imply the application of a moment M,

3.2 Independent Suspensions

147

Fig. 3.12 Scheme of McPherson suspension with integral (left) and double (right) thrust bearing

exerted on the rod by the spring, as shown on the ﬁgure, that will reduce reactions
acting on bushings. If:

we obtain the minimum value for RT , while, in these conditions:

M = FL a ,

R A = RT = FL ,
RB = 0 ,

ϑ A = ϑB = 0 .

(3.3)

(3.4)

(3.5)

Magnitudes M and FL change according to thrust bearing architecture and spring

inclination axis.

148

3 Suspensions

With reference to Fig. 3.12, we identify two different families of Mc Pherson
suspensions: those with integral thrust bearing (left) and those with double thrust
bearing (right).

In the integral solution, where both spring and shock absorbers loads are exerted
on the body through a single rubber element, reactions on the rod are represented by
the formulae, we have explained.

In the double solution, spring load and shock absorber load are transferred to
the body through two different rubber elements and the force acting on the rod is
represented by FL only.

In both cases is possible to reduce the hysteresis force, applying a suitable offset

to the spring.

The zero condition for hysteresis is bound to the value we have chosen for the
vertical load; changing this condition or applying other loads, as for example a
cornering force, will cause a zero condition to change. Spring offset can be designed
for a single load condition only, which is judged to be statistically important.

Advantages and Disadvantages

The comparison of advantages and disadvantages refers to front axle suspensions.

Advantages

• Design simplicity and reduced cost.
• Thanks to the relevant distance of body joints, forces exerted to the body are low,

in comparison, for instance with a low double wishbone suspension.

• Higher suspension stroke, as in other suspensions, for instance a high double

wishbone one, because on limitation on upper arm length.

• Contained transversal dimension, due to the absence of the upper arm; this fact is

quite beneﬁcial for transversal engine installation.

• Possibility of designing a good longitudinal ﬂexibility, without affecting the caster

angle too much.

• Good freedom in designing elasto-kinematic properties; camber recovery only is

limited by viable positions for upper pivot and lower arm ﬁxed joint.

• The ratio between suspension and shock absorber stroke is near to one. Shock
absorbers are therefore working well with limited loads, low oil heating and valves
wear.

Disadvantages

• Lower performance as far as camber recovery is concerned. See, for instance,
the comparison between camber angle variation for a Mc Pherson and a double
wishbone suspension, shown on Fig. 3.13.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

149

Fig. 3.13 Comparison between camber angle variation, as function of suspension stroke in a
Mc Pherson and a double wishbone suspension; the difference motivates a better camber recovery
in the double wishbone suspension

• Suspension characteristic geometry is causing a position for the upper pivot in-
terface with the body, usually called dome, which usually far away of stiffest
structures of the body, the side beams, as shown on Fig. 3.14. This is causing
signiﬁcant problems with suppression of vibrations and noise, coming from the
road.

• Shock absorber piston rod deformation can increase friction and hysteresis.
• Notable height for the upper pivot, being spring and shock absorber set over the
wheel; this fact could be a penalty for aerodynamic shape and for a sporty style
for the body.

Let us examine now some of the most relevant components of Mc Pherson suspen-
sions, which can feature many different alternative versions.

Design Details

Lower Arm

Lower swinging arms connect the moving parts as strut and wheel to the body directly
or to the subframe.

150

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.14 The position of the dome imposed by Mc Pherson suspensions is usually far away of
stiffest body structures, which are lower, close to side beams (FCA)

Lower arms have a particular shape able to allow both suspension and steering
motions to the wheel, as shown on Fig. 3.15 and are connected to the subframe
through elastic bushings and with spherical joints to the strut.

The choice of the shape of the lower arm is part of the concept design of the front

suspension and must be compatible with the handling and comfort targets.

Once the suspension scheme has been decided, using a CAE tool, the envelope
of the external shape of the tire can be designed, taking into account steering motion
and suspension stroke, as shown on the right side of Fig. 3.15. The lower arm shape
must be obviously outside of this envelope and must take into account of assembly
and disassembly conditions (some times holes must be provided for screwdrivers and
wrenches passage) and of limitations imposed by other parts of the car as powertrain
or body.

The lower arm absorbs a relevant part of forces coming from the wheel dur-
ing braking or cornering maneuvers. Because this components is ﬁtted to the body
through articulations, reaction forces must be contained in the plane through their
centers.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

151

Fig. 3.15 Lower arm must allow both stroke and steering motions of the wheel, as shown by the
envelope shape on the right; articulations are made by spheric joints or elastic bushings according
to their function

The lower arm oscillates around the axis through the two bushing centers (points
E and F of Fig. 3.15; remember the position of this axis with reference to the body).
From a kinematic point of view the A point trajectory is not affected by the position
of points E and F along their axis.

The axial position of bushing is, instead, relevant for the magnitude of the reaction
forces in points E and F. Bushings are not rigid spherical joints but are made with
elastomeric material and are deformed according to the amount of the force they
receive.

The shape of the bushing is governing its ﬂexibility: as we have already said sus-
pension displacement under the applied loads are relevant for handling and comfort
behavior of the vehicle.

This kind of considerations have led car manufacturers to design lower arms in a

banana like shape (Fig. 3.16).

Because of this shape (Fig. 3.17, at left) the most important part of the lateral force
applied to the A point is loading bushing E. This last must be designed very stiff as
to limit camber variation (opposite to recovery of camber) under the effect of such
forces.

For the same reason the moment of longitudinal forces, around point E, is loading

transversely the bushing F.

Bushing F must show a high level of ﬂexibility. The lower arm can therefore
rotate around the rigid bushing E. As a consequence, when the wheel is affording an
obstacle it can have a compliant back displacement, with beneﬁcial effect on comfort.

152

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.16 The banana like shape of the lower arm of the Mc Pherson suspension is the result of a
compromise between handling and comfort

But point A determines also the king-pin axis position, together with the upper
pivot. To limit the toe angle variation coming from the wheel longitudinal motion,
steering arms 7 should be positioned in a suitable way, to shape a parallelogram like
on Fig. 3.17, at right.

On some cars lower arms are shaped like a isosceles triangle, where point A is the
vertex; in this solution bushings E and F are almost equal as far as dimensions and
stiffness are concerned. Also in this case the target is to obtain a good longitudinal
ﬂexibility, without affecting toe angle variations negatively. This scheme must be
adopted with a different shape of subframe, that is positioned in a more advanced
position as for banana lower arms.

Lower arms can be made by cast iron, by hot stamped steel or by cold stamped
steel sheets; if weight reduction is a priority also stamped aluminum can be applied.
On Fig. 3.18 two examples are shown: one on cast iron and one on stamped
steel. The iron technology allows to reach minimum cost, but these components
feature reduced mechanical characteristics as far the rupture percentage elongation
is concerned.

Lower arms made by stamped steel sheet are built welding together two semi
shells. In this case the spherical joint housing has to be riveted, while bushings hous-

3.2 Independent Suspensions

153

Fig. 3.17 Most part of lateral force through A is applied to point E; this bushing is designed as very
stiff, to limit camber variation, because of the external load. Bushing F is designed to be ﬂexible to
allow the arm to have a compliant displacement when wheels are running on obstacles

Fig. 3.18 Examples of lower arms made by cast iron or stamped steel sheet, in two shells to be
welded together

ings show local reinforcements. This solution is characterized by reduced weight,
better rupture elongation, but slightly increased cost.

Figure 3.15 shows an example of hot stamped aluminum arms; the shape of a hot
stamp steel arm wouldn’t show a very different shape, but for the notable reduction in
cross section. With this technology very good mechanical properties can be obtained

154

3 Suspensions

at a higher cost; they allow notable weight reduction, the aluminum solution in
particular.

All this solutions must be machined to prepare the mounting interfaces with

spherical joint and bushings with the necessary dimension tolerance.

The importance attributed to the percentage rupture elongation comes from con-
sidering accident shocks that the suspension might afford. Let us consider for example
the case of an accidental side shock of the wheel against a side walk, for an excessive
speed in a curve.

In this case the lower arm has the function of a sacriﬁcial element, deﬁned by its

rupture properties, which include load, deformation and absorbed energy.

It should be noticed that in some cases the anti roll bar is directly linked to the

lower arm; in this case a suitable interface on the arm must be provided.

During asymmetric suspension stroke, the lower arm is loaded also by bending

moments, coming from anti roll bar, that intrust also bushing and spherical joint.

Elastic Bushings

Elastic bushings with their deformation allow motion of arm with reference to the
car body or subframe.

They are made by an outside body 3 and inside body 1, respectively ﬁxed with
the suspension arm and the body or the subframe; between these two bodies a layer
of rubber 2 is vulcanized.

Figure 3.19 shows two different installation alternatives. On the left side solution
A is shown, where the outside body is ﬂanged on the subframe and the inside body
is press ﬁtted on the arm. On the right side solution B feature the outside body press
ﬁtted into the arm and the inside body ﬂanged to a fork into the subframe.

Rubber thickness and mix composition are designed to be able to differentiate
stiffness according to the load direction. Vulcanized rubbers used in these applica-
tions must have a very high fatigue limit.

We have seen in the previous paragraph that bushings must be designed to grant
the suspension a certain elasto-kinematic behavior, as far as toe angle and wheelbase
(longitudinal displacement) variations are concerned.

Bushings with high stiffness will be ﬁnalized to a good road holding or handling
behavior. In this case the layer of rubber between the two steel bodies will have a few
millimeters thickness and the bushing outside diameter will be in the range between
35–45 mm.

The need for a high ﬂexibility in bushings ﬁnalized to comfort performance re-
quires a higher rubber thickness; therefore the outside diameter of the bushing could
reach the value of about 60 mm.

Figure 3.20 shows, as an example, the elastic characteristics of the more ﬂexible
bushing of a Mc Pherson suspension. As diagrams can show, the stiffness in the x
direction and in the y direction are very different; to this purpose the rubber body is
not made like a solid ring, but presents a connection, between the inside and outside

3.2 Independent Suspensions

155

Fig. 3.19 Elastic bushings are made by an outside body 3 and inside body 1, respectively ﬁxed
with the suspension arm and the body or the subframe; between these two bodies a layer of rubber
2 is vulcanized. Note the two different installation solutions

bodies, made like a beam, bent in the y direction and compressed in the x direction;
two stop springs made of rubber limit the bending deformation.

In a bushing have to be deﬁned the following values of stiffness:

• radial stiffness along the two x and y directions of the body reference system,
when the bushing internal diameter axis is, as in this case, directed to the z axis;

• axial stiffness, along the z axis;
• conical stiffness, measured by imposing to the bushing axis assigned angular de-

viations, with reference to the zero load condition;

• torsional stiffness, measured by imposing relative angular rotation of the steel

body around their axis.

This values of radial stiffness must be recorded on drawings, in addition to geo-
metric and material informations, to allow production quality control; for this purpose
is necessary to show these elastic characteristics with an allowed tolerance band.

Conical and torsional stiffness control is not as critic as the previous one, because
their impact on elasto-kinematics is limited; these values must be small, in order to
allow a free arm motion. It is, instead, important to verify that the arm motion, caused
by the suspension stroke, are not affecting fatigue life or are not changing the elastic
behavior of bushings at high deformation angles.

156

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.20 The stiffness of the more ﬂexible bushing are very different in the x and y directions;
for this purpose the internal part of rubber is designed as a beam, being bent in one direction and
compressed in the other, in order to have an asymmetric stiffness

Figure 3.21 shows, instead, the elastic characteristics of a stiff bushing, ﬁnalized

to road holding and handling performance.

Many cars feature also hydraulic type bushings. These can add to the described
elastic characteristics also some damping characteristic, by squeezing some quantity
of oil through internal oriﬁces.

This damping properties can have a beneﬁcial effect in the ﬁeld of comfort as far

as harshness is concerned.

Spherical Joints

The articulation of suspension strut with lower arm is made by a spherical joint also
called steering knuckle. Other spherical joints are used and the end of the steering
bars, connecting steering rods with steering rack.

This kind of joint is very stiff in every direction but the radial one and allows very

high rotations of the connected elements.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

157

Fig. 3.21 These diagrams show the elastic characteristics of a stiff bushing, ﬁnalized to road holding
behavior

Fig. 3.22 The spherical head of the joint has a ﬁxing pin. In the solution A a screw is used to press
a cut hole in the strut around a cylindrical pin; in the solution B the pin is tapered and pressed into
the strut hole by a traction nut

Figure 3.22 shows the spherical joint with its spherical head and a ﬁxing pin. In
the solution A a screw is used to press a cut hole in the strut around a cylindrical pin;
in the solution B the pin is tapered and pressed into the strut hole by a traction nut.
The choice between the two alternative solutions has no precise rules, but is more

due to tradition or existing tools for machining and assembling.

158

3 Suspensions

In both cases the material of the spherical cavity sliding surface is ﬁxed into the
arm directly; it is ﬁxed inside the arm by rolling-in. A layer of pre-lubricated Teﬂon
is set between the spherical head and its mounting cavity to lower the friction during
rotation.

It is a good practice to prescribe on the drawings, in addition to geometric dimen-
sions and materials, the maximum working angles to be allowed and the minimum
radial stiffness which is assumed to be necessary.

Strut

The strut is connected with the majority of suspension components and transfers
to them any force coming from the wheel. Its tasks condition its geometry and the
severity of the applied loads characterize the strut by its squat shape with very thick
cross sections.

We can identify the following functions of the strut (with reference to Fig. 3.9):

• to hold the wheel bearing in both radial and axial directions;
• to connect with the suspension arm through the spherical joint;
• to offer the ﬁxing ﬂange for brake calipers;
• to ﬁx the brake cover;
• to ﬁx the lower end of the spring and shock absorber unit;
• to connect with the steering arm with a spherical joint.

If the car is supplied by an ABS system or by a vehicle dynamics control system,

the strut is also use for ﬁxing the wheel speed sensor.

Materials used for this components include hot stamped steel and cast iron; some

times also hot stamped aluminum is used on luxury cars.

Hub and Bearing

To allow hub rotation and to transfer the wheel forces to the strut, the hub is mounted
with a double range ball bearing or a double tapered roller bearing; tapered roller
bearings are applied with opposed conicity.

Figure 3.23 shows the hub assembly for a front wheel driven vehicle with ball or
tapered roller bearings. This bearing conﬁguration, speciﬁc to cars, is characterized
by bearings with a single outside ring and double inside rings.

This is commonly called O conﬁguration; the pre-load of the two bearings is
determined by the play allowed between the two inside rings, that is brought to zero
after mounting.

The solution used on most small and medium size cars provides a double range
ball bearing, as we have seen until now. The hub pre load is obtained by tightening the
nut of the hub at a certain torque. This kind of bearing is also called ﬁrst generation.
Second generation bearings (Fig. 3.24) provide still two inside rings, but the out-
side ring is directly integrated into a ﬂange to be screwed to the strut. This solution

3.2 Independent Suspensions

159

Fig. 3.23 Hub assembly of the front wheel for a front wheel driven vehicle

Fig. 3.24 Wheel bearings of ﬁrst, second and third generation

simpliﬁes strut machining operation to cut the seat for the bearing and reduces the
assembly cost; on the contrary these bearing have a higher cost.

Third generation bearings feature a single inside ring, including the wheel hub, in
addition to the mounting ﬂange on the outside ring; this solution has the advantage
of maximum reduction in space and weight and of having a sealed bearing; on the
contrary the cost of the bearing is increased very much.

160

3 Suspensions

Coil Spring and Stop Spring

Coil spring alone would give the wheel an elastic characteristic almost linear, con-
sidering that the relationship between wheel stroke and spring stroke is almost linear.
As it will be explained in the chapter dedicated to comfort, in the second volume, a
linear characteristic should be avoided, because spring deformation should decrease
in proportion to the load increase. This target is reached by applying additional
springs made of rubber, which in a limiting way are called stop springs, because
their initial purpose was to limit the suspension stroke to a certain value.

The progressive spring characteristic, added by the stop spring, can keep the ﬁrst
natural frequency of the sprung mass at a constant value, even if the vehicle payload
is changing, while limiting the compression stroke too; another stop spring is limiting
the extension stroke and affecting the spring ratio too.

When the shock absorber is used for the coil spring installation, as in Mc Pherson
suspensions, the stop spring too must be ﬁtted into the shock absorber assembly.
Figure 3.25 shows the example of a rear Mc Pherson suspension.

In case of front suspension differences will be minimal but for the lower mount.
The compression stroke stop spring is coaxial with the shock absorber piston rod in
the outside of the hydraulic cylinder; the extension stroke stop spring is much smaller
and is again coaxial with the piston rod, but inside the hydraulic cylinder.

On the same ﬁgure the detail drawing of the stop spring is shown; the material
of this spring is usually polyurethane. On the middle of the same ﬁgure the elastic
characteristic is shown; the shape is strongly non linear and is obtained by shaping
the tip of the spring like a cone. Also ring grooves contribute to this characteristic.
In suspensions where coil springs and shock absorbers are not unitized, stop

springs can be separated; design criteria are in any case the same.

Extension stroke stop spring is usually always inside the shock absorber.
The main spring is usually of coil type; spring retainers are made by stamped
steel sheet and are shaped as to offer a wide supporting surface to the coil; free
coils can have constant pitch or variable pitch. In this case coils coming in touch
progressively increase the total coil stiffness. The coil spring alone can feature the
desired progressive elastic characteristic.

Anti Roll Bar

The roll angle resulting in a curve, because of suspension elastic characteristic given
by normal springs, could be too much. In this case an additional anti roll bar is used.
This is an additional spring that increases suspension rigidity only by antisym-
metric strokes, as in a curve, where one suspension is compressed and the other is
extended. If both suspensions are moved for the same stroke, in the same direction,
this additional sprig has no effect.

On our example, the anti roll bar (Fig. 3.26) is made by a bent tube connected to
the subframe in two points. The tube ends are ﬂattened and drilled, to be connected
to a pendulum bar, linked to the shock absorber at the other end.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

161

Fig. 3.25 Stop spring 4 interesting compression stroke is coaxial with the shock absorber piston
rod, outside of the hydraulic cylinder; the extension stroke stop spring 2 is much smaller and is
inside the hydraulic cylinder

During body roll the wheel outside the curve is moving to compression, that inside
is moving to extension. The body motion torques the linear part of the bar which tends
to limit the difference in strokes, limiting in this way the angle of roll (Fig. 3.27).

The pendulum bar limits the force exchange with the suspension to the anti roll
torque and avoids bar stressing during symmetric strokes; this happens if the bar is
directly ﬂanged to the suspension arms, as on some small car.

In this last case, in fact, as showed by Fig. 3.28, the interface between bar and arm
is asked to follow the circular trajectory of the arm and this fact introduces into the
roll bar an additional bending stress; this arrangement has the further disadvantage

162

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.26 Anti roll bar mounted on the suspension subframe

of having an unfavorable ratio between bar torsion angle and suspension stroke, as
compared with the pendulum bar application, therefore reducing bar effect.

The pendulum bar can also be connected to the suspension arm, usually with a
shorter length; in this case arm swinging should not introduce additional deformation
to the anti roll bar but the pure torsion, in order not to affect comfort by symmetric
strokes.

Figure 3.28 shows on section A-A also the elastic bushing mounts of the anti roll

bar, to the sub frame; this mounts are common to any kind of bar.

Shock Absorber

Shock absorbers used presently on vehicles are only hydraulic; the damping force is
obtained by squeezing with a piston a certain amount of oil through small oriﬁces
controlled by valves. The ﬂow of the oil through the oriﬁce occurs, at a given area of
the ﬂow cross section, with a certain pressure drop, almost proportional to ﬂow rate.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

163

Fig. 3.27 Anti roll bar connected to the shock absorber through a pendulum bar

Fig. 3.28 Anti roll bar directly ﬁxed to the suspension arm

Shock absorber can be classiﬁed as structural type or conventional non structural
type, according to their capability of supporting loads perpendicular to the piston
rod.

The ﬁrst type is used on Mc Pherson suspensions.

164

3 Suspensions

The shock absorber is ﬁt to the suspension strut and is carrying on it part of the
loads coming from the contact point of the tire; these loads generate on the piston
rod shear forces and bending moments as we have seen on Fig. 3.11. They have a
consequence on piston bar diameter and sliding bushings.

The second case can be found on almost all remaining types of suspension, where

shock absorbers receive forces only along its piston rod.

Shock absorbers, ﬁnally, can be unitized with the coil spring or can be separated;
there are Mc Pherson suspension where the two elements are separated, as there are
other type of suspension where they are unitized, with beneﬁt for installation space
and assembling easiness.

On conventional shock absorbers the only load is coming from the internal pres-

sure that loads, by deﬁnition, the piston rod.

It should be noticed, however, that also in this case transversal forces could be
applied, causing hysteresis increase and additional stress to the piston bar; this situ-
ation may occur when, because of the stroke of the suspension, the shock absorber
is changing its inclination. In this case, the torsional or conical stiffness of elastic
bushings, connecting the shock absorber to the suspension and the car body can in-
troduce transversal forces; this can also happen on sliding bushings, because of their
internal friction.

Figure 3.29 shows on the left a scheme, useful to understand the operation of
a hydraulic shock absorber. The upper part of the shock absorber is ﬁxed to the
sprung mass, while the lower one to the unsprung mass; if the shock absorber has no
structural function the joints should be equivalent to a spherical one.

During its stroke the suspension is moving the piston rod 1 and the piston 2, inside
the cylinder 3. The volumes outlined with broken lines A, B and C are ﬁlled with oil;
the piston motion, because of the incompressibility of the oil, is squeezing a certain
ﬂow rate from chamber A, to chamber B, through the valves V1 and V2.

From this ﬂow a damping force is generated; it should be noted that valves V1 and
V2 are outlined as check valves; in this way is possible to obtain different damping
coefﬁcients during compression stroke (valve V1) and extension stroke (valve V2).
The oil pressure generated by friction losses through the valves must be tightened
by the seal 4, to avoid oil spillage; this seal is causing a certain friction and suspension
hysteresis.

To improve seal effectiveness an additional labyrinth 5 is provided, reducing the
pressure acting on the seal to a value close to the ambient pressure of a chamber
connected to the holes 6.

The penetration and the extraction of the piston rod must be accompanied by a

displacement of an oil volume equal to what was occupied or freed by the rod.

In our scheme, volume C, with free surface, contained in the cylinder 7 provides to
this purpose, through the check valves V3 and V4, communicating with the volumes
A and B. The protection tube 9, avoids water or dust contamination on the rod; this
protection can be improved with a rubber bellow, not shown on this ﬁgure.

This type of shock absorber is also called double tube because of the double
outside cylinder. Two chambers are therefore available (inner and outer) containing

3.2 Independent Suspensions

165

Fig. 3.29 Hydraulic scheme for understanding the operation of a double tube (left) and mono tube
(right) shock absorber

oil. The piston with the valves assembly enter the inner chamber, a second valves
assembly separates the inner from the outer chamber.

In the lower part of the outer chamber, a quantity of pressurized gas compensate
for the oil volume variations because of the piston motion. The inside pressure of the
compressed gas avoids cavitation near the valves, where pressure drops are present.
Valves assemblies have different functions, according to the direction of ﬂow.
During suspension extension the piston valves control the damping force, while
lower valves allow the compensation ﬂow between inner and outer chambers. During
suspension compression the lower valves have the damping function, while those on
the piston allow an almost free ﬂow.

Some of the oriﬁces are closed by pre loaded valves which open when pressure
drop goes over a certain limit. In this way the damping force can be limited for high
compression or extension speeds.

166

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.30 Diagram force-stroke of a shock absorber and conversion to a force-speed diagram

A second kind of shock absorber is called mono tube, with reference to the scheme
on the right of the same ﬁgure. This kind of shock absorber is longer, but with a smaller
diameter as compared with the double tube one.

In this case only two oil chambers are available, A and B on the scheme. The valve

assembly on piston 2, with rod 1, controls the damping force in both directions.

Particularly the check valve V1 controls the compression force, while V2 the
extension force. A volume of pressurized gas D is separated from the oil through a
ﬂoating piston 10. This gas volume is compensating for oil volume variations due to
piston rod motion.

The advantage is a simpliﬁcation of the design, while the disadvantage is an
increase of pressure on the seal 4, with potential leakages and increased hysteresis.
The pressure in chamber D applies to the suspension a non negligible force, in parallel
to coil springs.

The force-speed characteristic of a vehicle shock absorber can look like Fig. 3.30
at right; on the same ﬁgure, on the right, also a force-stroke diagram is shown, for two
different speeds. This last diagrams refers to a simple test machine normally used
to evaluate shock absorber; this machine moves the shock absorber through a crank,
rotating at constant speed, from one side and holds it on the other side, through a
load cell.

In this machine the stroke is constant (usually 100 mm) and the speed can be set at
different values; the shock absorber extension and compression speeds are, therefore,
not constant. The cycle shown in the diagram represents the extension force in its
upper side and the compression force in the lower one.

The diagram on the right of the ﬁgure is derived by the ﬁrst, calculating for each
point of the ﬁrst the real compression or extension speed. The line is interpolated
in the clouds of points that are obtained in this way. The extension of this cloud in
the force direction is determined by the shock absorbed friction, mainly due to seals.
This machine doesn’t show correctly the effect of side forces on the rod.

The asymmetry of the diagram can be controlled by adjusting the valves.
The internal gas is giving to the shock absorber a certain pre load, obtained by
multiplication of the internal pressure by the rod cross area; the polytropic low of
gas justiﬁes also a variation of this force with the stroke

The following ﬁgures regard other details of shock absorbers.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

167

Fig. 3.31 Seals on a double tube (left) and a mono tube (right) shock absorbers

Figure 3.31 shows on the left the detail of the seal on a double tube shock absorber.
The seal is made by two parts: the body 1, which guides the rod 2, and the double
lip seal 3. The body 1 shapes a labyrinth between the pressure and the compensation
chambers.

The oil spilling from the labyrinth is conveyed to the bowl on the body 1 and
doesn’t leak to the outside because of the elastic double lip ring; this seal is not very
stressed and the lib elasticity can be reduced to have a consequently reduced friction
force.

The oil reservoir in the bowl can take few days do empty into the lower chamber,
because of the unavoidable spills of valves V3 and V4; consequently the danger of
having air bubbles in the pressure chamber is reduced. Air bubbles can introduce
clicking during the ﬁrst suspension strokes after a long stop.

The same ﬁgure on the right shows the seal of a mono tube shock absorber.
The seal is in this case single and is made by a ring of particular shape made
by elastomers, which surrounds the rod tightly; seal is effective but hysteresis is
increased signiﬁcantly.

Figure 3.32 shows two different valves assemblies: one on the bottom (left) and
one on the piston (right) for a double tube shock absorber; in a mono tube one
differences are not substantial.

The valve on the bottom is working during the compression stroke. The check
valve features a bevel disc spring, on the lower side, which opens the holes 2, cut
on the bottom; spring rigidity and hole diameters control the damping coefﬁcient at
low and high speed respectively.

The valve 3, on the upper part of the bottom has a very ﬂexible spring and hole
4 very large. The necessary pressure for oil return must be, in fact, low; this valve
is working during extension stroke, to return to the A chamber the oil necessary to
replace the rod volume.

168

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.32 Valves assemblies of a double tube shock absorber

The valve on the piston (at right) is controlled, during the extension stroke by the
coil spring 5, which allows the lift of the disc 6, opening holes 7 cut on the piston;
also in this case the spring is controlling low speed force, while the high speed value
is controlled by holes diameter.

The upper valve, closed by spring 8 is working during oil transfer only, through

holes 9, to compensate for the oil moved by the rod.

Springs and valves bodies are easily interchangeable, to build shock absorbers
for different applications on the same production line; during ﬁnal stages of a new
car development the choice of dimensions of valves assemblies is usually made
empirically, according to a trial and error process, starting from ﬁrst approximation
values, obtained by mathematical models.

The characteristic curve of the damping force versus speed can be classiﬁed, with

reference to its shape, as:

• constant, when the derivative of force, with respect to extension or compression
speed is almost constant but, usually, with different values in compression and
extension;

• progressive, when the derivative is increasing with speed;
• degressive, in the opposite case, when the derivative is decreasing with speed.

The derivative of the force with respect to speed is also called damping coefﬁcient;
a constant damping coefﬁcient appear ideal according to the Boursier De Carbon
theory, we will explain in the second volume; a progressive characteristic could be
suitable to improve handling quality of a sport car, with some sacriﬁce on comfort;
a degressive characteristic can, instead, improve comfort on bumpy roads, where
suspension stroke speed can be high.

The rubber bushing between shock absorber and car body is used to ﬁlter dynamic
forces over 30–40 Hz of frequency, where shock absorbers are loosing their capacity

3.2 Independent Suspensions

169

Fig. 3.33 Kinds of body and suspension mounts for a non structural shock absorber; the conical
stiffness of these mounts can affect shock absorber friction

signiﬁcantly; these vibrations cause noise which is diffusing to the car interior through
the body structure.

On Mc Pherson suspensions, the design of this bushing integrated within the upper

pivot can be made in two ways: simple or double.

In the simple conﬁguration the shock absorber is loading the body together with
the coil spring and the stop spring; being the load signiﬁcant rubber must be well
sized and is usually stiff.

With the double conﬁguration, a dedicated rubber bushing is carrying the shock
absorber load only. Static load is negligible, except for the gas pressure effect, if any.
In this case the rubber can be lighter, with improvements in ﬂexibility and a better
ﬁltering capacity.

170

3 Suspensions

For non structural shock absorbers the body mount is made by a simple cylindrical
rubber bushing (detail a of Fig. 3.33); the symmetry axis of bushings must be oriented
to make easier the inclination changes due to suspension stroke.

If the value of this change of inclination is contained (<10◦), the inside and outside
cylindrical surfaces of the rubber bushings are press ﬁtted between the hole and the
pin, with the advantage of avoiding lubrication; in this case the shear of the bushing
is stressing the piston and the piston rod of the shock absorber.

If the angle is greater, it is a better practice to use a self lubricating additional

sliding bushing to reduce hysteresis.

If other rotation angles are present it is better to shape the rubber bushing as in

For very limited rotation angles (<5◦), the simple mount shown on detail d can

detail c.

be adopted.

3.2.2 Mc Pherson Suspensions for Rear Axle

As we have already said Mc Pherson suspensions can be applied also to rear axles.

In general, a rear axle suspension must perform the following functions:

• to be compatible with the installation of many bulky components, such as fuel

tank, spare wheel, silencer and exhaust pipe;

• for rear wheel drive, must provide the space for differential and ﬁnal drive and

transmission shafts;

• must allow to the body a space for the cargo compartment as big as possible;
• must allow a suspension stroke longer as for the front axle, because the rear axle

load variations are larger.

Fortunately the wheel positions envelope is smaller because steering angles are

limited to the much smaller toe angles variations.

The Mc Pherson conﬁguration allows a better elasto-kinematic performance, as
compared with the other typical solution for rear trains we will see later on, with
some sacriﬁce on cargo compartment width and with component cost.

Figure 3.34 shows the rear suspension of a medium size passenger car.
The kinematic scheme of this suspension can be derived from that of the front
axle suspension by changing the steering link with a bar 1 connected between the
strut 2 and the subframe 3. The cross bar 4 is for cornering forces, while the bar
5 is for longitudinal forces; together they work as the lower arm of the front axle
suspension.

Also in this case the application of a subframe doesn’t affect, in ﬁrst approximation

the elasto-kinematics of the suspension.

The spring-shock absorber unit 6 is articulated to the body to a dome in the wheel
case. The anti roll bar 7 is supported by the subframe and is linked to the shock
absorber with a pendulum rod 8.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

171

Fig. 3.34 Rear Mc Pherson suspension for a medium size car with front wheel drive. Can be derived
from the same type of suspension for the front axle, by imagining to change the steering rod with
the lever 4 (FCA)

The appearance is quite different from that of the front wheel suspension even if

the kinematic scheme is similar and the number of links is the same.

The three links 1, 4 and 5 lie on the same plane; links 4 and 5 have the same
function of an arm with virtual center; in the same way link 1 is like a steering bar.
Either because of the mutual position with the wheel and for the higher stiffness

of their bushings, the bar 4 will absorb a high percentage of cornering forces.

Because of its orientation, the bar 5 will absorb a high percentage of the braking
forces and other longitudinal loads; its bushing connecting with the body could be
conveniently ﬂexible for a better ﬁltration of the longitudinal shocks, originated by
obstacles, without affecting toe angles, because the steering mechanism is again an
articulated parallelogram.

Finally, the ﬂexibility of the bushing of the articulation with the body of bar 1
can be ﬁnalized to correct the understeering behavior of the car, under the action of
cornering forces. In conclusion, each of the elastic bushings can be designed for a
single performance, without negative consequences on the remaining ones.

There also examples of rear Mc Pherson suspensions that are more similar to the
front axle type; in this case, the strut rotation, causing the wheel steering is avoided
with a steering bar ﬁxed, in the inner end, to the body, called usually false steering
bar; the articulation position of the ﬁxed end can be designed to obtained the desired
toe angle variation.

172

3 Suspensions

Advantages and disadvantages of rear axle Mc Pherson suspension can be sum-

marized in the following list.

Advantages

• Good camber recovery with suspension stroke.
• Potential for proper toe angle variation by cornering forces.
• Potential for proper longitudinal ﬂexibility of the wheel.
• Reduced unsprung mass.
• Suitable for driving axles.

Disadvantages

• Forces acting on the body through the dome are applied to a ﬂexible point.
• The coil spring-shock absorber unit is reducing the cargo compartment width.
• Structural shock absorber with potential hysteresis problems.
• Medium complexity and cost.

For its characteristic is used on medium size high segment cars or on sport cars.

3.2.3 Double Wishbone Suspension

Double wishbone suspensions are applied to luxury sedans and sport cars, because
they allow a design of the elasto-kinematic parameters that is very suitable for an
optimum compromise between handling and comfort performance.

Since the upper arm is in general shorter as the lower one, to allow a given camber
recovery, they are also called short and long arm suspensions, with the acronym of
SLA suspensions.

Description

Figure 3.35 shows two different kinds of double wishbone suspension; the ﬁrst one,
at the left, is easily adaptable to front wheel driven cars with transversal powertrain
but, as the second at the right, can also be applied to longitudinal powertrains.

If we compare these suspensions with the Mc Pherson ones, we can notice the
upper arm, which carries on the function of the shock absorber sliding bearing. The
shock absorber has no structural functions, because static and dynamic forces don’t
load it, but the damping force.

Hysteresis and the consequent penalty on comfort is therefore limited.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

173

Fig. 3.35 Front wheels double wishbone suspensions, of the high type, on the left and of the low
type, on the right; only the high double wishbone suspension can be easily applied to transversal
powertrains

According to the upper arm position with respect to the wheel, suspensions of

this type are classiﬁed as high (on the left) or low (on the right).

The difference between these two solutions is imposed by the transversal bulk of
the engine or differential, in case of rear wheel driven cars, and by the track that must
be obtained for the car; as a matter of fact, the high double wishbone suspension is the
only one that can be adopted on front wheel driven car with transversal engine and is
applied to other cars also, because, sometime, it suits the structure of a unitized body
very well. Low double wishbone suspensions, featuring a very good elasto-kinematic
performance are very intrusive for the engine compartment and are practically applied
only to luxury touring cars.

Figure 3.36 shows a high double wishbone suspension in detail; we refer to what
we have said about the Mc Pherson suspension for many common details, as steering
bars, subframe, steering mechanism, anti roll bar and elastic bushings.

The upper arm 1 and the lower one 2 are linked to the body through elastic
bushings. The same arms are linked to the strut 3 through spherical joints 4 and 5
which allow the steering rotation of the strut. The line connecting the two spherical
joints is the king-pin axis.

The shock absorber and the coil spring are unitized as in the Mc Pherson suspen-
sion; this assembly is connected to the lower arm through the elastic bushings 7 and
is shaped like a fork, to clear the bulk of the half shaft.

The shock absorber piston rod is connected to the body through an elastic bearing;
in this case there is no pivot bearing, because the steering motion interests the wheel

174

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.36 The lower arm 1 and the upper one 2 are linked to the car body with rubber bushings.
These arms are also linked, at the other end, to the strut 3, through spherical joints 4 and 5. The fork
arm 8 connects the lower arm with the shock absorber (FCA)

strut only. A rest includes upper arm bushings and shock absorber bearing and is
bolted to the body.

On other applications this rest can have a different shape or can be avoided, being
bushings and bearings directly linked to the car body; this solution is justiﬁed by
standardization reasons of the body, that can be produced in the same plant together
with other bodies equipped with Mc Pherson suspension.

The lower arm is connected to a subframe. The torsion bar is connected to the
shock absorber through a pendulum rod. As in previous suspension, the subframe is
used for the steering rack installation too.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

175

Advantages and Disadvantages

Advantages

• Optimum design of elasto-kinematic parameters, particularly as far as camber

• Shock absorbers have no structural function; comfort can be improved, because

recovery is concerned.

of hysteresis reduction.

• Possibility of lowering the hood proﬁle, particularly for the low version.

Disadvantages

• Production costs are higher, because of the increased number of parts; an arm an

its bushings are added, as compared with the Mc Pherson suspension.

• Additional parts for upper suspension attachment.
• The space taken by the upper arm is notable. Transversal engines oblige to adopt
the high version: the reduced length of the upper arm of this version compromises
the possibility of reaching best elasto-kinematic performance.

• The increased number of joints and bearings can affect wheel angles because of
bushing rubber permanent deformations, with negative consequences on tires wear.
• The high value of braking loads can have a negative inﬂuence on longitudinal

ﬂexibility.

Design Details

On high wishbone solution the strut is characterized by a gooseneck shape, if observed
on an yz plane. This shape is conditioned by the tire bulk and by the upper joint
position, with reference to the engine bulk. This thin and highly stressed component
is made usually by hot stamped steel.

The example on Fig. 3.36 shows an arm inclination in the x y view; this is only

due, again, by the transversal position of the powertrain.

Figure 3.37 show alternative design of a low double wishbone suspension, as far

as spring and shock absorber position is concerned.

Solution A is characterized by having shock absorbers and spring applied to the

upper arm.

Solution B shows a spring made by a torsion bar and the shock absorber applied to
the lower arm: this solution allow a very limited hood height and introduces limited
values of stress in upper body parts. The same result, on height only, can be obtained
by applying a unitized coil shock absorber, if the space is sufﬁcient.

A last variant of this suspension can have, as springing element, a transversal left
spring, which can integrate the function of one of the arms too; the distance between
the bearing of the leaf spring can be designed as to obtain the desired symmetrical

176

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.37 Different alternative positions for the coil spring and of the shock absorber for a low
double wishbone suspension

and asymmetrical ﬂexibility without applying any anti roll bar. This solution is now
rarely applied because of the hysteresis penalties of the leaf spring.

The high wishbone solution can be easily adapted to pneumatic springs, particu-
larly suitable to high class sedans and SUVs. With this kind of suspension the vehicle
trim can be easily changed according to the kind of the road; for instance the clear-
ance between the body and the ground can be set high in off-road driving or low in
motorway driving, to reduce the drag coefﬁcient; in addition, the clearance can be
kept constant independently of the vehicle load.

An example of this application is shown in Fig. 3.38; we can note the very simple
shape of the spring assembly connecting to the lower arm, in this case goose neck
like, to clear the bulk of the half shaft.

The diameter of the pneumatic spring is contained to comply with the space
available in the upper arm; as can be seen in Fig. 3.39, the lower part of the pneumatic
chamber is tapered, to provide an increasing stiffness with the compression stroke.
We should remember that the stiffness k of an air spring is not constant as in
coil springs or torsion bars; the last two springs feature a constant stiffness with the
spring stroke s, while the ﬁrst features a stiffness that can change with the stroke.
The reasons are two:

• The shape of the piston area A p can change with the stroke as in the example in

Fig. 3.39;

• The pressure p is changing with the inside volume of the pneumatic chamber;
this change is dependent on the heat that is transferred from the chamber to the
environment. Fast changes can be supposed to be adiabatic, as in case of springing
motion, while slow changes can be supposed to be isothermal, as in case of imposed
trim adjustments.

The stiffness of a pneumatic spring at a given position in its stroke can be written

as the derivative of the spring force F with respect to the stroke.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

177

Fig. 3.38 Example of double wishbone front suspension with pneumatic springs suitable for a high
class SUV (FCA)

k = d F
ds

= d(A p p)
ds

= p

d A p
ds

+ A p

= p

dp
ds

d A p
ds

+ A2
p

p
V

n,

where V is the volume of the air chamber and n is the exponent of the volume in the gas
equation (n = 1 for isothermal transformations, n = 1 for adiabatic transformations).
The ﬁrst part of the last equation is depending from the piston shape only, while the
second part in increasing as the volume decreases because of the spring compression
stroke.

Designing a particular shape for the lower part of the pneumatic chamber can make
a pneumatic spring constant (stiffness constant with stroke), progressive (stiffness
increasing with stroke) or degressive (stiffness decreasing with stroke), as shown in
Fig. 3.40; changing inﬂation pressure is a tool for a further adjustment of the stiffness.
To contain the bulk of the spring assembly, pneumatic chambers are usually made
with a thin layer of elastomeric material, protected by a steel or aluminum capsule,
in car suspensions, while a kevlar reinforced elastomeric bellows without protection
is used in truck suspensions where there are no problems of space.

178

Fig. 3.39 The air spring
contains inside the shock
absorber and the stop spring
to comply with the space
available in the upper arm

3 Suspensions

3.2.4 Virtual Centres Suspensions

On suspensions we have examined up to this point, the strut is linked to two spherical
joints, which identify king-pin axis. In many cases king-pin axis can’t be set in a
position suitable to obtain a desired value (limited or negative) of the king-pin offset,
without setting the wheel with an undesired camber angle.

Some manufactures solve this problem, by adopting, particularly on high class
cars, single or double virtual center links for the suspension strut; in this case one
or two arms are substituted by a double number of linkages, each of them with its
spherical joint. The king-pin axis is no more identiﬁed by the physical position of a
joint, but by a virtual point given by the intersection of the two lines connecting the
articulation points of a linkage.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

179

Fig. 3.40 Schemes of three types of pneumatic springs; from left: constant stiffness, progressive
stiffness, degressive stiffness

This scheme can be applied to both arms or for the lower arm only, crucial to
obtain a negative king-pin offset. In this second case also the lower arm of a Mc
Pherson suspension can receive a virtual centre articulation.

In the case where only the lower arm is adopting virtual centers, this last will be
substituted by two arms, as in Fig. 3.41, while the upper arm will receive a conven-
tional shape.

The king-pin axis can be determined by the already known geometric construction,
by intersecting the two planes through the lines connecting the four articulation points
of the arms and the upper physical center, as shown on Fig. 3.41.

On Mc Pherson suspensions the upper physical center is the upper pivot.
The virtual center conﬁguration allows a negative king-pin offset also by large
tires and bulky brake discs. As known a negative king-pin offset can improve vehicle
stability during braking, when one of the braking circuits has failed or when different
friction coefﬁcients are applied to the two wheels of the front axle.

The disadvantage of this solution is the introduction of additional spherical joints.

Arms must be shaped in a particular way as to avoid the wheel envelope space.

With this design feature king-pin axis is changing with steering angle; as a con-

sequence king-pin offset must be veriﬁed for each steering angle.

As outlined, this solution can be applied also to the upper arm of a double wishbone
suspension, as shown on Fig. 3.42. In the same way, as we have explained in the
previous case, the king-pin axis can be obtained by intersecting the two planes through
the two lines for the four articulation points of the two rear arms and of the two front
arms.

It is possible to reduce the value of the king-pin offset, even by large disc brakes.
King-pin offset reduction can also have beneﬁts on steering wheel return, which

can be affected by the value of the traction force.

180

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.41 High double wishbone suspension with lower virtual center articulation; king-pin axis
is determined by the intersection of the two lines through articulations of arms 1 and 2 (Mercedes)

3.2.5 Trailing Arm Suspensions

This architecture is widely applied on small and medium cars on rear axles only.

Both wheels are ﬁxes to a longitudinal arm free to rotate with reference to the
body: the rotation axis of the two arms is usually the same and is parallel to the y
vehicle axis.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

181

Fig. 3.42 High double wishbone suspension with both virtual center suspension arms; the ﬁgure
shows the geometrical construction to obtain king pin axis position (FCA)

During suspension strokes wheelbase is affected but toe angles remain unchanged.
Wheel comber with reference to the ground is equal to the car body roll; there is no
camber recovery.

Description

Figure 3.43 shows two perspective views of a trailing arm suspension for a front
wheel driven medium class car.

The axle features a couple of oscillating arms connected to a subframe through
a transversal rotation axis; the subframe is connected to the body by four elastic
bearings. This subframe is made by two shell of stamped steel sheet, welded to a
tubular cross beam. Subframe can be not applied and in this case arms bearing are
directly ﬁxed to the body.

On each shell is shaped the upper spring rest. A bracket offers the upper shock

absorber mount.

The suspension arm is, in this case, made of an iron casting, integrating the lower,
moving, coil spring rest, shock absorber bushing case and the wheel bearing case or
pin.

182

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.43 Rear suspension with trailing arms (FCA)

The anti roll bar is ﬁxed to the arms directly in two different points on each arm;
there are no ﬁxation points on the body; for this reason this is also called ﬂoating
bar.

Figure 3.44 shows a detail of the arm of the above suspension. It shows an opposed
conicity roller bearing used for the articulation of the arm to the subframe. Being
this bearing quite stiff, there won’t be any toe angle, or camber variation, or other
displacements caused by arms deformations because of forces applied to the wheel.
As far as the camber angle is concerned we must take into account the arm torsional

deformations too, caused by vertical and lateral forces.

The choice of roller bearings instead of the more traditional rubber bushings is
caused by the high value of the reaction forces, due to the reduced distance a between
the bearings; a higher value could allow the use of rubber bushing but would reduce
the space available for fuel reservoir and spare wheel.

Figure 3.45 shows a cross section of the wheel assembly. The wheel bearing inside
ring is press ﬁtted to a pin, which is again press ﬁtted into the suspension arm; the
bearing is a second generation one. The arm shows a ﬂange for ﬁxing a drum brake
or the caliper of a disc brake; notice that the braking torque is applying to the arms
a reaction torque, which rends to reduce the body rear up-lift, due to inertia force.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

183

Fig. 3.44 Detail of tapered roll bearings of the arm of the trailing arm suspension of the previous
ﬁgure; one of the ﬁxation points of the ﬂoating anti roll bar can be also seen

Fig. 3.45 Detail of the ﬁxed wheel pin of the second generation bearing of the wheel hub of a
trailing arms suspension

184

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.46 Front axle with longitudinal trailing arms; springs working through pull bars are not
represented. Roll center position has been calculated taking into account tire deformation. different
rotation centers are represented (see on this topic the dedicated paragraph)

This example applies two coil springs as elastic elements; torsion bars can also

be applied to reduce the vertical height of the cargo ﬂoor.

In this case, usually three torsion bars are applied: one for each suspension are
dedicated to symmetrical springing and are ﬁxed at the arm, on one side and to the
subframe to the other; a third bar is ﬁxed at each side on the two suspension arms
and act as anti roll bar in asymmetric springing. Sometimes this kind of arrangement
is causing different wheelbases for each side of the car.

In the past this kind of suspension has also been applied to steering front axles,

as in Fig. 3.46, but this solution is no more used.

In fact king-pin axis direction is changing either by symmetric or by asymmetric
strokes and the return torque of the steering wheel can increase too much on curves,
because of the increase of the longitudinal trail of the external, more loaded wheel.
In addition to that the longitudinal motion of the wheel, because of vertical stroke,
is opposite to the direction along which obstacles are met, with negative impact on
comfort.

Advantages and Disadvantages

Advantages

• Hysteresis is very low with roller bearing versions.
• The suspension intrusion into the baggage compartment is very low.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

185

• High simplicity and, therefore, low production cost.
• Easy to be assembled.
• Suitable also for driving axles.
• Reduced value for unsprung mass.

Disadvantages

• Transversal deformations of trailing arms, because of cornering forces, have an

oversteering effect.

• There is no camber recovery.
• Low longitudinal ﬂexibility because of the rigidity of highly loaded bearings.
• There are no independent parameters to be tuned for improving the elasto-

• High vibration transmittance from the wheel because of bearing stiffness, again

kinematic behavior.

due to the value of acting loads.

This solution is used predominantly on low segments.

3.2.6 Semi Trailing Arms Suspension

As a difference with trailing arms suspensions, which feature arms rotating around
the same transversal axis, semi trailing arms or triangles are rotating around two
different symmetric axis, with reference to the car zx symmetry plane.

This axis show an inclination angle either on the zy plane and on the x y plane; a
particular case of this kind of suspension is the cross arms suspension, where arms
rotate around a longitudinal axis.

Also this suspension is applied to rear axles only.
Figure 3.47 is shown a comparison between a trailing arm scheme (a) and a semi

trailing arm one (b).

Arm inclination angles allow to obtain a modest camber recovery and a certain toe
angle variation with understeering effect, with a slight improvement of the elasto-
kinematic behavior.

Description

Figure 3.48 shows the semi trailing rear suspension of a small front wheel driven car.
The axle is made by a couple of swinging triangular arms (1 on scheme b) ar-
ticulated to a subframe (1 on scheme a) being ﬁxed to the car body in points A
and B.

The subframe is made by a cylindrical tube with two stamped steel shells at the
two ends; arms too are made by two stamped semi shells spot welded together. This

186

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.47 Trailing arm suspension (a) and semi trailing arm suspension (b)

ﬁgure shows also the position os the coil spring and the stop spring (2 and 10, on
scheme a) and of the shock absorber (2, on scheme b).

As a difference with trailing arm suspensions it has been possible to use elastic
bushings for arm connections to the body, thanks also to the increased distance
between the two articulation points.

We can say that this distance is not caused by the suspension kind, but rather by the
dimension and installation of the underbody components; on this car the increased
space is justiﬁed by the installation of the spare wheel under the hood, possible
because of the small diameter.

Also if this application has only historic value, because of its extreme roughness,
we show on Fig. 3.49 a semi trailing arm suspension suitable for rear engine cars;
this example explains also the main reason for using this kind of suspension, because
it simpliﬁes the design of drive shafts.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

187

Fig. 3.48 Assembly view and details of a semi trailing arms suspension for a small front wheel
driven car (FCA)

Fig. 3.49 Semi trailing arms suspension in a small car with rear wheel drive and rear engine; the
arm rotation axis crosses the center of the constant speed joint (FCA)

188

3 Suspensions

The arm rotation axis can cross the center of the constant speed joint; this condition

avoids shaft length variation and allows the application of very simple joints.

Because of the inclination of the rotation axis with reference to the body symmetry
plane a partial camber recovery can be obtained. This practice is limited by the
contemporary toe angle variation that, within certain limits, can improve the natural
oversteering of a rear engine car but can be not viable over certain values.

Advantages and Disadvantages

Advantages

• Limited vertical dimension.
• Limited unsprung mass.
• Decent design possibility on elasto-kinematic properties.
• Construction simplicity.
• Suitable for rear wheel drive

Disadvantages

prematurely.

• Transversal dimension penalizing underbody components lay out.
• The excessive track variation because of the suspension stroke can wear tires

This solution is presently used only on microcars or quadricycles.

3.2.7 Guided Trailing Arm Suspensions

Guided trailing arms suspensions have been conceived as improvement to trailing
arms suspensions; with respect to this last suspension more linkages have been added
and the number of degrees of freedom of the trailing arm has been increased, trying
to conserve the natural advantage of this suspension of a reduced intrusion into the
cargo compartment.

There are not, at this time, names for this suspensions which are shared universally
by chassis engineers: we have selected this one to point out that there is a more
sophisticated connection of the trailing arm to the body than a simple rotary bearing.
Many car manufactures, for commercial reasons, have improperly called this
suspension as multilink suspension; in the opinion of the Authors this name should
be reserved to the ﬁve linkages suspensions only.

On guided trailing arms suspensions, two or three additional arms are linked to
the trailing arm, in order to improve elasto-kinematic performance of the suspension.

3.2 Independent Suspensions

189

Fig. 3.50 Scheme for a guided trailing arms suspension; the articulation point 6 must allow two
rotational degrees of freedom to feature the desired camber angle recovery

To restore the correct number of degrees of freedom of the mechanism the con-
nection between trailing arm and body or subframe is made by a sufﬁciently ﬂexible
rubber bushing.

Figure 3.50 shows an example of a guided trailing arms suspension; the trailing

arm 1 is guided, in this case, by two additional cross arms 2 and 3.

Cross arms identify a steering axis through the two elastic bushings 4 and 5. This
axis is designed to create a given understeering toe angle variation, under the action
of the cornering force or braking force. The elastic bushing 6 of the trailing arm, as
dimension suggest, can grant a good longitudinal ﬂexibility for a good comfort.

The position of bushings allows longitudinal motions without undesirable steering

rotation of the wheel.

Figure 3.51 shows a different example. The application of three cross arms can
be noticed on this suspension. The introduction of the third arm improves the elasto-
kinematic behavior further.

With reference with the lower ﬁgure, arms 1 and 2 shape a transversely articulated
parallelogram, which can grant a correct camber recovery. The linkage 2 is made
by a shell structure of stamped steel sheet, relatively stiff, because spring loads are
applied to it; linkage 1 is, on the contrary very light, because only transversal forces
are applied to it; this linkage is curved to avoid the volume of the side beam of the
underbody.

The linkage 3 can react to longitudinal loads with controlled deformation to sta-

bilize steering with an understeering effect, as we have seen in other suspensions.

The trailing arm 4 is also made by steel sheet and shows a notable ﬂexibility; if it
would be rigid there will be too few degrees of freedom and the suspension would be

190

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.51 Outline drawing of a guided trailing arm suspension; to understand the way of operation
also the torsional deformation of arm 4 must be taken into account (Ford)

3.2 Independent Suspensions

191

blocked. The arm can react only to forces acting through the articulation points, in
longitudinal direction and to bending moments as those given by the braking force;
camber variations can take place thanks to its torsional deformations. With a suitable
elastic bushing the wheel can move longitudinally on obstacles, with beneﬁts on
comfort, without penalty on toe angle variation.

Transversal arms are connected to the subframe 5, suspended to the body through

elastic rubber bearings.

Advantages and Disadvantages

Advantages

• Toe angle variation under cornering and longitudinal forces with stabilizing effect.
• Suitable camber recovery.
• Good longitudinal ﬂexibility.
• Limited under ﬂoor volume similar to simpler suspensions.

Disadvantages

• Wheel case restriction if shock absorbers are applied to trailing arms.
• Many adjustment points for correct assembly on the subframe.
• Higher cost complexity as compared to previous solutions.

For its characteristics is used on medium cars, where it represents a good com-
promise between sophisticated multilink suspensions and lighter trailing arms or
Mc Pherson suspensions; this architecture could be widely applied in the future.

3.2.8 Multilink Suspensions

The solution shown on Fig. 3.52 obtains, with penalties on weight and cost, the best
result on comfort and handling; in this case, referring to a high class SUV, also air
springs are applied.

By this suspension the strut is connected to the body with ﬁve linkages, as many
as the degrees of freedom to be subtracted to the strut, to leave the suspension stroke
motion only.

This or similar schemes are applied on most large and luxury cars rear axles, for

front and rear wheel drive.

This suspension can be also considered as a double wishbone suspension with
both lower and upper steering virtual points (4 and 5 for the upper arm and 2 and 3
for the lower one). The ﬁfth linkage 1, or false steering linkage, is used to avoid or
control the wheel steering motion.

192

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.52 Classic multilink suspension for the rear axle of a rear wheel driven car with air springs;
it features ﬁve linkages, one for each degree of freedom subtracted to the wheel, to allow the
suspension stroke only (FCA)

3.2 Independent Suspensions

193

The difference with a front wheel double wishbone suspension are limited; nev-
ertheless elasto-kinematic behavior will be different, considering the different role
played by the two axles.

Every ﬁxed articulation point is set on a subframe, because of the already explained

beneﬁts on pre-assembly capability and comfort.

When adopted on a rear driving axle, toe angle variations depend on the traction
force, in addition to cornering and braking force; this fact must be taken into account
while designing rubber bushings.

Any function can be obtained in the ﬁeld of:

• toe angle variations stabilizing turning and braking;
• longitudinal ﬂexibility, without undesirable toe angle variations;
• camber recovery by roll angle.

In addition to that, for rear wheel driven cars, wheels can increase their toe-in
angle as function of the traction force, with reduction of the phenomenon of steering
angle reduction at increasing traction force.

This phenomenon, called torque steering, is justiﬁed if we recall that the appli-
cation of a longitudinal force is increasing the side slip angle of the rear wheels, at
a given cornering force; to avoid a path change front wheel steering angle must be
decreased.

In summary the design freedom allowed by this suspension is notably increased,

particularly for a driving axle.

front wheel drives sedan (Fig. 3.53).

Similar considerations can be also made for the multilink suspension of a large

This solution is characterized by the triangular arm 1, a cross beam 2 and a false
steering linkage 3; the remaining linkage 4 connects the triangle to the suspension
strut.

In this case we can again assimilate the scheme to a double wishbone suspension
with the arms 1 and 2. The linkage 4 without ﬁxed connection, increases wheelbase
variation as function of the wheel stroke, with beneﬁts on comfort. In this case torque
steering is not to be taken into account.

Advantages and Disadvantages

Advantages

• Stabilizing toe angle variations as function of cornering and braking forces.
• Camber recovery.
• Wheelbase increase at compression stroke.
• Suitable to avoid torque steering effect on rear wheel driven cars.

194

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.53 Particular kind of multilink suspension for front wheel driven cars; the linkage 4 is used
to increase wheelbase variations during compression stroke with beneﬁts on comfort (FCA)

Disadvantages

• High mechanical complexity.
• Long development time.
• High production cost.
• High volume and weight.
• High sensitivity to variation of bushings elastic behavior.

3.3 Semi Independent Suspensions

3.3.1 Twist Beam Suspension

Description

Twist beam suspension (Fig. 3.54) can be imagined as two trailing arms 4, ﬁxed to
the body with elastic bushing 2; the intrinsic instability of the resulting structure is
corrected by a cross beam 3.

The spring shock absorber unit is ﬁxed between arms and body.

3.3 Semi Independent Suspensions

195

Fig. 3.54 The longitudinal arm 4 of this twist beam suspension is carrying the wheel hub welded
on it. The torsion cross beam 3 has a U shaped cross section and is welded to the longitudinal arms.
The anti roll bar is welded too

Fig. 3.55 Design alternatives for a twist beam axle: a tubular type; b hybrid type; c type made by
stamped parts only

Figure 3.54 shows further details. The arm is made by two stamped and welded
steel shells. The strut will be ﬂanged to the plate 1, welded on the arm. The spring
seat 6 is shaped on one of the stamped shells, building up the arm; the lower shock
absorber mount 7 will be screwed to a tube, also welded on the shell 5.

The cross beam 3 has a U shaped cross section and is welded to the arms at its

end. Also the anti roll bar is welded to the arms.

196

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.56 Scheme to determine the rotation axis of the arms of a twist beam axle in an asymmetric
suspension stroke; the point C is the shear center of the cross section of the cross beam

Some design alternatives for twist beam axles are shown on Fig. 3.55. The detail
a refers to the so-called tubular type, where either the cross beam and the arm are
made by cuts of steel, stamped and welded each to the other; also the twisting cross
beam is made by a tube crushed to the shape of a V, in order to obtain the elastic
properties, we will discuss later.

The detail b refers to the hybrid type, where the arm is made by a cut of tube and
the twist beam is made by a stamped steel sheet. A possible variant of this solution
can include arms made by cast iron. The choice is motivated by process optimization,
in regard to the existing production tooling.

By symmetric suspension stroke, arms are rotating around the axis AB (Fig. 3.56),
given by joining the two center of the arms elastic bushings; there are no changes
of toe and camber angles because of the suspension stroke, but for the structure
deformation caused by external forces.

By asymmetric stroke, the cross beam is twisted by the difference of torque applied
to the arms and, only because of this deformation, arms can have different angles,
around non coincident axis.

To determine axes BC and AC, around which the arms are rotating, it is necessary
to join the bushing center of each arm with the shear center of the cross beam, in the
symmetry plane of the car (point C). It should be remembered that the shape of the
cross beam is such as to obtain a high bending stiffness (regard the cornering forces),

3.3 Semi Independent Suspensions

197

Fig. 3.57 Twist beam axles have a natural tendency to steer because of cornering force application.
This tendency can be hindered with particular rubber bushing (left) or by inclining bushing axis
(right)

with a modest, but suitable torsion stiffness. For this reason camber angle variations
will be very small by symmetric strokes.

It is therefore possible to design toe angle and camber angle variations, by design-
ing the section of the cross beam and the dimension d, relative to the wheel offset
with reference with the shear center.

If the cross beam is made by a crushed tube, the V cross section of the tube can

be designed to avoid the need of an anti roll bar.

On Fig. 3.57. at left, the details of an elastic bushing are represented. The bushings
axis is parallel to the car y axis; to limit toe angle variation caused by cornering forces,
the inside metal body of the bushing has a tapered shape which limit this rotation.

The same effect, suitable to obtain an understeering behavior on the car, can be

obtained by inclining bushing axis on the x y plane, as shown on the right scheme.

Different arrangement are possible for coil springs and shock absorbers. The
choice between the different alternative is a compromise between car comfort and
the width of the cargo compartment between the wheel cases.

198

3 Suspensions

As a matter of fact the optimum position for shock absorbers is perpendicular to
the arm as far as possible from the articulation point to the body; in this case the ratio
between shock absorber and wheel stroke ratio is the highest one.

On the contrary this same positions brings the tip of the shock absorber inside the
wheel case, reducing the cargo compartment width, particularly if the coil spring is
installed coaxial to the shock absorber.

A further system to limit lateral deformation of arms, because of the cornering
forces, is using a Panhard bar; this system is suitable for heavy cars, for instant high
class MPVs, when other solution can affect comfort negatively.

Advantages and Disadvantages

Advantages

• Design simplicity.
• Assembly simplicity.
• Reduced vertical dimension.
• Almost total camber recovery by asymmetric strokes.
• Possibility of controlling toe angle by body roll.
• Unsprung mass smaller as with a rigid axle.
• Decent longitudinal elasticity.

Disadvantages

• High wheel case width, because of expected camber variation.
• Low roll stiffness.
• Highly stressed parts (twist beam and its welding).
• Unsuitable to driving axles.
• Toe angles too sensitive to loads.
• Remarkable different behavior by empty and full load condition.

Twist beam axles are used on small and medium cars extensively.

3.4 Rigid Axle Suspensions

This solution virtually abandoned on cars, ﬁnds applications on commercial and
industrial vehicles and on many off road vehicles.

By driving axles the suspension cross structure (axle) can integrate ﬁnal drive,

differential and driving shafts.

In this case unsprung mass is certainly heavier as by independent suspensions.

3.4 Rigid Axle Suspensions

199

Fig. 3.58 Simple rigid axle suspension with single leaf springs for a small commercial vehicle
(FCA)

By front wheel driven cars, rear idle axles have a simple structure connecting the
two wheels; the unsprung mass value is not far away of the range of independent
suspensions.

Considering the kinematic point of view, this solution features no track variation
by roll and parallel springing motion. Wheel camber referred to the ground doesn’t
change because of body roll.

We will consider two different design alternative: rigid axles with leaf springs,
where also the kinematic function is performed by springs and the guided rigid axle,
where the kinematic function is performed by dedicated linkages, as by independent
suspensions. In this case elastic elements can be different as leaf springs.

Rigid Axles with Leaf Springs

Figure 3.58 shows the drawing of a very simple solution suitable to front wheel driven
vehicles; in this case it is a small commercial vehicle.

The two wheel are connected by the axle 1, whose shape is caused by the bulk of

the other under body components, in this case, the spare wheel.

200

3 Suspensions

The axle is linked to two leaf springs with ﬂanges and screws. The spring is
connected to the body as to be able to change its length, because of suspension
stroke; the front end is connected to a ﬁxed eye 3, where the rear end is connected
through two swinging shackles, a kind of small pendulum rod. The stop spring 5
works on the axle directly, as shock absorbers 6.

The leaf spring is bent on the zx plane; curvature is positive when the center of
curvature is above the axle; this curvature is peculiar to axle that are self-steering by
body roll; this curvature is also necessary to obtain the desired value of suspension
stroke.

If curvature is positive the steering angle of the axle is oversteering the car;
by negative curvature it is understeering and gives no contribution by ﬂat springs.
Because curvature is decreasing as load is increasing, this contribution becomes more
understeering as load increases.

This effect has to be added to that of leaf spring lateral deformation, normally

In our example the leaf spring shows a single leaf, with advantage on suspension

oversteering.

hysteresis.

This simpliﬁcation is not always possible, because of the weight of the vehicle.
When leaves are many they feature different length; they should be free to slide
one over the other, in such a way as to build a uniform ﬂexural resistance body.
The stack of leaves is, in fact, by semi elliptic leaf springs, bound to have the same
curvature and the resulting structure can be considered as a different arrangement
of a beam with rhomboid shape, supported at the ends and loaded in the middle, as
shown on the lower part of Fig. 3.59.

In some cases single leaf spring are used, as in our example or on Fig. 3.59, at
right; in this case the leaf is tapered according to a theoretical parabolic shape, to
obtain again a uniform ﬂexural strength body. In other cases tapered leaves can be
joined in twin assemblies as in the upper right. If the fabrication process is able to
dominate the leave thickness leaves stacks can provide contact at the end only, with
beneﬁts on the hysteresis.

The central part of the stack is ﬁxed to the axle through U shaped brackets (see

Fig. 3.64 in the following paragraph); other brackets keep leaves in position.

The longest leave has two eyes, sometimes copied by the second leave, for ﬁxation
to the body. On semi elliptical leaf springs, layers of self lubricating plastic strips are
interposed between the leaves. They decrease friction and avoid leaf sticking after
long stops, because of corrosion.

Advantages and Disadvantages

Advantages

• Extreme design simplicity.
• The only suspension with full camber recovery by roll.
• Robustness suitable to off road and heavy duty applications.

3.4 Rigid Axle Suspensions

201

Fig. 3.59 Different kind of leaf springs for rigid axles (upper part); the scheme shown on the left of
the bottom part, explains how a semi elliptic leaf spring can be seen as a uniform ﬂexural strength
body; the scheme on the left shows the motion of the leaf spring end because of suspension stroke

• Wheel stroke is greater as spring stoke, by roll motion; this property is useful on

off-road vehicle to clear transversal trenches.

Disadvantages

• High elevation of the body ﬂoor on the cargo compartment.
• High restriction on wheel cases reducing cargo compartment width.
• Heavy unsprung mass.
• Wheels working angles can’t be adjusted.
• Poor elasto-kinematic characteristic.
• Low longitudinal elasticity.
• Low roll stiffness.
• Vibrations caused by S deformations of the leaves.

Rigid Guided Axles

To improve the transversal and longitudinal guidance of the axle and to obtain a better
elasto-kinematic behavior, the axle can be complicated by adding suitable linkages.
This additional linkage are essential if springs are only capable to absorb vertical

loads as coil springs and pneumatic springs.

202

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.60 Systems for axle guidance; on the upper part a Panhard bar, on the lower side a De Dion
mechanism

Figure 3.60 (scheme A) shows a solution where the reaction to cornering forces is
assigned to a Panhard bar, linked to the car body on one end (point 2) and to the axle,
at the other end (point 1). If coil springs are adopted other linkages are necessary,
not visible on this ﬁgure, as longitudinal parallelograms, to build up the necessary
longitudinal guidance.

Panhard bars can also reduce the natural oversteering behavior of a leaf spring

rigid axle, setting limits to lateral springs elasticity.

Scheme B shows a solution where the vertical guidance of the axle is performed
by a Watt quadrangle. In this case the axle is usually shaped as a rigid triangle, where
the basis is connecting wheel hubs and the vertex is set on the symmetry plane of the
body in front of the wheels and is connected through a spherical joint; this schemed
is named De Dion axle.

The Watt quadrangle, by its shape, is obliging the middle of the axle to move
on the symmetry plane of the body. The front spherical joint can receive a certain
ﬂexibility as to reach a given value of understeering.

Figure 3.61 shows possible linkages for a rigid axle in connection with the appli-

cation of coil springs.

Scheme A shows two longitudinal arms and an anti roll. Arms react to longitudinal
loads, while their inclination can absorb also cornering forces; the anti roll bar can
take longitudinal loads, contributing to react to the torques applied to the axle.

Scheme B provides four longitudinal arms and a Panhard bar. Longitudinal bars
react to longitudinal forces and driving and braking torques, while cornering forces
are absorbed by the Panhard bar. In a possible variant to this version Panhard bar can
be avoided by a suitable inclination of the longitudinal beams. In both cases elastic
bushings rigidity can be designed with an assigned elasto-kinematic behavior.

3.5 Industrial Vehicles Suspensions

203

Fig. 3.61 Different rigid axle linkages suitable for coil springs; the anti roll bar itself (upper scheme)
can work as a linkage, with function

3.5 Industrial Vehicles Suspensions

Industrial vehicle suspensions must allow notable load variations particularly on rear
axles; we should remember the ratio between curb weight and full load on a truck.
This ratio is lower of an order of magnitude, in comparison with cars.

Industrial vehicles have a structure including a chassis frame made by side beams

and cross beams, bearing chassis components, cabin and pay load.

Front and rear suspensions on trucks are usually rigid axle type, similar to those
introduced in previous paragraphs. Buses and commercial vehicles adopt also inde-
pendent suspensions.

Many vehicles of this kind adopt pneumatic springs instead of leaf springs. The
advantage of this choice is the possibility to control vehicle trim and the springing
characteristic as function of the actual load.

Their application implies an increase of cost and a more complicated axle mech-
anism, because the guidance function of leaf spring is missing; the necessity of com-
pressor and storage pressure bottles is partially overcome, because they are already
justiﬁed by the braking system.

On light industrial vehicles, there is still a large diffusion of leaf springs.
Sometimes to increase progressively the suspension stiffness at higher loads, more
leaf springs set in parallel are applied, as shown by the example on the second left
raw of Fig. 3.59. The spring set in parallel works when pay load overcomes a certain
limits; this reduces vehicle trim variations and approximates the constant natural
frequency condition in a better way.

204

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.62 Different kind of pneumatic springs for the suspension main spring; if the elastic elements
of tandem axles are pneumatically connected the two axles built up an isostatic system in an easy
way (lower scheme at left); stop spring are usually included inside the rubber element (lower scheme
at right)

3.5.1 Pneumatic Springs

Air spring allow to change and control vehicle trim and to reduce the load excursion
effect on suspension geometry, with beneﬁts on comfort and, on trucks, on transported
goods integrity.

As it will be explained later, the condition to minimize sprung mass acceler-
ation implies a spring stiffness proportional to the sprung mass (constant natural
frequency).

Because of the value of pay load variations by industrial vehicles, springs rigidity
should be highly progressive. But springs are designed for maximum pay load and
prove to be too stiff at partial pay load or at empty vehicle.

Air spring overcome this inconvenient, by changing their inﬂation pressure, as

previously explained for pneumatic double wishbone suspensions.

Figure 3.62 shows some examples of pneumatic springs and a simpliﬁed scheme
of their installation on the vehicle. The spring is a rubber bellow reenforced with
textile ﬁbers, like a tire, containing pressurized air.

3.5 Industrial Vehicles Suspensions

205

Types a and c show a bellow like a tube 1 (lower detail), which can roll up on a
metal surface 2, to adapt for different lengths; this conﬁguration is suitable for light
vehicles where the spring diameter is reduced with reference to the stroke; the bellow
diameter, at the same inﬂation pressure, must be proportional to the square root of
the sprung mass.

For types b the bellow is reinforced with metallic rings; this shape is suitable
(notice that this picture is not scaled to the others) for heavier vehicles where the
diameter has the same magnitude of the useful stroke.

Air, with its characteristic to change the volume as function of pressure, is the
elastic element of the suspension. With a compressor and controllable valves is
possible to adjust the pressure to have the same vehicle trim at any load.

Pressure variations can also adjust vehicle height, when needed (for instance to

lower the saddle of a tractor, when carrying the semitrailer on).

The air physical transformation can be assimilated to an isotherm, during slow
trim variations; it must be assimilated to a polytropic or adiabatic during springing
motion, where the time allowed to thermal exchange is very low.

In this last case, spring characteristic provides no constant ﬂexibility, not consid-

ering possible effective diameter changes.

The detail shows also how the rubber stop spring can be integrated into the pressure

The lower scheme shows also how is possible to obtain an interconnected suspen-
sion on a tandem axle. Tandem axles are used to limit road loads by heavy vehicles.
The interconnection eliminates the intrinsic hyperstaticity of the system.

Similar springing elements can also be used by light vehicle and cars when the
vehicle trim must be adjustable, on off road vehicle, for instance, where the ground
clearance is increased by off road driving only.

In a dedicated chapter we will discuss also the control techniques applied to these

bellow.

systems.

3.5.2 Front Suspension

Rigid Axles

On European industrial vehicles the steering wheel is usually set over the front axle
or in the front overhang.

This kind of architecture is, therefore, characterized by the application of a lon-
gitudinal steering rod connecting the steering box with the steering knuckle, as can
be seen on Fig. 3.63.

As the ﬁgure shows, the steering box of rack and sector type with ball recirculation,
rotates the drop arm 1, articulated to the longitudinal steering rod 2. This last is
connected to the steering arm 3, part of the steering knuckle, or stub axle. A cross
steering bar 4 connects the right steering knuckle, as to obtain correct steering.

206

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.63 Steering mechanism for a front rigid axle of an industrial vehicle (Iveco)

To limit steering angle consequent to suspension stroke, the articulation between
drop arm and longitudinal steering rod must be set at the instantaneous rotation center
of the axle, or leaf spring, relative to the body, close to the front eye of the spring.

Figure 3.64 shows a rigid steering axle with its main components. The leaf spring
features two equal length tapered leaves ﬁxed to the chassis frame in the known
way. Leafs are contacting each other at the ends at in the middle only; in this way
the behavior of a uniform stress body is obtained, with a very limited friction and
hysteresis.

A third very short leaf can increase the ﬂexural stiffness of the spring assembly

for high loads and decrease S deformation during braking.

The S deformation is called in this way because of the shape of elastic deformation

of the leaf spring, caused by the application to the axle of a pure torque.

It is particularly annoying, because the moment of inertia of the axle, around the y
axis, can lead to periodic deformations, where the axle accepts a torque higher as the
friction limit for a short while and then slips when the inertia force is disappearing.
The result is vibrations and loss of braking efﬁciency or traction.

Leaves are ﬁxed to the axle 3 through U bolts. The anti roll bar 6 is moving with the
axle (therefore must be accounted as unsprung mass), while its ends are connected
to the chassis frame, through pendulum bars 7; rubber stop springs 4 work on the
axle directly.

3.5 Industrial Vehicles Suspensions

207

Fig. 3.64 Design details of a front rigid axle suspension for an industrial vehicle (Iveco)

Fig. 3.65 Stub axle of a rigid steering axle, showing king pin axis position

208

Fig. 3.66 Roll steering of a
rigid axle

3 Suspensions

The drawing on Fig. 3.65 shows a cross section through the front wheel axes.
King-pin axis and king-pin offset are identiﬁed by the rotation axis of the steering
knuckle. The wheel disc has a bell shape, necessary to contain king-pin offset, in
consideration of the space necessary for the large disc brake; this shape is standardized
for all vehicle wheels and must take into account the fact that by rear twin wheels
tires should not contact together or trap rubble.

As we explained for cars this axle has the advantage of keeping wheels always

perpendicular to the ground; on such large tires camber angles are not acceptable.

A further advantage is the possibility of keeping every suspension component
below the chassis frame with simpliﬁcation of its shape and more space for the pay
load or cabin.

As a disadvantage it is difﬁcult to control the elasto-kinematic characteristic of

the suspension, because of the rigid connection between the wheels.

On bumpy roads wheels can be steered by the suspension stroke. Figure 3.66
shows the path of the leaf spring connection point to the axle, during suspension
motion; this point is moving forwards during suspension extension and back, during
suspension compression. By parallel springing the axle shouldn’t steer in the lon-
gitudinal steering rod articulation is set in the centre of curvature of this path. By
asymmetric springing (body roll) a certain steering angle will be present.

3.5 Industrial Vehicles Suspensions

209

Fig. 3.67 Rigid axle suspension for an industrial vehicle; the application of pneumatic elastic
elements is made in conjunction with longitudinal and transversal guiding linkages (Iveco)

Guided Rigid Axles

Figure 3.67 shows a rigid axle suspension where the axle is guided by two longitudinal
parallelograms, similar to those we have seen for small vehicles.

There are two couples of longitudinal rods dedicated to the reaction to longitu-
dinal forces and torques. A Panhard bar is dedicated, as usual, to cornering forces.
Springing is obtained through pneumatic bellows.

The advantage of this arrangement is a better control of the axle steering by roll
and the possibility of application of pneumatic springs. This kind of mechanism can
be applied also with leaf springs, which will be free to move longitudinally at both
ends; this mechanism avoids the S deformation completely.

Double Wishbone Suspensions

The need for a better ride comfort for passengers and for a better handling perfor-
mance due to the increased speed has led industrial vehicle designers to apply to
buses a front wheel double wishbone suspension, similar to those applied to cars.

A further need for these industrial vehicles is to have the passenger compartment
ﬂoor as low as possible in order to make boarding easier; this need is particularly
important by urban buses, where there is a frequent exchange of passengers. Rigid
axle cause a too high position for the chassis frame and this is a further advantage
for double wishbone suspensions.

Figure 3.68 shows two examples of this suspension. Air springs are applied on
both suspensions; the suspension mechanism scheme is the same as by cars. Air

210

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.68 Front double wishbone suspensions with pneumatic spring for busses

springs allow urban buses to incline the body by stops, in order to lower the entrance
door further.

3.5.3 Rear Suspensions

The need to have twin tires always perpendicular to the ground doesn’t allow sus-
pension conﬁgurations different from rigid axles.

The high value of the load spread on heavy duty vehicles has practically stan-
dardized the application of pneumatic springs; by tractors the vehicle can be lowered
when the semi trailer must be hooked.

Figure 3.69 shows a rigid axle suspension architecture widely applied to heavy
duty industrial vehicles. The axle is guided by two lower longitudinal bars 2, which
react to longitudinal loads; the upper triangular arm is connected to the axle through
a spherical joint 1 and reacts to cornering forces and to torques.

Pneumatic spring bellows 4 are double for each side to allow standardization with

the front ones.

On highly loaded vehicles tandem axles must be sometimes applied in order to

comply with the legislative limits of load on a single axle.

Tandem axles, or multiple axles must distribute the load in a uniform way to the

ground and adapt to uneven roads or bumps.

An isostatic condition is also necessary to better distribute the reaction to payload

when this is not uniformly distributed.

Isostatic condition is easy to be satisﬁed by air springs by a suitable interconnec-

tion of pressure air pipes.

Tandem axles using leaf springs obtain this condition using two cantilever springs

free to rotate in their middle section, as Fig. 3.70 shows.

The axles are suspended by symmetric longitudinal triangles and bars, as in the
previous ﬁgure; this mechanism causes the two axles to carry on the same vertical
load.

3.5 Industrial Vehicles Suspensions

211

Fig. 3.69 Rear suspension for a heavy duty industrial vehicle, featuring pneumatic springs; the
axle is guided by an upper triangular arm and two lower longitudinal arms (Iveco)

Leaf springs cannot react to pitch; front shock absorber have to limit by suitable

stop rubber spring any excessive leaf spring rotation due to driving on bumps.

3.6 Design and Testing

3.6.1 Design Preliminary Outline

The design preliminary outline of a suspension scheme consists essentially of the
determination of the geometric coordinates of the articulation points and of the po-
sition of the main axis as king-pin axis, shock absorber axis, etc., in order to reach
the assigned target for elasto-kinematic performance.

The choice of the suspension scheme has been made previously, taking into ac-
count the volumes of the mechanical components of the chassis, the minimum clear-
ance from the ground, the body structure and the other conditions set on costs and
available production technology.

By automobiles, suspensions architecture is also one of the selling points.

212

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.70 Cantilever leaf springs allow to obtain an isostatic tandem suspension. Leaf springs are
connected to the frame by a pin in their middle and axles are guided by longitudinal bars and
triangles (Iveco)

On this paragraph a step by step logic ﬂow of the design outline operations is
explained for a Mc Pherson suspension; the extrapolation to other suspension is left
to the reader.

We refer to the case of a front steering axle by a transversal powertrain.
The ﬁrst step consist of the identiﬁcation of the king-pin axis position. This should
be consistent with what has been decided for king-pin offset and trail in relation to
steering wheel feeling and return and braking stability.

By Mc Pherson suspension the king-pin axis is determined by the center of the
spherical joint A and the center of the upper pivot B (Fig. 3.71). The point A is
set along the king-pin axis in such a way as the spherical joint could ﬁnd its place
between the constant velocity joint and the wheel rim.

To reduce as much as possible the reaction to lateral forces on the lower arm, the
point A is set as low as possible. The lower limit is done by wheel rim and braking
disc positions.

Point B position must allow the assigned suspension stroke and the correct oper-

ation of coil spring and stop spring.

Point B elevation must be as low as possible to comply with a low hood proﬁle;
hood proﬁle has inﬂuence on style and aerodynamics performance and the clearance
between hood proﬁle and suspension upper bearing is depending on requirements of
passive safety of impacts against pedestrians.

3.6 Design and Testing

213

Fig. 3.71 Points A and B positions of king pin axis is conditioned by powertrain bulk, on one side,
and brake disc bulk, on the other side, and by constant velocity joint position

When the king-pin axle is set, the shock absorber axis can be set. This is joining

points B and C, on the piston rod of the shock absorber, as shown on Fig. 3.72.

To avoid mechanical complication on the strut design, the point C, as seen from

the y direction, should be set on the king-pin axis.

The position of point D, setting the rotation axis of the lower arm, is a consequence
of the desired camber recovery and track variation, as function of suspension stroke
(see Fig. 3.72). D is the intersection of the arm rotation axis with a zy plane determined
by point A position.

Because of kinematics of this mechanism, to increase camber recovery, point B
must be closer to the car inside or the shock absorber inclination increased; this
positions must be compromised with possible mechanical interferences and with
king-pin axis position, which practically limit camber recovery.

As an alternative, camber recovery can be improved by rising the point D. This
modiﬁcation implies, as we will see later, the elevation of the suspension roll center,
with impact with other vehicle performances (Fig. 3.73).

214

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.72 The arm rotation axis EF is determined to obtain the desired camber recovery, once A
and B are determined

Now the rotation axis of the arm can be determined by setting points E and F,

centers of the elastic bushings.

Most solutions provide the same y coordinate for these two points; we will adopt

this assumptions for sake of simplicity.

The z coordinates of these points is decided to limit pitch angles during acceler-

ation or braking; we will explain later about anti dive properties of their position.

The x coordinates of these points determines the shape of the arm and are bound
to the space available for the articulation points and the kind of subframe that will
be adopted.

Their position has also direct consequences on the value of the forces that are ap-
plied to the points E and F, by longitudinal shocks against obstacles and by cornering
forces.

Combining an a suitable way the position of these points and the radial and axial
stiffness of the elastic bushings is possible to control longitudinal wheel ﬂexibility,

3.6 Design and Testing

215

Fig. 3.73 Correction on the point D position can change the shape of the camber angle variation
diagram as function of the suspension stroke

impacting comfort, and camber angle variations by cornering forces, impacting tire
cornering stiffness and, therefore, handling.

At the end, the positions of the articulation of the steering mechanism will be set,
as shown on Fig. 3.74; additional explanations on this subject will be given on the
chapter dedicated to the steering system.

The choice of point H position (spheric joint between strut and steering rod) is
determined considering the Ackermann correct steering condition, the torque per-
missible on the steering wheel and the position available for the steering rack.

Point I (spheric joint between steering rod and rack) is determined in order to
limit toe angle variations because of the suspension stroke. On a view from the z
axis, points A, E, I, H must shape a parallelogram in order to limit toe angle variation
caused by longitudinal motions of the wheel.

After the preliminary design outline of the suspension, the detail design of sus-
pension components can start, taking into account the structural mission of this part
of the chassis. This mission can be considered according to two different points of
view:

• mechanical integrity, deﬁned by the fatigue and shock resistance of the suspension

components;

• deformations under the applied loads or elasto-kinematic behavior.

We are going to analyze these two missions brieﬂy.

216

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.74 The point E position should allow the wheel to move back against an obstacle, without
sensible variations of the toe angle and camber angle

3.6.2 Structural Integrity

Fatigue Behavior

The evaluation of the fatigue behavior may be accomplished, through calculations
or tests; in this last case dedicated facilities are used, as benches and measurements
systems. In both cases, reference is made to load speciﬁcations that have the func-
tion to simulate in a synthetic way all the operational life of the component under
investigation.

The load synthesis is made applying scientiﬁc methods to real load histories on
road circuit chosen according to the manufacturer experience and the purpose of the
vehicle.

Structural analysis can be performed on the complete suspension or on single
components. In the ﬁrst case it is a good practice to include in the test also part of
the body or subframe structure, where the suspension is connected.

The suspension under test is usually installed on a bench including a real part of
the car body; this dummy proves to be the less expensive installation ﬁxture to be
used. The wheel hub is linked to a three axis actuator, applying loads in the three
directions of the car reference system.

Load and displacements, which are applied, are extracted from on road mea-
surements, signiﬁcant of the average life of the vehicle; at regular intervals of time

3.6 Design and Testing

217

the general integrity of the suspension is controlled (cracks, bushings or bearings
deterioration, etc.).

The mission loads deﬁnition is made, as we have said, by recording forces Fx , Fy
and Fz and moments Mx , My and Mz applied to the wheel hub on an assigned road
circuit, where a similar vehicle equipped with measurement and recording devices
is driven.

It is obviously very important do deﬁne the minimum life, in term of distance
travelled, necessary on a given course; different courses can be travelled in sequence.
When our suspension under test has reached the target life, the following evalua-

tions are made:
• bolts and screws thrust decay;
• main characteristics of disassembled components, to be compared with those at
the beginning of the test, with particular reference to bushings, bearings, springs,
stop springs, spherical joints and shock absorbers.

Usually the suspension is assembled again and the test is continued until at least

three failures are reached or the life is doubled.

The suspension target life must be at least the same of the entire vehicle, usually
200,000 km for a car and in the range 300,000–800,000 km for industrial vehicle,
according to the kind of application.

Broken components or not accomplishing their design speciﬁcations are analyzed

and modiﬁed until they reach the desired life.

When single components are tested, forces and moments are applied to their
mounting interfaces, which are calculated with mathematical models starting from
forces and moments applied to the wheels. This test procedure is particularly cost
effective when only single components are modiﬁed on a suspension or when tests
must be repeated to gather a sufﬁcient conﬁdence level.

In this case simpliﬁed test are deﬁned, which are normally more severe and which

the experience has demonstrated to be equivalent to the baseline test.

As an example of this approach, we can summarize an example for a suspension
arm; by tests or by calculations the component is linked to a testing block and is
loaded with the wheel forces.
The test cycle can include:

• longitudinal loads, due to braking forces (at least 3,000 load blocks representing

a stop brake with the highest friction coefﬁcient);

• cornering forces, due to curves (at least 300,000 load blocks each of them simu-

lating a bend with the highest friction coefﬁcient).

By this example are not taken into account loads due to road asperities, because

they are not so relevant to the suspension arm.

If the suspension is applied to a driving axle, also traction load at maximum

friction coefﬁcient must be taken into account.

If the part under test is interested by vertical loads also maximum loads applied
by stop springs are considered; usually they are assumed to correspond to a vertical
acceleration of 35 m/s2.

218

3 Suspensions

For a more accurate evaluation of a component life stresses of the most loaded
parts are calculated with analysis codes and their results are interpreted using a fatigue
damage criterion.

The scheme of this method is the following. Let us consider that this component
undergoes n different load histories (Pk(t), with k = 1, n). Pk is a generic load applied
to a point of our structure.

Using the stress analysis code stresses are calculated, at ﬁrst, generated by the
forces applied to the same points (σi j,k(x), with k = 1, n) where loads Pk are applied.
The fatigue code can calculate the time history of stresses by a linear superimpo-

sitions of the effects, as:

(cid:2)

σi j (x, t) =

σi j,k(x)Pk(t).

Suitable algorithms allow to summarize any three axial stress status in a single axis
stress having the same danger; on metal components the distortion energy criterion
is usually applied.

Afterwords the fatigue life of each point of the structure can be evaluated, with

reference to the material characteristics.

A method frequently used is the Miner hypothesis, saying that a body which
undergoes different stress levels is reaching the end of its life (rupture) when the
sum of the partial damages of each of these levels reaches the value of 1. The partial
damage is, by deﬁnition, the ratio between the number of cycles actually performed
and the number of cycles necessary to reach a rupture at a given stress.

Also defects of the material and shape oddities must be taken into account.
A simple way to evaluate this effects is to evaluate the materials fatigue by test-
ing samples extracted by parts of the same components or by similar components
produced by the same process.

In this way many Wöhler curves can be achieved, suitable to evaluate the inﬂuence

of the main factors on the material fatigue life.

Misuse

It is a common practice to take into account a reasonable misuse: misuse is a not
correct, but possible use of the component; the idea behind is that, after one of this
misuses, the driver understands to have made a mistake, that probably learned to
never repeat again, but it would be unreasonable to have the mission interrupted for
this mistake only.

A minimum number of misuses must be allowed without rupture; in the case of

suspensions misuse usually implies the applications of shocks.

Certain obstacles must be afforded without damages or permanent deformations;
a typical test example consists of driving at 50 km/h on an obstacle 100 mm high and
100 mm long.

3.6 Design and Testing

219

A different kind of misuse test is hitting a wheel against a sidewalk, as it could

happen driving in a curve at an excessive speed.

In this case the structural integrity of the suspension cannot be guaranteed, partic-
ularly for the lower arm; occupant safety must be, instead, protected within certain
limits of acceptable severity.

After a maneuver of this kind, the following results must be obtained:

• arms mustn’t brake as to maintain their guidance to the wheel until the car is

• permanent deformation on the arm must be visible and such as to discourage any

stopped;

prosecution of the trip.

Crash Test

By automotive engineering crashes against external obstacles or other vehicles make
reference to a standard test speciﬁed by law.

Suspensions must be designed as to not intrude into the passenger compartment

as a result of a standard crash test.

These structures must prove to collapse in a non aggressive way; on the other
side subframes, wheels and other elements have to play an important role into the
entire car structure collapse, after a crash test, to conserve the passenger compartment
geometrical integrity.

3.6.3 Elasto-kinematic Behavior

After the explanation on different suspension kinds and after having analyzed their
advantages and the disadvantages, it is clear that a certain technical hierarchy could be
established, ranking suspension types by increasing function, but also by increasing
cost.

Front suspension could be ranked starting from Mc Pherson to double wishbones
with virtual centers, while rear suspension from trailing arms and twist axles to
multilink.

If the designer decision is easy for a high performance car with no problems
on price, or for a small economy car, where costumers are keen to sacriﬁce for a
contained price, the choice is rather difﬁcult for most medium cars.

Many times very good results can be achieved by a cheaper suspensions if the
design is sufﬁciently reﬁned, particularly as far as tire sizing and elastic bushings are
concerned.

3 Suspensions

Some design rules can be set to address suspension design to obtain good handling
and comport performance.

220

Design Rules

Tires Working Angles

Let us start from the tire working angles and their impact on handling performance.
If it is true that the working angles variations, in consequence of the body roll,
can correct signiﬁcantly handling properties by making the vehicle more or less
understeering, it is also true that such corrections are delayed as compared with the
maneuver starting time; the best rule is to design suspension mechanism without any
variation of toe angles and camber angles with the suspension stroke.

The desired level of understeering may be achieved by a convenient tire sizing
and by optimizing weight distribution also in consequence of transfers due to inertia
forces.

This condition on toe angles is relatively easy to be reached; as far as camber is
concerned the condition can be reached only if camber angles are recovering the roll
angle effect, but for rigid axle where the problem is not existing.

This condition should not be assumed without reasonable criticism; the camber

stiffness of selected tires is fundamental.

What must be reduced is the additional cornering force rising from camber angles;
if on a given tire camber stiffness is about 1/10 of the cornering stiffness (that means
the cornering force rising from a side slip angle of 1◦, with no camber, is the same
rising from a camber angle of 10◦, with no side slip angle), tires with a lower camber
stiffness can be manufactured making a simpler Mc Pherson suspension performing
like a more sophisticated double wishbone one.

On prevailing use conditions toe angles and camber angles must be set to zero to

minimize wear and rolling resistance.

For the same reason is better to minimize track variations because of suspension

stroke.

Comfort

Considering comfort, a ﬁrst rule can be set on total suspension ﬂexibility determined
by coil springs and stop springs; a convenient value for the ﬁrst natural frequency
of the sprung mass should be set around 1 Hz, optimum for a human body in sitting
position.

This condition implies that ﬂexibility should be proportional to the vertical sus-

pended mass or that suspension must become stiffer as the pay load is increased.

Suspension total stroke must be limited for practical reasons: wheel case dimen-
sion and car lifting with a jack, in order to change a punctured wheel; it should be
at least comparable with the extension of maximum road asperities to be afforded.

3.6 Design and Testing

221

This condition has, as consequence, a maximum stroke of about 70 mm in both di-
rection (extension and compression) starting from the reference condition of vehicle
at minimum load.

In the compression direction, the stroke necessary to reach the maximum pay load
condition must be also added. By wide load variations (station wagons, minivans,
large sedans, etc.) suspension with trim control are necessary.

To think about vertical obstacles only is a rough approximation of the reality.
Because of the vehicle motion each obstacle hits the wheel also in an horizontal
direction. It is fundamental to assure to each wheel also a horizontal suspension;
longitudinal stiffness should be no more then ten times of the vertical one.

This result may be obtained by designing a mechanism as to have a convenient
wheel base variation with suspension stroke; for front wheels, wheel base must
decrease by compression stroke, while the rear ones must do the opposite. In addition
elastic bushings must assure an additional convenient longitudinal ﬂexibility.

In the ﬁrst case the suspension is again a mechanism with one degree of freedom,
but the path of center of the tire patch has been conveniently inclined in the vertical
x z plane. In the second case an additional degree of freedom has been added: the
longitudinal motion.

The suspension mechanism must never comply horizontally with toe angles vari-

ations, but in a reduced way for stabilizing braking.

Steering

Further considerations can be made for the steering mechanism.

Contrary to what commonly thought reaching Ackermann condition is not vital
until the difference between the effective and the theoretical angle (the so-called
steering error) is lower as about 4 deg at maximum steering angle. In fact side slip
angles is partially vanishing steering angle accuracy.

King-pin offset can affect steering wheel torque during braking; the rule for a
negative king-pin offset is universally adopted, because is stabilizing the car path
during braking (if the braking force increases on one wheel, the added steering
action left by the late response of the driver, is able to counterbalance the yaw
moment caused by braking forces unbalance).

The longitudinal trail, by cornering forces, can apply to the steering wheel an
additional self aligning torque; this contribution is particularly important because
can compensate tire self aligning torque decrease by large side slip angles, but still
with good cornering force.

It is better not to exaggerate with front wheel driven cars, because of the aligning

torque caused by traction forces.

Caster angle is bound to the longitudinal trail; an appropriate value can have a pos-
itive impact on turning radius, because the king-pin inclination is causing additional
camber angles on wheels.

222

3 Suspensions

Elasto-kinematic Calculation

Independent Suspensions

Elasto-kinematic behavior predictions can be made by modelling an articulated sys-
tem including all spherical or cylindrical couples included in the mechanism. If
couples are considered to be stiff, the kinematic behavior can be predicted; if they
are supposed to be compliant to the applied forces, the elasto-kinematic behavior
will be predicted.

It is convenient to calculate the suspension conﬁguration by kinematic contribu-
tions only ant then to add to this conﬁguration the effect of elastic displacements.
This procedure is approximate, because it doesn’t take into account contributions of
the modiﬁed position on the values of forces; this approach is nevertheless acceptable
in practical cases.

By this kind of calculations, conventionally, all displacement and rotations of the
wheel are referred to the car reference system and not to the wheel; in other words
the body is supposed to be ﬁxed at a test bench block and the actual position of the
wheel is calculated by imposing to the hub a given displacement along the z axis.

At this displaced position a certain force Fz will be necessary to maintain the
elastic suspension system in equilibrium; when necessary, to this new displaced
position forces Fx and Fy will be applied to examine their additional effect.

It must be recalled that toe and camber angles that are so evaluated cannot be
introduced into the formulae used to calculate tire forces, as they are, but they must
be corrected with the effects of body and wheel rotations, as roll angle, vehicle side
slip angle and wheel steering angle.

Usually the study of displacement and rotations caused by suspension stroke are

separated from the study of the effect of applied forces.

In the ﬁrst case, vertical loads (at the wheel center or at the contact patch center),
toe, camber, track, wheelbase variations are calculated with reference to the static
conﬁguration, as function of the suspension stroke (referred to the body) and for
different steering angles.

These characteristics may have a different behavior in the case of symmetric
stroke (the wheels of the same axle have the same stroke) or asymmetric (when the
displacements are opposite, with the same absolute value).

By elasto-kinematic calculations, suspension elements and articulations to the

body have further displacements because of the applied loads.

By calculating the effect of additional forces but the vertical ones, the procedure
is the same; it should be remembered that the path of the center of the contact patch,
where forces are applied is not perfectly directed along the z axis; therefore the
application of Fx and Fy forces causes additional suspension stroke.

At this new position, the effect of bearing and bushings deformations can be

calculated.

On Fig. 3.75 some typical diagrams are shown that are obtained with this kind of
analysis. The diagram at the upper left reports stroke as function of the vertical force.
The stroke (cid:2)z is measured starting from the reference conditions of car with full

3.6 Design and Testing

223

Fig. 3.75 Typical diagrams of suspension geometric parameters. From the top right, going clock-
wise, we can see suspension stroke diagram as function of vertical load, toe angle diagram as
function of suspension stroke for different steering angles, camber angle diagram as function of
suspension stroke and semi track diagram as function of suspension stroke

tanks and two people with their baggage; (cid:2)z is positive in compression and negative
in extension.

There is a part of the line almost linear, when only the coil spring is working
(the contribution of elastic bushings is very small), while at increasing loads the
curvature of the diagram is increasing till a maximum value, as stop spring start to
work. Suspension ﬂexibility is deﬁned as the partial derivative ∂z/∂ Fz, calculated for
(cid:2)z = 0. The total suspension stroke is done by the difference between the maximum
compression and the maximum extension.

The diagram at the upper right shows, instead, toe angle as function of the suspen-
sion stroke, for different steering angles, while the diagram at the lower left concerns
camber angle as function of the suspension stroke.

Finally, the last diagram reports semi track variation as function of the suspension

stroke.

These diagrams can be used to calculate also the same magnitudes as function of
roll angle by reading the diagrams at symmetric values, which easily provide the roll
angle. It should be noticed that each of these diagrams as function of roll are valid
only for the value of the symmetric stroke, we have considered as starting point of
the roll motion.

On the following Fig. 3.76 are represented the effects of the applied forces on the

same characteristic parameters.

224

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.76 Typical diagrams describing the elasto-kinematic behavior of a suspension; notice how
steering rack can couple the two wheels of the same axle

Toe angles variations, as function of the cornering force Fy, are reported on the
upper left diagram. In this diagrams the force is applied to a suspension only (called
loaded side), but the effects are also measured on the other suspension of the same
axle (called unloaded side): notice how the unloaded side wheel responds, because
of the mechanical connection established by the steering rack.

The following diagrams show the camber angle variation, as function of the cor-

nering force Fy.

Toe angle variations, as function of the self aligning torque Mz is shown on the

lower left; in this case too the effect on the unloaded wheel can be observed.

The last two diagrams show respectively toe angles variation and wheelbase vari-
ations as function of the braking or driving force Fx . This last diagram is useful to
evaluate the longitudinal absorption capacity of longitudinal shocks.

3.6 Design and Testing

225

Very often these diagrams are linearized by substituting these curves with their
tangent at the origin, in order to be input in simple mathematical models: in this case
the derivatives of this parameter are considered.

The main ones are (t),z, (t),φ, (γ),z, (γ),φ and (ε),z, (ε),φ.

Rigid Axles

If wheels are connected by a rigid beam, this last must have two degrees of freedom
with respect to the body, one translation in the z direction and one rotation around
the roll axis. This rigid beam can be guided, as we have seen, by linkages or by the
leafs springs or by both.

The elasto-kinematic behavior must, in this case, be described by two coordinates;
a common choice is to have diagrams as function of roll angle, with suspension stroke
as parameter.

The solution with leaf springs, with structural function, has the disadvantages
of approximating the correct kinematic behavior in which the axle can move only
along z coordinate and rotate about the roll axis, in a poor way. The stiffness in x
and y directions, although far higher than that in z direction, is not high enough,
as is the stiffness for rotations about the y axis and, above all, any rolling motion
is linked to a steering of the whole axis (roll steer). In other words, the derivative
∂δ/∂φ can be quite high (Fig. 3.66). The latter characteristic is due to the fact that
the motion of the points in which the axle is connected to the springs is not exactly
vertical, although the deviation from the vertical direction of the trajectory shown in
the ﬁgure is exaggerated, to show the phenomenon.

The solution with guiding linkages can avoid this poor characteristic and improve

the behavior also by longitudinal ﬂexibility.

In all cases track and camber angle are constant, this last if tire vertical deformation

is neglected. Therefore (t),z = (t),φ = (γ),z = (γ),φ = 0.

Roll Axis

Roll axis is the instantaneous rotation axis of the vehicle, when the body is in sym-
metric condition (i.e.: φ = 0). It is an instantaneous rotation axis because the roll
motion is not a pure rotation around a physical articulation; therefore this axis can
be deﬁned for small rotations only, starting from a well deﬁned initial condition.

The points where roll axis is crossing vertical planes through wheel centers of

same axles are called suspension roll centers CR.

For symmetry reasons, the roll axis must lie in the symmetry plane of the vehicle
(x z plane) and therefore also the roll centres of the suspensions must lie in it. Note
that in case of a two-axle vehicle the roll centre of each suspension can be determined
from the characteristics of the relevant suspension only and that the roll axis can be
deﬁned as a line connecting the roll centres of the two suspensions. If the vehicle has
more than two axles, the roll centres of the suspensions need not be aligned: A roll

226

3 Suspensions

axis still exist, but it does not pass through the roll centres of the single suspensions,
considered as insulated.

The roll centre of each suspension can also be deﬁned as the point on a plane
perpendicular to the ground and to the symmetry plane in which the application of
a lateral force Fy to the vehicle body does not cause any roll. The two deﬁnitions
obviously coincide.

Other important points are:

• the center of rotation of the body with respect to the wheels CW and
• the center of rotation of the wheels with respect to the ground RS.

Rigid Axles

As in a rigid axle the two wheels are rigidly connected, the two points are located in
the symmetry plane. Moreover, if the compliance of the tires is neglected, the wheels
cannot rotate with respect to the ground: Points CW are located at inﬁnity on the
intersection between the ground and the plane parallel to yz plane passing through
the centres of the wheels and the two points BW coincide with the roll centre RC.

If the compliance of the tires is accounted for, points RS lie on the symmetry
plane slightly below the ground, but their positions are not exactly deﬁned as they
depend on the deﬂection of the tires and hence on the forces applied to them; it is
however possible to deﬁne a zone in which they lie. Also points CW coincide and
are located in the symmetry plane of the vehicle below the roll centre CR.

In some case points CW are physically deﬁned as there is a material hinge between
the axle and the body (Fig. 3.77a–d). If the axle is guided laterally by leaf springs,
CW is on the symmetry plane, at the level of the attachment of the springs to the
body (Fig. 3.77e). The lateral deﬂection of springs causes CW to be located at a lower
level and the inﬂection of the tires causes the roll centre CR to be located below CW.
With lateral deformations of tires, the center will be at the intersection of the
perpendiculars to the displacement vectors, caused the application of Mx and Fy, as
in Fig. 3.77f.

A four-link suspension is shown in Fig. 3.78. To obtain the position of the roll
centre, the intersections A and B of the axes of links 1-1(cid:2) and 2-2(cid:2) must be found
ﬁrst. They lie in the symmetry plane of the vehicle. The roll centre is found as the
intersection of line AB with the plane perpendicular to the ground containing the
centres of the wheels. If two links are parallel (say links 1 and 1(cid:2)) the intersection
is at inﬁnity and line AB is parallel to the projection of the relevant links on the
symmetry plane.

The situation for a three-link suspension is similar (Fig. 3.79). The only difference
is that point B is the intersection of the axis of the transversal link with the plane of
symmetry.

In the case of a rigid axle with leaf springs, the roll centre is located at the
intersection between the projection on the symmetry plane of a line connecting the
points in which the springs are connected to the body and the perpendicular to the

3.6 Design and Testing

227

Fig. 3.77 From a to e position of point CW on some rigid axle suspensions; tires are stiff. Scheme
f shows the position of RS, CR and CW, taking into account tires deformation

Fig. 3.78 Four link suspension. Position of point CR

228

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.79 Three-link suspension. Position of point CR

ground through the centre of the wheel (Fig. 3.77e). If the compliance of the tires
is not neglected, to ﬁnd an approximate location of CW, CR and RS it is possible
to proceed as in Fig. 3.77f: A force Fy and a moment Mx are applied to the body:
Displacements s1, s2, s3 and s4 of points A, B, C and D are due to the inﬂection of
the tires, while the compliance of springs causes displacements s5 and s6 of points C
and D. The intersection of the lines perpendicular to s1 and s2 locate point RS; CW is
the intersection of the lines perpendicular to s5 and s6 and that of the perpendiculars
to the resultants of s3 and s5 and of s4 and s6 locate point CR.
The derivative (γ),φ can be approximately computed as:

(3.6)

where:

∂γ
∂φ

=

χ
χ + (cid:3)

,

χ = 2kd 2 + χt ,

(k is the stiffness of the springs and χt that of the anti-roll bar) and (cid:3) are respectively
the rolling stiffness of the suspension and of tires.

3.6 Design and Testing

229

Fig. 3.80 Position of roll center CR for a low double wishbone suspension with 1(cid:2)2(cid:2) and 3(cid:2)4(cid:2) arms
parallel to x axis. CR: position with rigid tires; CR(cid:2): position with deformable tires

Independent Suspensions

Note that in general the wheel motion is not planar and as a consequence the study of
the kinematic behavior is not easy. Nowadays it is however easy to obtain the exact
kinematics of any suspension by using computer generated trajectories.

With double wishbone suspensions, the points CW1 and CW2 of the two wheels
are located at the intersection of the upper arms and lower arms axis that can cross out-
side of the vehicle (Fig. 3.81a,) or inside (Fig. 3.80). It is possible to obtain ∂t/∂z = 0,
by imposing that CW1 and CW2 are on the ground (Fig. 3.81b), but this condition
can be obtained for a certain value of the pay load. If ∂γ/∂φ must be set to zero, the
points CW1, CW2 and CR must lie on the symmetry plane (Fig. 3.81c).

If the wheels were thin rigid discs, points RS1 and RS2 would coincide with the
centres of the contact areas. If the compliance of tires is accounted for their approx-
imated position can be located under the ground, slightly inboard of the centres of
contact. By connecting points CW1 and RS1 and points CW2 and RS2 and intersect-
ing such lines the roll centre CR, which lies in the symmetry plane, can be located.
In the case of transversal articulated quadrilaterals, it is usually close to the ground
or, if the deformation of the tires is considered, even below it. If the axes of the
hinges of the two triangular linkages are not horizontal or not parallel (Fig. 3.82) the
determination of the roll centre and of the motion of the latter is far more complicated.
The construction necessary to obtain the different centers of a Mc Pherson sus-

pension is shown on Fig. 3.5.

A different approach is that of using trailing arms (Fig. 3.47). The arms can be
hinged to an axis which is perpendicular to the symmetry plane of the vehicle but
this is not always the case. In the ﬁrst case the track remains constant,

∂t
∂z

=

∂t
∂φ

= 0

and the camber angle does not change in the vertical motions and is equal to the roll
angle:

230

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.81 Low double wishbone suspensions

Fig. 3.82 Low double wishbone suspension with non horizontal articulation axis (a) and non
parallel axis (b). The inclination of these axis determines the position of the pitch center

3.6 Design and Testing

Fig. 3.83 Swing arms
suspension with different (a)
or coincident (b) hinges

231

∂γ
∂z

= 0,

= 1 .

∂γ
∂φ

If the compliance of tires is neglected, the roll centre is on the ground (Fig. 3.47a) or
slightly below (Fig. 3.47b).

Another solution is that based on swing arms. The hinges of the arms can be
located at different points (Fig. 3.83a) or be coincident (Fig. 3.83b). The roll centre
can be quite high on the road and the values of ∂t/∂z and of ∂t/∂φ cannot be small.
Swing arms can be connected to the powertrain block instead of being hinged to
the body, as it was common in small cars with rear engine. The fact that the engine
was suspended through rubber blocks decreased the precision requirements of the
suspension.

Conclusions

The main kinematic characteristics of the various type of suspensions are summarized
in Table 3.1. This overview does not cover all the solutions which have been used or
have been suggested like, as an example, the multilink solution, which is common
on luxury cars. It is similar to a suspension with transversal quadrilaterals but the
greater number of distinct elements allows a more detailed adjustment.

232

3 Suspensions

Table 3.1 Main characteristics of some suspensions. TA: Trailing arms; SAL: Swinging arms (limit
case); SA: Swinging arms; DWP: Double wishbone with parallel arms; DWL: Double wishbone
(limit case); DW: Double wishbone; MP: Mc Pherson. A, CR high on the ground; B, below or on
the ground, C, about at the wheel center D, over the wheel center; E, on the ground

Rigid
axle

Independent suspensions

TA

SAL

SA

DWL

#0
0
#0
0
C
0
#0

#0
#0
#0
#0
D
0
#0

DWP
#0a
#0
#0
1
B
#0
0

0
#0
#0
#0
E
0
0

MP

#0
#0
#0

DW
#0b
#0
#0
> 0 < 1 < 0 > 1
B
#0
#0

B
#0
#0

0
0
0
1
B
0
#0

∂t/∂z
∂t/∂φ
∂γ/∂z
∂γ/∂φ

0
0
0
0
CR Pos. A
0 (≈0)
CR Var.
∂i/∂zc
0
a0 in one conﬁguration
b0 in two conﬁgurations
ci: kingpin inclination

Pitch Axis: Anti-dive and Anti-squat Conﬁgurations

When the vehicle accelerates or brakes a load transfer between front and rear wheels
occurs. This causes the body to pitch up (lift or squat) or down (dive).

As for the roll, a pitch axis can be deﬁned. The pitch axis is the axis of instantaneous
rotation for pitch. It is an instantaneous rotation, because the pitch motion is not a
pure rotation around a well deﬁned axis, but this axis can be deﬁned only for small
rotation starting form a deﬁned position, such as that where x axis is parallel to the
X axis of the inertial reference system.

Apparently, as forces Fz1 and Fz2 can be approximated as:

where forces F ∗
zi
the front and the rear of the body are respectively:

are those occurring when the vehicle does not accelerate, the lift of

⎧
⎪⎨

⎪⎩

Fz1

Fz2

= F ∗
z1
= F ∗
z2

− m

+ m

hG
l
hG
l

˙V
˙V ,

⎧
⎪⎪⎨

⎪⎪⎩

(cid:2)z1 = m

hG
l Ka

˙V

(cid:2)z2 = −m

hG
l Kr

˙V ,

(3.7)

(3.8)

where K f and Kr are the vertical stiffness of the front and rear suspensions. The
pitch angle due to an acceleration is then:

3.6 Design and Testing

θ = 1
l

(−(cid:2)z1 + (cid:2)z2) = −m

(cid:7)

hG
l 2

˙V

1
Ka

+ 1
Kr

(cid:8)

.

A positive value of θ occurs when the vehicle dives (pitches down) as it occurs

with a negative acceleration, hence the minus sign in the formula.

This expression is however an oversimpliﬁcation, for two reasons: Firstly the
longitudinal forces due to driving or braking wheels can cause themselves a pitching
moment due to the coupling of the suspensions and, secondly, driving and braking
torque reactions can be applied, at least partly, to the suspensions instead of the body,
inducing further pitching. Both effects cause pitching even in constant speed driving.
If suspensions allow wheels to move also in x direction, i.e. if the characteristic
∂x/∂z is not vanishingly small, a fraction Fx ∂x/∂z of force Fx acting between the
road and the wheel acts on the suspension and causes pitching. Equation (3.7) then
becomes:

Fz1

= F ∗
z1

− m

Fz2

= F ∗
z2

+ m

hG
l
hG
l

˙V −

˙V −

(cid:7)

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

(cid:8)
1

2

∂x
∂z
∂x
∂z

Fx 1

Fx 2

⎧
⎪⎪⎨

⎪⎪⎩

(cid:7)

and Eq. (3.9) transforms into:

θ = −m

hG
l 2

˙V

1
Ka

+ 1
Kr

−

(cid:8)

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

∂x
∂z

Fx 1
l Ka

1

+

∂x
∂z

Fx 2
l Kr

.

2

233

(3.9)

(3.10)

(3.11)

If only longitudinal forces needed to accelerate or to brake the vehicle are con-
sidered and the percentage of the longitudinal force assigned to the front axle is kl,
it follows:

Fx1

= klm ˙V ,

Fx2

= (1 − kl)m ˙V .

Equation (3.9) yields:

θ = −m

(cid:9)

˙V
l

hG
l Ka

+ hG
l Kr

+ kl
Ka

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

(cid:10)

∂x
∂z

(1 − kl)
Kr

−

1

∂x
∂z

.

2

(3.12)

Obviously Eq. (3.9) holds in the case of acceleration and braking alike, provided

that the sign of ˙V is correct and a suitable value for kl is used.

Consider for example the trailing arm suspension of Fig. 3.84a. With simple ge-

ometrical reasoning it is easy to assess that:

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

∂x
∂z

= e
d

.

(3.13)

A similar equation holds also for the suspension of Fig. 3.84b. If a torque My is
applied to the sprung mass, it causes an increase of the force acting on the spring equal
to My/d. As the torque linked to a generation of driving or braking forces is equal

234

3 Suspensions

to −Fx Rl, the result is that the application of the braking torque to the suspension
can be accounted for by substituting:

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

∂x
∂z

+

i

Rl
d

i

a:

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

∂x
∂z

.

i

Note that d is positive when point A is in front of the wheel and negative otherwise.
The driving torque is applied to the unsprung mass in the case of live axles, while
in De Dion axles and independent suspensions it is applied directly to the vehicle
body and this correction does not apply. Braking torques are on the contrary applied
usually to the unsprung masses, so the term in Rl/d must always be accounted for.
However, if the torque transmission between the sprung and the unsprung masses is
supplied by linkages which prevent any relative rotation about y axis, as d tends to
inﬁnity, these effects are minimized.

The above relationships allow one to design the suspensions to compensate, usu-
ally partially, for squat or dive. A total compensation occurs when Eq. (3.11) yields
θ = 0. If:

the front of the car does not lift in acceleration or dive in braking, while if:

hG
l Ka

+ kl
Ka

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

∂x
∂z

= 0

1

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

hG
l Kr

−

(1 − kl)
Kr

∂x
∂z

= 0

2

the rear does not squat in acceleration or lift in braking.

Note that in case of a single driving axle either kl = 0 or kl = 1 and both front
and rear compensations cannot be performed together. To obtain a complete com-
pensation the term in square brackets in Eq. (3.11) must vanish and the front of the
car must dive to compensate for the squat of the rear axle in front drives or the rear
must lift in rear drives.

In case of braking a total compensation of the front axle leads to the condition:

i.e.:

and that of the rear axle to:

(cid:9)(cid:7)

(cid:8)

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

(cid:10)

kl
Ka

∂x
∂z

+

1

= − hG
l Ka

,

1

Rl
d

(cid:8)

(cid:7)

kl
Ka

e + Rl
d

= − hG
l Ka

1

(cid:9)(cid:7)

(cid:8)

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

(cid:10)

(1 − kl)
Kr

∂x
∂z

+

2

Rl
d

2

= hG
l Kr

,

(3.14)

(3.15)

(3.16)

(3.17)

(3.18)

3.6 Design and Testing

235

Fig. 3.84 Relationship between ∂x/∂z and suspension geometry, for trailing arms (a) and double
wishbone (b) suspensions. If arms are parallel, d → ∞. How to establish the anti-dive effect (c)

i.e.:

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

(1 − kl)
Kr

e + Rl
d

= hG
l Kr

.

2

(3.19)

A simple geometrical construction is shown in Fig. 3.84c; if pivots are on the
dotted lines, a complete compensation in braking is obtained while if they lie below
the lines dive compensation is only partial. If they are above the line, the front will
lift and the rear will squat in braking.

A similar scheme could be draft for traction conditions; in this case the dotted

line should start at the wheel center and not on the contact point.

Usually no complete anti-dive compensation is obtained for many reasons, psy-
chological (a ﬂat braking is not desirable) and objective (complete anti-dive compen-
sation can lead to overcompensation of acceleration squat and to geometries which
are poor both for comfort and performance).

3.6.4 Bench Testing Methods

The most relevant problems of testing a suspension are those that are common to the
development of remaining vehicle components that are:

236

3 Suspensions

• reducing lead time to signiﬁcant prototypes;
• improving velocity of performing tests;
• containing testing costs.

For these reasons is preferable to test suspensions as outside of the road as possible,
using dedicated indoor benches; obviously the ﬁnal approval will, in any case, be
given after an on road test of the complete vehicle.

The advantage of this approach is bound to the simpliﬁcation of the system to be

analyzed.

• The test object can be simpliﬁed, by limiting prototypes to the really new com-
ponents and by utilizing remaining ones taken from the shelf of the production
shop. This approach can be used for both a suspension to be bench tested and to
a vehicle, drivable on the road, with the new suspensions. Vehicle of this kind are
usually called mule cars.

• Test outputs can be easily obtained in an objective way for prototype simplicity
and because it is not tested on the road; these outputs can be elaborates through
mathematical models, to predict the entirely new vehicle performance.

• Bench test can be easily automatized, with beneﬁts on costs and on test results

conﬁdence level.

This approach is clearly advantaging only if test results have been anticipated by
calculations; in this case the most relevant issues only are investigated, while the less
relevant ones can be totally neglected.

Elasto-kinematic Bench

Bench tests, ﬁnalized to elasto-kinematic behavior measurement are performed es-
sentially in order to:

• verify the accomplishment of the projected characteristics;
• determine the input data of vehicle dynamics simulation models, used to analyze
and verify the performance of a prototype car or interpret the performance of a
competitor’s car (reverse engineering).

Generally speaking an elasto-kinematic bench is a system able to impose to sus-
pensions of a real car or of a test ﬁxture, which is ﬁxed on the bench, an assigned
displacement or set of forces.
The bench is composed by:

• actuators (can be hydraulic or electric);
• actuators control system;
• measurement and recording system;
• a suitable software package for data acquisition and elaboration and hardware

control.

3.6 Design and Testing

237

Fig. 3.85 Elasto-kinematic bench with hydraulic actuators and anthropomorphic arm measuring
system. Hydraulic actuators

As an example, an elasto-kinematic bench with hydraulic actuators and anthro-

pomorphic arm measuring system is brieﬂy described.

Actuators are composed by a couple of moving platforms, shown on Fig. 3.85,
able to apply assigned displacement and forces to the center of the contact patch of
the tire or to the wheel hub.

Displacements can be parallel or opposed, along the three axes; also rotations can
be imposed around the z axis; both displacement and rotations are applied according
to sinusoidal laws at very low frequency (≈0.005 Hz) within the desired measuring
range.

The possibility to apply load cycles is essential to evaluate frictions and hystereses.
Also assigned vertical or cornering forces and self aligning torque can be applied.
The anthropomorphic arm system of Fig. 3.86 allows to detect the spatial mo-
tion of the wheel hubs of the same axle, consequent to the application of the said
displacements and forces; three displacements and three angles are monitored.

The body is ﬁxed through the structure 1 and is considered as the reference system;

measurements can be repeated with different steering angles.

While interpreting measurements body displacements must be also evaluated;
when assessing the suspension only, their contribution should be eliminated; they

238

3 Suspensions

Fig. 3.86 Elasto-kinematic bench with hydraulic actuators and anthropomorphic arm measuring
system. The anthropomorphic arm detects the spatial wheel motion, consequent to forces application
or suspension stroke

are to be taken into account, in any case, when the entire car behavior is under
investigation.

We complete this example by reporting some of the technical speciﬁcations of

this bench:

±150 mm
vertical stroke:
longitudinal displacement: ±75 mm
±75 mm
lateral displacement:
angle of rotation around Z (cid:2): ±90◦
±180◦
steering angle rotation:
±20,000 N
vertical force:
±10,000 N
longitudinal force:
±10,000 N
lateral force:
torque around Z (cid:2):
±1,000 Nm
±50 Nm.
steering wheel torque:

3.6 Design and Testing

239

Vibrations Characterization Bench

This bench is also called four axes bench, because of the number of available inde-
pendent actuators; it allows measurements of the vibrational behavior of the entire
vehicle and of its suspensions, because of the application of periodic forces at its
wheels, which simulate, in a controlled environment, the road proﬁle.

Each wheel rests on an independent vertical actuator. This actuator is characterized

by the following limits:

• input forces can be only vertical; therefore horizontal components due to car motion

• wheels are not rotating; dynamic contribution of tires given by rolling is, therefore,

are neglected;

neglected.

The bench is, nevertheless, very useful to monitor the ﬁltering capacity of the
suspension, to compare different suspensions, to reproduce and solve problems de-
tected on the road, in terms of vibration, noise and squeaks and to supply experimental
correlations to comfort mathematical models.

The bench includes:

• four vertical actuators;
• actuation control system;
• measurement system;
• software package for data acquisition and control.

Different kinds of vertical inputs are available:

• sinusoidal input at constant frequency;
• sinusoidal input at increasing frequency (frequency sweep);
• random not correlated inputs on the four wheels;
• assigned road proﬁles reproduction.

The ﬁrst three input types allow to calculate the transmissibility of the tire-
suspension-body system, as ratio between the input point at the wheel and the mea-
surement point. By changing excitation amplitude nonlinearity can be discovered.
Sinusoidal inputs and frequency sweeps easily allow their detection.

Not correlated random inputs are useful for a quick characterization: with a single
test a predeﬁned frequency ﬁelds my be investigated. By data elaboration it is possible
to separate transmissibility contributions of parallel springing, roll and pitch motions.
Road proﬁles reproduction is a direct evaluation of the suspension comfort per-

formance.

To characterize suspension comfort, three axial accelerations are measured at

wheel hubs, body spring seats and shock absorbers body connections.

The comparison with the accelerations of the body at foot rest, seat rails and

steering wheels is a very common indicator for the comfort performance.

If the bench isn’t noisy also induced noise can be evaluated.
The technical speciﬁcations of a bench of this kind may be:

240

3 Suspensions

±100 mm

suspension stroke:
maximum actuation speed: 2.8 m/s
maximum acceleration:
passing band:

270 m/s2
up to 200 Hz.

Fatigue Bench

Fatigue testing can be applied to the entire suspension or to a suspension component
(like a suspension arm or a spring, etc.), separated of the system.

The benches in use depend on the complexity of the system to be tested. Compo-
nents are tested using hydraulic pulsator that can be combined with other, according to
the system complexity; a single hydraulic actuator should have these speciﬁcations:

• three axial capability (can apply forces along x, y, z axes contemporarily);
• load programmer;
• complete body or universal ﬁxation structure;
• signal recorder.

Fig. 3.87 Three axial bench: the suspensions are mounted on a body, ﬁxed to the bench with the
structure 1. Suspensions are tested by actuators that can transfer to the wheel longitudinal, vertical
and cornering forces

3.6 Design and Testing

241

Fig. 3.88 Fatigue test of a single suspension arm

The suspension to be tested is mounted on the body or body dummy, set on the
bench with a combination of actuators; the same bench can also fatigue test an entire
car body.

Figure 3.87 show a bench of this kind: suspensions are installed on the body,
which is ﬁxed to the bench through the structure 1. Suspensions are loaded by a set
of actuators that can apply vertical, longitudinal and cornering forces.

Longitudinal and cornering forces actuators are working through rods 3 and 4.
Actuators must be designed for an unlimited life.
These actuators apply load blocks which a load time history gathered on a real
roads; some parts of this history are eliminated, if they do not contribute to structure
damage, to shorten the test duration.

When a single component is tested, the bench is much smaller and can be used
for different test: it consists of a general purpose ﬁxture for assembling the test
components and the actuators and some hydraulic actuators.

This benches can be easily retooled to perform test on different components.
Figure 3.88 represents the bench setup for testing a longitudinal arm of a guided
arms suspension. The point 1 corresponds to the body articulation, while points 2
and 3 to the other arm articulations; the point 4 is the wheel hub ﬂange.

The arm is installed on a test bed with thin rods 5, able to react with axial forces
only and set as to reproduce the total mechanism, missing on the bench. Particularly,
the point 1 is ﬁxed by three rods, as to eliminate any linear displacement, the point

242

3 Suspensions

2 has the only vertical displacement blocked, while the point 3 has the lateral and
vertical displacement constricted.

The point 4, corresponding to the wheel hub ﬂange, is loaded by two hydraulic
actuators; the vertical actuator A1 simulates the vertical static load, while a second
actuator A2 applies a periodic load on the yz plane, with a given inclination as to
reproduce the cornering force and the consequent load transfer.
A different setup could simulate traction and braking forces.

Chapter 4
Steering System

4.1 Introduction

As far as path control is concerned, vehicles may be classiﬁed according to two
categories:
• guided vehicles, or better, kinematically guided vehicles, whose trajectory is ﬁxed

by a set of kinematic constraints;

• piloted vehicles, in which the trajectory, a tri-dimensional or a planar curve, is
determined by a guidance system, controlled by a human pilot or by a device,
usually electro-mechanical. The guidance system acts by exerting forces on the
vehicle which are able to change its trajectory.

In the ﬁrst case the kinematic constraint exerts all forces needed to modify the
trajectory without any deformation, i.e. is assumed to be inﬁnitely stiff and inﬁnitely
strong. A perfect kinematic guidance is therefore an abstraction, although it is well
approximated in many actual cases.

In the second case the forces are due to the changes of the attitude of the vehicle
which in turn are caused by forces and moments due to the guidance devices. These
vehicles can be said to be dynamically guided.

Apart from the cases in which the forces needed to change the trajectory are

directly exerted by thrusters (usually rockets), there can be two cases:
• the attitude changes can be quite large, large enough to be directly felt by the pilot

or driver, or

• small enough to be unnoticed.

The ﬁrst case is that of aerodynamically or hydrodynamically controlled vehicles,
in which the pilot acts on a control surface, causing the changes of attitude needed to
generate the forces which modify the trajectory. There is also usually a certain delay
between the changes of attitude and the actual generation of forces and consequently
the drivers feels clearly that a dynamic control, i.e. a control through the application
of forces, takes place.
In the case of road vehicles the situation is similar but the driver has a completely
different impression: The driver operates the steering wheel causing some wheels
to work with a sideslip and to generate lateral forces. These forces cause a change
of attitude of the vehicle (change of angle β) and then a sideslip of all wheels: The
resulting forces bend the trajectory.

However the linearity of the behaviour of the tire and the very high value of
the cornering stiffness give the driver the impression of a kinematic, not dynamic,
driving. Wheels seem to be in pure rolling and the trajectory seems to be determined
by the directions of the midplanes of the wheels.

This impression has inﬂuenced the study of the handling of motor vehicles for a
long time, originating the very concept of kinematic steering and in a sense hiding
the true meaning of the phenomena.

The impressions of the driver is in good accordance with this kinematic approach,
at least for all the linear part of the behaviour of the tire. When high values of the
sideslip angles are reached, the average driver has the impression of losing control
of the vehicle, much more so if this occurs abruptly. This impression is conﬁrmed
by the fact that in normal road conditions, particularly if radial tires are used, the
sideslip angles become large only when approaching the limit lateral forces.

These considerations are only an indication, as there are cases in between those
considered here like kinematic guidance with deformable constraints or magnetic
levitation vehicles. The difference turns out to be more quantitative than qualitative,
and depends mostly on the greater or smaller stiffness with which the vehicle responds
to the variations of attitude due to the guidance devices.

We should also notice that it is conceptually possible to generate the torque,
which initially modiﬁes the vehicle attitude angle, by different means as those we
have explained. Instead of steering and applying a side slip to the steering wheels,
an unequal traction or braking force can be applied to the wheels of the same axle or
an aerodynamic force, outside of the vehicle symmetry plane.

In both cases, this torque is causing a side slip angle to the wheels which curves
the vehicle path. We could imagine a vehicle where no axle is steering and which is
controlled by means of differential wheel braking. Tracked vehicles are controlled in
a similar way, but their dynamics is quite different, because of the intrinsic difference
between tires and tracks.

As we will see later on, differential braking is used by some control system, applied
to improve the vehicle dynamic behavior or handling: the path is set up by the driver,
by steering the wheels, while an automatic control system applies corrections by
differential braking or, sometimes, by additional steering angles.

In the following paragraphs we will comment on the main components which are

part of the steering system, including:
• steering mechanism that is the linkages system steering the front wheels, in a
particular way around the king-pin axis, connecting steering arms, moving with
the suspension stroke, with the steering box;

• steering box transforming steering wheel rotation into a displacement of the steer-

ing tie rods;

• steering column connecting steering wheel with steering box.

4.2 Steering Mechanism

245

4.2 Steering Mechanism

Before explaining the steering mechanism conﬁguration, let us introduce some fur-
ther consideration on steering piloted road vehicles.

Low speed or kinematic steering is deﬁned as the motion of a wheeled vehicle
determined by pure rolling of the wheels. The velocities of the centres of all the
wheels lie in their midplane, i.e., the sideslip angles α are vanishingly small. In
these conditions the wheels can exert no cornering force to balance the centrifugal
force due to the curvature of the trajectory. Kinematic steering is possible only if the
velocity is vanishingly small.

Consider a vehicle with 4 wheels, two of which can steer (Fig. 4.1). The relation-
ship that must be veriﬁed to allow kinematic steering is easily found, by imposing
that the perpendiculars to the midplanes of front wheels meet the ones of rear wheels
at the same point:

tan(δ1) =

,

tan(δ2) =

(4.1)

l
R1 − t
2

.

l
R1 + t
2

Instead of the track t, Eq. (4.1) should contain the distance between the king-pin

axes of the wheels, or better, between their intersections with the ground.

By eliminating R1 between the two equations, a direct relationship between δ1

and δ2 is readily found:

cot(δ1) − cot(δ2) = t
l

.

(4.2)

A device allowing to steer wheels complying exactly with Eq. (4.2), is usually
referred to as Ackerman steering or Ackerman geometry. No actual steering mech-
anism allows to follow exactly such law and a steering error (cid:2)δ2, deﬁned as the
difference between the actual value of δ2 and that obtained from Eq. (4.2) can be
obtained as a function of δ1.

Fig. 4.1 Kinematic steering of a four-wheeled and a two-wheeled vehicle

246

4 Steering System

Fig. 4.2 Scheme of a steering mechanism made by an articulated quadrilateral

Consider for instance the device based on an articulated quadrilateral shown in

Fig. 4.2, used by rigid axle suspensions with a screw and sector steering box.
By this simple mechanism, the track rod AB coordinates wheels steering.
To calculate the relationship between δ1 and δ2, is sufﬁcient to develop some

geometrical considerations. The track rod length AB is:
(cid:3)
(cid:2)
A − B

= l1 − 2l2 sin(γ) .

When steering wheel is turned, the new positions of A and B, said A(cid:2) and B(cid:2),
with reference to a reference system, having the origin in O1 and the x axis in cross
direction, are:

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

(cid:2)
A(cid:2) − O1

(cid:3)

=

l2 sin(γ + δ1)
−l2 cos(γ + δ1)

(cid:4)

(cid:2)
B(cid:2) − O1

(cid:3)

=

l1 − l2 sin(γ − δ2)
−l2 cos(γ − δ2)

,

(cid:5)

,

The square of the distance between A(cid:2) and B(cid:2) is:

(cid:6)

A(cid:2) − B(cid:2)

(cid:7)
2

But this distance is equal to the square of

, and a relation between δ1

and δ2 can be obtained:

= [l2 sin(γ + δ1) + l2 sin(γ − δ2) − l1]2 +
[l2 cos(γ + δ1) − l2 cos(γ − δ2)]2 .
(cid:2)
A − B

(cid:3)

sin(γ − δ2) + sin(γ + δ1) =

(cid:8)(cid:9)

= l1
l2

−

l1
l2

(cid:10)
2

− 2 sin(γ)

− [cos(γ − δ2) − cos(γ + δ1)]2 ,

(4.7)

(4.3)

(4.4)

(4.5)

(4.6)

4.2 Steering Mechanism

that is:

247

1 + sin(γ − δ2) sin(γ + δ1) − λ sin(γ − δ2) − λ sin(γ + δ1)+

(4.8)

+ [λ − 2 sin(γ)] sin(γ) − cos(γ − δ2) cos(γ + δ1) = 0 ,

where λ = l1/l2.

Equation (4.7) may be solved as to obtain δ2 as function of δ1. With laborious

calculations, the following relationship is obtained:

A sin2(γ − δ2) + B sin(γ − δ2) + C = 0 ,

where:

A = 1 + λ2 − 2 sin(γ + δ1)

B = 2D [sin(γ + δ1) − α]

C = D2 − cos2(γ − δ1)

D = 1 − λ sin(γ + δ1) + [α − 2 sin(γ)] sin(γ) ,

which allows to calculate δ2.

If the two steering arms converge on the rear wheels axle, at the intersection with
the vehicle symmetry plane, as proposed by Jeantaud, the angle γ can be calculated
as:

(cid:12)

(cid:11)

γ = artg

l1
2l

.

The relationship δ2 (δ1) obtained with the Jeantaud quadrilateral is compared with
that obtained using the correct kinematic relationship and three different values of γ
in Fig. 4.3a. The steering error (cid:2)δ2 = δ2 − δ2c can be calculated by any value of δ1,
as shown on Fig. 4.3b.

The Jeantaud condition leads to a value of γ = 13, 3◦ and fairly large steering
errors. Three other curves are plotted for γ: 16◦, 18◦ and 20◦ (in all 3 cases the
steering arms converge behind the rear axle); the error is decreasing, for low values
of the steering angle, as γ decreases. Nevertheless low errors at low steering angles
are accompanied by large errors at large steering angles; a compromise is necessary:
on our case a value of γ = 18◦ can be a reasonable choice.

The complete calculation of the steering error for a rack and pinion steering box

is omitted for sake of brevity; we can refer to Fig. 4.4.

If we suppose that rack and tie rods OA are lying on the same plane (this is not
always true) or the triangle OAB is always on a horizontal plane, we can understand
visually that the steering error depends on dimensions a and h, which are conditioned
by the place allowable in the engine compartment.

248

4 Steering System

Fig. 4.3 a Relationship δ2 (δ1) obtained with the Jeantaud quadrilateral (curve J) compared with
that obtained using the correct kinematic relationship and three different values of γ. b Steering
error, (cid:2)δ2 = δ2 − δ2c as function of δ1 for the same steering systems

Fig. 4.4 Kinematic scheme to calculate steering error by a rack and pinion steering box

Let us consider, ﬁnally, the case of a screw and sector steering box in connection
with an independent wheel suspension; in this case a track rod cannot be applied,
because it could introduce undesirable toe angle variations by suspension asymmetric
strokes.

Different steering mechanism can be applied; some of them are shown on Fig. 4.5.
On the upper side of the ﬁgure, the case of a light duty vehicle is represented, for
instance an off-road vehicle. The drop arm, moved by the steering box, is part of an
articulated quadrilateral, where pull arms are connected or the drop arm is directly
doubled. The choice between the two mechanisms is imposed by the available space
and by the elasto-kinematic behavior of the suspension.

On the lower side, at the right, the case is shown of a bus or, more in general, the
case of a vehicle by which the distance between steering wheel and steering axle is
relevant; in this case, a longitudinal pull rod, similar to that of a rigid axle (on the
left), is moving an additional swing arm.

4.2 Steering Mechanism

249

Fig. 4.5 Steering mechanisms for a screw and sector steering box, applied to an independent wheel
suspension; on the upper side of the ﬁgure, the case of a car; on the lower side, the case of a bus
with rigid axle (left) can be compared with the case of an independent suspension (right)

Many efforts have been made in the past to minimize the steering error; neverthe-

less the importance of a correct kinematic steering is often overestimated.

As a matter of fact, we should remember that:

• a wheel side slip angle is always present, by steering;
• most suspensions cause an additional steer angle with roll;
• in most cases steering wheels must have a slight toe-in angle;
• additional steering angles are caused by suspensions stroke and deformation.

All these facts reduce the importance of the steering error and suggest to consider

this issue from an ampler point of view.

The steering error has, nevertheless, a signiﬁcant effect on tire wear of the front
wheels and on steering wheel self aligning, inﬂuencing the driver feeling of the
steering wheel.

It is important that the reaction torque of the steering wheel increases progressively

with steering angle, feature that can be obtained with a suitable geometry.
The radius of the trajectory of the centre of mass of the vehicle is:

(cid:13)

(cid:14)

R =

b2 + R2
1

=

b2 + l 2 cot2(δ) ,

(4.9)

where δ is the steering angle of the equivalent two-wheeled vehicle (Fig. 4.1b), also
called monotrace model. Although it should be computed by averaging the cotangents
of the angles of the two wheels,

250

cot(δ) = R1
l

= cot(δ1) + cot(δ2)
2

,

4 Steering System

(4.10)

it is very close to the direct average of the angles.

Consider for example the same vehicle of Fig. 4.2 with centre of mass at mid-
wheelbase on a curve with a radius R = 10 m. The correct values of the steering
angles are δ1 = 15.090◦, δ2 = 13.305◦ and δ = 14.142◦. By direct averaging the
steering angles of the wheels, it would follow that δ = 14.197◦, with an error of only
0.36%.

Therefore, conventionally, the steering angle δ of a mono trace model is the

average of the steering angles of the wheels of the same axle.

In case the radius of the trajectory is large if compared with the wheelbase of the

vehicle, Eq. (4.9) reduces to:

Equation (4.11) can be rewritten in the form:

R ≈ l cot(δ) ≈ l
δ

.

1
Rδ

≈ 1
l

.

(4.11)

(4.12)

The expression 1/Rδ has an important physical meaning: It is the ratio between
the response of the vehicle, in terms of curvature 1/R of the trajectory, and the input
which causes it. It is therefore a sort of transfer function for the directional control
and can be referred to as trajectory curvature gain. In kinematic steering conditions
it is equal to the reciprocal of the wheelbase.

In the case of a vehicle with independent suspension and rack and pinion steering

box, the steering mechanism is quite different, as shown on Fig. 4.4.

The Jeantaud’s condition could be only veriﬁed if tie rods and rack are aligned

and steering arms are crossing in the middle of the rear axle center line.
The complete explicit calculation of the steering error is laborious.
By using a mathematical model, we can arrive to the diagram shown on Fig. 4.6,

where errors are rather higher as compared with the previous case.

We can assume, in any case, bearing in mind what we have said, that a maximum

error of 5◦ is still acceptable.

The same ﬁgure shows a second diagram, where the steering error is calculated at
the maximum traction force, in this front wheel driven vehicle; this variation is the
effect of the longitudinal displacement of the king-pin axis, by effect of the traction
force.

The wheels steering angle must be also calculated, as function of steering wheel
angle; the result of a calculation of this kind is reported on Fig. 4.7; this result is
obtained by a simple mathematical model of the articulated system representing the
steering mechanism.

On the right of the diagram the right steering angle is reported for a maximum
steering wheel rotation of about 360◦, in counterclockwise direction; on the other
side, the same diagram is shown for the right wheel.

4.2 Steering Mechanism

251

Fig. 4.6 Steering error as function of steering angle in a front wheel driven car, with rack and
pinion steering box. Two diagrams are shown, with and without traction force

Fig. 4.7 Diagram of wheel steering angle as function of steering wheel angle; at the right the left
wheel steering angle, at the left the right wheel steering angle

The overall transmission ratio of the steering mechanism is, therefore, about 20:1.
This value is typical for a car without power steering assistance; for a power
assisted steering system this value can be reduced with the beneﬁt of a more imme-
diate response.

The two curves are almost linear, at least on the investigated ﬁeld; they can loose

this property at the rack full stroke, at about 400◦ of steering wheel rotation.

252

4 Steering System

4.3 Rack and Pinion Steering Box

A rack and pinion steering box is applied today to almost all cars and light duty
industrial vehicles; the other alternative, the screw and sector steering box, with its
variants, is practically reserved to heavy duty industrial vehicles or to those off-road
vehicles still featuring a front rigid axle.

The device shown on in Fig. 4.8 transforms, through the geared couple of the
pinion 3 and the rack 1, the rotary motion of the steering wheel, imposed by the driver,
into a linear motion of the spheric heads 2, which operate the steering mechanism.
The rack accomplishes in the mean time the task of steering wheels and that of

the track rod.

Due to the mechanism simplicity and the reduced friction between teeth ﬂanks,
mechanical efﬁciency is usually very good; this fact is appreciated because it reduces
the reaction torque on the steering wheel and gives the driver a good and faithful
feeling of the existing lateral tire-road friction.

As a disadvantage, steering transmission ratio cannot be increased over certain
values, because is limited by tooth size, imposed by fatigue resistance of the material
and by the minimum number of teeth that can be cut without interference.

The steering wheel is, therefore, always rather immediate; this fact, that is pos-
itive in general, doesn’t allow the application of this mechanism to heavy vehicles.
Therefore, when power steering was limited to luxury cars, rack and pinion was also
limited to small cars.

Figure 4.9 shows a cross section of this steering box through the pinion axis; this
version is not power assisted. The pinion 1 is supported by the ball bearing 2 and
by the needle bearing 3; the ball bearing reacts to radial and axial loads, while the
needle bearing reacts to radial loads only. The rack is supported by the sliding block
4, pushed by the spring 5 that controls the pressure between rack 6 and pinion 1.

Fig. 4.8 Rack and pinion steering box; the gearing point between rack and pinion is enlarged in
the lower view

4.3 Rack and Pinion Steering Box

253

Fig. 4.9 Enlarged detail of a rack and pinion steering box

It should be noticed that gears are of the helical type in order to allow a larger

A sliding bush 7, made by Teﬂon, offers the second bearing point, at the other

transverse contact ratio.

end of the steering rack.

The pre-loaded spring 5 overrides backlash between pinion and rack and controls
the internal friction between parts. Since the sliding block 4 is mounted with a
determined clearance, the spring can also absorb dynamic loads at the rack stops; the
threaded ring 8 determines the value of this clearance, adjusted at the assembly line.
Rack and pinion are splash lubricated inside the box of tubular shape; also the
spheric heads connecting the rack with the tie rods are set in the same oil. Two ﬂexible
rubber bellows avoid lubricant spillage and dust contamination.

The steering box is ﬁxed to the car body or to the subframe, through the two holes
shown in the same ﬁgure; those mounts feature rubber bushing, to ﬁlter noise and
vibrations.

Transmission ratio is in part determined by mechanism geometry, but a major role

is played by the primitive radius d of the pinion.

Once the pinion is built, or a certain value for its base circle db is set, this simple

relationship applies:

d = db/ cos θ ,

(4.13)

where θ represents the pressure angle of the cutting rack tool which generated the
tooth wheel; by correcting tooth proﬁle it is possible to have a correct contact with
rack with different angle too.

254

4 Steering System

This feature is exploited on racks with decreasing pressure angle on each tooth,
starting from those teeth meshing with the pinion when the wheels are straight and
going to those teeth that are meshing with high steering angles. In this way the
pitch radius is increasing as steering angle is increasing; the result is that the steering
control is immediate at high speed, when steering angles are small, while the steering
reaction torque is reduced in parking maneuvers, when steering angles are large.

A critical point of the rack is its lateral dimension, which is determined by the
necessary stroke (steering angle from stop to stop) and by a convenient distance
between its bearing points; it should also be remembered that the pinion and the
steering column must be positioned between the drivers feet.

The transversal bulk can sometimes affect the desired result.
To solve this problem, steering boxes with central spheric heads are designed
(Fig. 4.10); in this case the box features a cut through which the two heads can
emerge outside, to operate the steering mechanism; the bellow is now set inside,
while the two rack end are closed.

This conﬁguration can be used when is necessary to increase the length of the
two tie rods to obtain a correct kinematic behavior during suspension stroke; this
happens when steering arms are pointing forwards, instead of backwards, for reasons
of installation, as shown on the picture or when the car is too narrow.

The kinematic behavior is very much conditioned by rack position, but the freedom

allowed to position this component is very limited.

Engine dimensions, according to its position, are conditioning rack installation.

Fig. 4.10 Rack and pinion steering box with central spheric heads, particularly useful to solve
installation problems; notice also the different conﬁguration of the steering mechanism

4.3 Rack and Pinion Steering Box

255

By cars with longitudinal engine and rear wheel drive, the rack can be installed
in front of the engine, when the front axle is also in front of the engine, with steering
arms pointing forwards, or behind the wheel center, again with steering arms pointing
forwards, in any case the rack must be installed below the oil sump. By front wheel
driven cars with transversal engine, the rack must be installed behind the engine and
steering arms are pointing usually backward.

Another condition on rack installation is posed by obtaining a correct position for

the steering wheel.

4.4 Screw and Sector Steering Box

Screw and sector steering boxes are applied, as we have explained, mainly on indus-
trial vehicles either with rigid or with independent suspensions (buses).

There are no conceptual limits to the application of rack and pinion steering boxes
to rigid axles, but we should consider that the rack should be mounted on the axle and
it is difﬁcult, with the available space, to provide for a constant velocity transmission
between the pinion and the steering wheel.

Figure 3.63, in the previous chapter, shows the installation of this kind of steering
box on an industrial vehicle with driver compartment on the engine. The mechanical
transmission, connecting the steering wheel with the steering arm has the conﬁgura-
tion shown on Fig. 4.11.

Fig. 4.11 Screw and sector
steering box. The tooth
wheel sector has been made
with a roller, to decrease
mechanical friction. The
shape of the screw is copying
the roller proﬁle in order to
increase the number of
working threads

256

4 Steering System

This box could include a very simple screw and a tooth wheel sector, moving
the steering arm, as it has happened in the past; this solution would imply very high
internal friction.

We remember that such kind of transmission is almost irreversible, that means
that the torque can be transmitted from the screw to the sector and not vice versa.
This fact would imply lack of steering wheel self alignment and of feeling on the
existing friction between tires and ground.

Reversible kinematic couples, working according to the same principle, can be
produced, but with much lower transmission ratios, adopting a multiple threads
screw; but in this case, the advantage of reducing the steering wheel torque is almost
disappearing.

To counteract the irreversibility, a solution has been developed where the screw
5, operated by the steering column 1, is of globoidal type and the sector shows a
threaded roller 4.

The globoidal screw has a thin section in the center, to increase the number of
working threads. The threaded roller, whose proﬁle is matching the screw, works as
a rack, capable of motion according to the screw rotation, with consistent reduction
of mechanical friction.

The circumferential motion of the roller is transmitted to the spline shaft 2, through

the fork 3; the shaft is connected to the steering arm.

Another way of reducing friction is shown on Fig. 4.12 with a recirculating balls

screw.

Fig. 4.12 Screw and sector steering box with recirculating balls; this kind of screw reduces the
friction to a minimum

4.4 Screw and Sector Steering Box

257

In this case the globoidal screw is limited to a small portion. This screw is also
threaded in the inside bore, matching with a second screw ﬁxed to the steering column.
The shape of the thread is particular, building up an helical channel 1 (shown on the
scheme at the lower right), inside which a number of balls can roll and move. The
pipe 2 is used to close the circuit full of balls, to allow their recirculation.

In this case, again, the slip motion is changed into rolling motion, with friction
reduction; since the contact between balls and channel walls is very limited, the
friction is reduced to a minimum.

4.5 Steering Column

Figure 4.13 shows the assembly of a steering column for a medium size car; the
miniature on the left can identify the steering column position inside the car.

The function of this component is to transfer the torque applied to the steering
wheel by the driver to the steering box. Very seldom, steering box and steering wheel
position allow, in modern cars, to have a straight steering column; for this reason
the column is made by three sections, where the ﬁrst and the last are, respectively,
connected to the steering wheel and to the steering box.

The medium section is connected to the ﬁrst and the third through universal joints;
the three shaft lay-out must grand a constant speed transmission and therefore the
shafts must lie on the same plane and the working angles must be equal.

Fig. 4.13 Steering column assembly, capable of adapting steering wheel position on the zx vertical
plane. The miniature allows to understand the inclined position of the medium part of the column,
suitable to allow structural collapse with no intrusion of the steering wheel into the passengers
compartment

258

4 Steering System

Fig. 4.14 Cross section of the adjustable structure bearing the ﬁrst section of the steering column
and steering wheel: the articulated quadrilateral AA(cid:2)BB(cid:2) allows this adjustment

This kind of lay-out is also justiﬁed by steering wheel position adjustment and by

passive safety.

The ﬁrst section 2 of the column is ﬁxed to the body through a structure 1,
containing a couple of needle bearings or bushings. It rotates the mid section 3
through an universal joint. The vertical position of the structure 1 can be adjusted to
adapt steering wheel position to driver size.

Figure 4.14 shows a cross section of the structure 1.
It is divided in two parts: one ﬁxed to the body (not shown on this ﬁgure), one

supporting the bearing of the ﬁrst section of the steering column.

This second part is connected to the ﬁrst through an articulated quadrilateral,
where the joints between cranks (AA(cid:2) and BB(cid:2)) and rod A(cid:2)B(cid:2) allow rotation and
linear displacement, as shown on the same ﬁgure. This part can be shifted in vertical
and horizontal directions.

One of the A(cid:2) and B(cid:2) articulation is done by a screw that can ﬁx the crank in a
given position or leave the steering wheel free to be adjusted. Obviously the universal
joint between the ﬁrst and the second section must feature a sliding spline.

Major legislative regulations require the steering column to be collapsible, that
means that in case of a reference crash against barrier the steering column can reduce
its length, to allow steering box displacement without steering wheel intrusion into
the drivers compartment over a certain homologation limit.

This homologation requirement can be satisﬁed if the central section of the steering
column (3 on Fig. 4.13) can change its length and if the ﬁrst and third sections are
not aligned.

4.6 Power Steering

The constant increase of passive safety requirements, of comfort and convenience
devices and of interior room have lead to a general mass increase of all cars, despite
the efforts devoted to apply light weight materials and design; this mass increase has
affected loads between tires and ground and, therefore, the torque to be applied to
the steering wheel to rotate front wheels.

The reduction of the steering wheel torque to levels that are ergonomically accept-
able has been obtained by applying power assistance to the existing mechanical sys-

4.6 Power Steering

259

tems; power steering has spread from heavy luxury cars and industrial vehicles to
virtually all cars. The most diffused power assistance system used to be hydraulic,
sometimes integrated by an electro-hydraulic device with electronic control, to adjust
the assistance to the vehicle speed; such hydraulic systems show slight differences
if they are applied to rack and pinion steering boxes or to screw and sector steering
boxes.

Hydraulic systems affect car fuel consumption negatively, not only because of their
low overall efﬁciency (the power necessary for assistance is draft from the engine,
transformed from mechanical to hydraulic and again from hydraulic to mechanical
and control is obtained by wasting the ﬂow in excess) but also because the pump
feeding the oil circuit is always in motion, even when the car is not steering. Many
on-road measurements have shown that hydraulic power steering systems are in the
average increasing the fuel consumption by about 8% in city driving and 4% in
highway driving.

A partial solution to this problem was obtained by having the pump driven by
an auxiliary electric motor, working with a duty cycle to maintain an oil reservoir
at a preset pressure; this kind of system does not improve signiﬁcantly the over-
all mechanical efﬁciency but eliminates any power absorption when the car is not
steering.

In recent years, full electrical assistance systems were widely applied, reducing

the ﬁeld of application of hydraulic systems to very heavy vehicles only.

4.6.1 Hydraulic Rack and Pinion Steering Box

Figure 4.15 offers a general lay-out of the hydraulic power steering system for the
rack and pinion box.

This system applies, as power source, the hydraulic pressure of a certain ﬂow of

oil, generated by a pump driven by the engine.

Fig. 4.15 Hydraulic power
steering system for a small
front wheel driven car with
rack and pinion steering box

260

4 Steering System

The system includes the following components:

1. oil reservoir;
2. pump, normally blade type, driven by the accessory belt of the engine;
3. high pressure tube;
4. steering box;
5. cooling serpentine;
6. return, low pressure tube.

This scheme applies to screw and sector steering boxes too.
The cooling serpentine is necessary to waste the heat generated by pressure control
choke valves. In addition to that, the ﬂow rate generated by the volumetric pump is
depending on engine speed only; what is not necessary to power assistance is by
passed from high to low pressure, with additional heat waste.

An inadequate cooling can allow the oil to work close to the boiling point, with

lack of efﬁciency and danger of cavitation.

Thanks to the choking valves and to other circuit losses, this system grants a certain
damping characteristic, with beneﬁts oh the steering wheel return and vibrations. See
also what was said about shimmy.

It appears that the relative simplicity of this system has a negative impact on fuel
consumption; as a matter of fact the fuel consumption increase is about 2–3% on the
average driving cycle. To limit this negative effect some system has been developed,
where the oil pump is driven by an electric motor and feeds a pressure accumulator. In
this case the electric pump is working only when the oil pressure in the accumulator
drops below a certain threshold value, with potential savings on hydraulic losses.

This system has also the advantage of allowing a more ﬂexible installation of the
pump, on small cars engine compartments, with problems of space; this system had
a short life and was abandoned in favour of totally electric systems.

As shown by the upper scheme on Fig. 4.16, a double effect hydraulic cylinder is
integrated into the steering box, able to move the rack. M and R are the input and

Fig. 4.16 Schema of a hydraulically assisted rack and pinion steering box (upper side); detail of
the hydraulic control valve (lower side)

4.6 Power Steering

261

output nipples of the oil ﬂow and chambers S and D on the power cylinder assist left
and right steering.

The lower part of the same ﬁgure shows an enlargement of the distributor and
control valve which puts in pressure chambers S and D of the power cylinder; the
pressure force is added to that applied to the rack by the steering wheel.

The double effect power piston can have one of the faces at intake pressure or
both at the exhaust pressure, according to the angular position of the distributor and
control valve. This valve is made by two coaxial cylinders, with relative rotation
motion, featuring a number of windows, which can put the S and D chambers into
communication with ports M and R, as shown on the cross section on the left.

In the position shown on the ﬁgure, the oil pressure is sent to the S chamber,
while the R chamber is to exhaust. The higher the pressure, the higher the clockwise
rotation angle of the inside cylinder of the valve, until a maximum opening of the
window is reached; by counterclockwise rotation the pressure will be reduced till the
closure of the window.

If the counterclockwise rotation of the cylinder in continued the same functions

are performed for the other face of the piston.

The inside cylinder 5, as can be seen on the right cross section, is connected
through a pin 3 to one end of a torsion spring 4, loaded by the torque applied to the
pinion 1 by the steering column. In the same way the external cylinder 6 is connected
to the other end on the torsion spring.

The torsional stiffness of the spring 4 must be determined in such a way as
windows are completely open at the maximum acceptable steering wheel torque.
At lower torque, the spring deformation will be proportionally reduced; the steering
wheel torque, even if reduced, will reproduce the aligning torque variation, thus
rendering a correct feeling of the dynamic behavior of the car.

This trailing mechanism reduces the assistance torque to zero, as soon as the
steering wheel torque is set to zero. It should be noticed that the operation is the same
when the steering wheel is moving the wheels or when wheels are applying torque to
the steering wheel, during steering wheel return or driving on an asymmetric obstacle.
We should draw our attention on the fact that pressure pulses or variations can
generate vibrations and noise; therefore it is a good practice to apply rubber bushings
to the steering box mounts and damping joints to tubes under pressure.

4.6.2 Hydraulic Screw and Sector Steering Box

Figure 4.17 shows the scheme of a hydraulic power assisted screw and sector steering
box, with balls recirculation, suitable to industrial vehicles.

As can be noticed, by comparing this ﬁgure with the previous one, the valve
scheme, here featuring two spool valves 9 and 10, moved by the fork 3, connected to
the torsion spring 18, the working principle is substantially the same. In this steering
box, the short rack 2 is also the double effect working piston, inside the cylinder 1.
The two valve types we have shown are not necessarily bound to the steering box

with which they have been presented, but can be applied to both kinds.

262

4 Steering System

Fig. 4.17 Cross section of a recirculating balls screw and sector steering box, with hydraulic power
assistance (below) and the detail of the control valve (above)

4.6.3 Electric Power Assistance

Starting from small and medium size cars, electric power steering (EPS) systems
have obtained a wide diffusion. They are usually applied to rack and pinion steering
boxes and are made substantially with an electric motor adding torque to the steering
mechanism.

We should not forget that only EPS ﬁts very well the needs of electric and hybrid
cars where the prime mover is supposed to be stopped for signiﬁcant periods of time.
In addition, an electric motor can be interfaced with an electronic control system
more easily than a hydraulic pump: from this point of view, EPS can be considered
as a cornerstone of an independent steering control, suitable to collision avoidance
or even to autonomous driving systems.

Several EPS systems are now available and their choice is mainly bound to cost,
performance (vehicle weight and speed of actuation) and the space available in the
engine compartment; the following list is roughly ranked by the value of the force
Fr they can exert on the rack and, therefore, by vehicle mass.

4.6 Power Steering

Column EPS

263

In column EPS (C-EPS), the electric motor is applied to the steering column, acting
on that with a suitable gear and is located in the passenger compartment; this solution
is particularly suitable for small cars where the engine bay is always crowded but
has the disadvantage of increasing the torque on the steering column and featuring
a reduced integration with the steering mechanism with negative effect on cost. The
force on the rack Fr can range between 6 and 8 kN.

Pinion EPS

In pinion EPS (P-EPS), the electric motor is geared on the pinion directly, after the
universal joint on the steering column; it grants a better road feedback in comparison
with the C-EPS; it is probably the cheapest solution for its good degree of integration
and the most suitable one for small cars newly designed form the ground up that take
provision for the additional space it needs. The force on the rack Fr can range between
6 and 10 kN.

Dual Pinion EPS

Dual pinion EPS (D-EPS) feature about the same performance of the previous solu-
tion with more ﬂexibility in the installation at a small disadvantage in cost; it can use
the existing space usually allowed for the rack and pinion mechanism in other-side-
drive versions. The force on the rack Fr can range between 6 and 10 kN.

Increasing the electric motor rotation speed can reduce the motor cost and weight
at an assigned performance; this is what is done in belt EPS (B-EPS). The motor
is connected to a recirculating balls screw directly acting on the rack with a belt
that enables the mechanism to be easily reversible (for prompt return to the aligned
wheels position) for it good mechanical efﬁciency. The force on the rack Fr can
range between 7 and 16 kN.

Belt EPS

Rack EPS

In rack EPS (R-EPS), the electric motor is coaxial with the recirculating balls screw
acting on the rack; this solution is suitable to large cars that can enjoy a good
reversibility of the steering mechanism despite of the signiﬁcant inertia of the electric
motor. The force on the rack Fr can easily reach 20 kN.

264

4 Steering System

Fig. 4.18 Example of C-EPS. Above, a perspective view of the assembly and below a detail of the
motor with reduction gearbox (FIAT)

Figure 4.18 shows a C-EPS system with an assembly including a modiﬁed steering

column and an electric motor with reduction gearbox, in this case a worm gear.

An example of application of a DP-EPS is shown in Fig. 4.19, in this case the rack
has two independent pinions, one connected with the steering column, one connected
with the electric motor through a worm gear.

On a larger car, in Fig. 4.20, we see a very compact B-EPS; the two details above
show the two-steps transmission connecting the motor with the steering rack: the
ﬁrst step is a toothed belt, while the second is a recirculating balls screw, chosen for
its high mechanical efﬁciency and compactness.

In any case, the electric motor regulation is done by an electronic controller, which
again has the function of generating an assistance torque proportional to the steering
torque.

The control system includes sensors able to measure steering torque, vehicle
speed, steering wheel speed and angle. These data are used to calculate the optimum
torque to be applied by the motor; it is function of vehicle speed, to improve driver
sensitivity to the smaller steering torque values. The assistance is increased at large
steering angle, typical of parking maneuvers and of narrow turns, where actuation
speed is more important then sensitivity.

4.6 Power Steering

265

Fig. 4.19 Example of application of a DP-EPS. The rack has two independent pinions, one con-
nected with the steering column, one connected with the electric motor through a worm gear (FCA)

Fig. 4.20 Example of B-EPS. Above is shown the two-steps transmission connecting the motor
with the steering rack (FCA)

266

4 Steering System

This optimum torque is applied with the correct direction, given by steering angle
acquisition. Sometimes a switch on the dashboard allows the driver to obtain a larger
or smaller assistance, according to driving environment.

The motor is a simple direct current unit with permanent magnets.
A limited inertia of the motor (consider that the motor inertia must be added to
the steering wheel inertia, with its value increased by the square of the transmission
ratio to the steering column) is mandatory to have a good return of the steering wheel
to the aligned position without oscillation; system damping can be enhanced by a
suitable current control of the motor.

These systems have a number of advantages if compared with a conventional

hydraulic unit:
• oil circuit and radiator are eliminated, with consequent simpliﬁcation of the engine

compartment lay-out;

• start-stop devices do not inﬂuence steering assistance;
• active safety is increased, because the assistance is available also when the engine

stalls or is switched off;

• easier possibility of having a more sophisticated torque control as in hydraulic

systems;

• low impact on mechanical components design.

4.7 Design and Testing

4.7.1 Outline Design

A possible procedure to outline the steering mechanism, with reference to the rack
and pinion case, is described by the following steps; the case of the screw and sector
can be easily extrapolated.

Let us consider Fig. 4.21.

1. The most suitable position for the rack is set, according to engine and gearbox

bulk and steering column lay-out.

2. On the plant view, starting from king-pin trace steering arm may be draft, trying to
satisfy the Jeantaud condition, to contain steering error. Steering arms can point
backwards or forwards, but must comply with the wheel bulk. In this way x and
y coordinates of the point A are decided, while those of point B are decided
according to the rack position.

3. With reference to the yz plane represented on the ﬁgure, the trace of point A can
be draft or calculated as function of the suspension stroke, with no variation of
toe angle. The trace of this path can be approximated by a circle.

4. The center on this circle should be coincident with the B articulation of the steering
arm, to avoid toe angle variation versus suspension stroke; if this condition isn’t
veriﬁed the z coordinate of the point A can be changed, until point B satisﬁes the
rack installation requirements.

4.7 Design and Testing

267

Fig. 4.21 Scheme useful for positioning rack and steering arm

• By draft or calculation the angle between steering arm and steering rod must be
evaluated in order to verify that the mechanism doesn’t block (this angle must,
prudentially, be in the interval between 20◦ and 160◦)

• The rack length must be sufﬁcient to allow the necessary stroke; often the two B
points (right and left side of the car) are too close. In this case a rack with central
spheric heads must be adopted and this procedure repeated from the beginning.
• If car understeering should be changed the z elevation of point A can be changed,

until the desired toe angle variation is obtained.

4.7.2 Mission

The steering system mission includes requirements on material fatigue, crash wor-
thiness and elasto-kinematic behaviors.

Fatigue

ited life.

The fatigue design of the steering system includes the experimental veriﬁcation of
all components and of the complete system. The target of this design is to predict
the life of this system under signiﬁcant test conditions. The mission can be derived
from that introduced for the suspension and the entire body.

In this case it is necessary to establish not only the forces acting on the wheel, but

also the appropriate steering angle.

Given the importance of this system it is suggested to verify all parts to unlim-

268

Crash

4 Steering System

Usually reference is made to the standard test against barrier, with increased severity,
as suggested by EuroNCAP, to evaluate the intrusion into the passenger compartment
and the potential danger for the driver.

Other safety targets are set, because the steering column includes also the driver
air bag system; the driver’s head must impact the inﬂated air bag in a preestablished
way, to be protected during its travel after the impact; in other words steering column
and wheel deformation must not affect substantially the deployment geometry of the
air bag.

A ﬁrst approximation criterion consists in evaluating if the impact between driver’s
dummy and steering wheel can take place. In a positive case, injury criteria are used,
limiting the dummy head acceleration after the impact. For instance, an optimum
performance corresponds to a value of 72 g of acceleration and a poor performance
to a value of 88 g.

Elasto-Kinematic Behavior

The elasto-kinematic study of the steering system includes the evaluation, as function
of the suspension stroke, at different steering angles, of the following magnitudes:
• caster angle;
• king-pin angle;
• longitudinal trail;
• king-pin offset.

The diagrams of these magnitudes are reported on Fig. 4.22 for a front wheel

driven medium size car, as a reference for a suspension of acceptable behavior.

King-pin angle variations can be small, as those of king-pin offset; on the contrary,

longitudinal trail is affected by wheel steer angle mainly.

The design value of the caster angle will determine the design value of longitudinal
trail as well, while its variation in function of the suspension stroke will affect not
only the longitudinal trail behavior, but also comfort and braking capacity on bumpy
roads, because of the dynamic response of sprung mass.

The design value of king-pin angle has effects on king-pin offset and on steering
wheel return (due to the vertical load on the steering axle), for small lateral acceler-
ations. The king-pin angle variation will inﬂuence king-pin offset variation and the
torque felt on the steering wheel during braking.

Longitudinal trail, which is very sensitive to steering angles, has inﬂuence on
vehicle stability on straight roads and determines the steering wheel torque in curves,
in addition to the self aligning torque of the tire; it can, therefore, conceal the self
aligning torque decrease for high tire side slip angles, giving a different perception
(through the steering wheel torque) of the friction between tire and ground.

Steering wheel torque should never be too low or negative if the cornering force
can still increase, when tire side slip angle is increasing. It should be remembered

4.7 Design and Testing

269

Fig. 4.22 Diagrams of main geometrical characteristics of the steering system as function of sus-
pension stroke and steering angle. I.W. (inside wheel) and O.W. (outside wheel) refer to the position
of the wheel on a curved path; outside wheel has a positive stroke

that the steering wheel torque is determined by the sum of torques acting on the two
wheels; what is lost on the wheel inside the path, can be compensated by an increase
on the outside wheel.

King-pin offset variation have inﬂuence on the steering wheel torque and on
vehicle stability during braking on roads with different friction coefﬁcient on the
two wheels of the same axle. As a matter of fact, in this case, the torque generated
on the steering wheel, different on the two wheels, is such as to direct steering to
counteract the applied yaw moment.

4.7.3 Bench Testing Methods

The components that usually are evaluated separately are steering rods, steering
box, steering column and power steering pump; with small adaptations what will be
written on this last subject will apply also to electric power systems.

The steering rod is assembled to the steering box, ﬁxed to the best test bed, and
is connected to a hydraulic actuator on the wheel side. These three items lie on the
bench with the same position they have on the vehicle.

270

4 Steering System

Fatigue test can be performed on universal benches. Tests should be repeated on
many specimen as to obtain a sufﬁcient statistic conﬁdence; test results are positive
if all specimen have accomplish their mission without ruptures of any kind.

The steering box is usually installed on a dedicated bench, reproducing the position
on the vehicle and mechanical interfaces; the maximum mission torque is applied
for a deﬁned number of cycles (i.e. 100,000).

The mission torque is deﬁned on a complete steering from stop to stop, with the
vehicle standing on dry good tarmac. During this fatigue test functional tests are
repeated from time to time to verify that performance is not affected; particularly
mechanical efﬁciency must not decrease. At the end of the test there should be no
degradation or rupture.

The bench is including an electric motor with gear box and reverse gear able
to apply alternate rotations in the ﬁeld between ±500◦, at a frequency of about
0.2 Hz; the torque is applied through the steering column, while the steering rods or
the spheric heads directly are loaded by a couple of pneumatic actuator applying a
constant reaction force; they simulate the spin friction of the tire on the road.

The steering column is tested on a fatigue bench suitable for pulsating torque.

Universal joints should reproduce working angles of the actual vehicle.

The test procedure is the same as for the steering box and, if convenient, these

two tests can be performed together.

The hydraulic pump is tested on a dummy hydraulic circuit reproducing a realistic
driving cycle, including only urban and bendy road driving; this kind of mission could
be applied for about 50,000 km. At the end of the test there shouldn’t be any rupture
or loss of performance.

Similar tests can be designed for the remaining components. We will describe
now some screening test used to verify design quality and to obtain input data to be
used on mathematical models.

The main synthetic parameters describing steering system performance are:

• transmission ratio, between steering wheel and king-pin axis;
• dry and viscous friction or hysteresis;
• torque on the steering wheel as function of the cornering force.

A test system suitable to perform this kind of functional evaluation may include

the following parts:
• a rotary hydraulic actuator, with angular displacement of at least 90◦ and radial
load capacity of at least 30 N, with its dedicated hydraulic power generator and
control system;

• an universal joint without angular plays to apply forces to the steering wheel, com-
pensating for actuator and steering wheel misalignments; high torsional stiffness
and reduced inertia are also important features;

• an angular displacement transducer (measurement ﬁeld ±180◦) to acquire steering

wheel angle;

• four linear displacement transducers (measurement ﬁeld ±20 mm) to acquire dis-

placements of right and left wheels during steering;

4.7 Design and Testing

271

Fig. 4.23 Driver seat of a car equipped with a measurement system to acquire steering wheel torque

• two reaction springs on the wheels able to simulate a reaction torque of about

• two load cells (measurement ﬁeld 0–1,000 N) to acquire actual steering torque at

60 Nm/◦;

the contact patch;

• a static torsiometer (measurement ﬁeld 0–50 Nm) to acquire steering wheel torque;
• signal acquisition system and dedicated data processing software.

During this test, front wheels are resting on a ﬂoating plate (ﬂoating on an air
bearing) with reduced friction. Screening tests are performed imposing steering angle
and measuring remaining magnitudes.

Figure 4.23 shows the driver compartment of a car equipped with such measure-
ment system: we can notice the hydraulic actuator 1, the universal joint 2, the angular
displacement transducer 3 and the static torsiometer 4.

Figure 4.24 shows, instead the wheel side; we can notice the reaction springs 1,

whose effective load is measured by load cells 2.

Steering wheel actuation is done by sinusoidal or triangular waves of assigned

frequency and amplitude, in the following test modes:
• wheels free on ﬂoating plates;
• one wheel free and one loaded;
• one wheel free and one blocked;

The following magnitudes are measured:

• steering wheel angle;
• wheels steering angle;
• wheels steering torque;

272

4 Steering System

Fig. 4.24 Part of the same measurement system of previous picture dedicated to wheel rotation
and torque acquisition. Wheels are resting on ﬂoating plates

Fig. 4.25 Steering hysteresis cycle, referred to the steering wheel

• steering wheel torque.

The following relevant magnitudes can be calculated by data processing:

• steering system transmission ratio, as function of steering wheel angle;
• steering wheel torque, as function of angle;
• wheel steering torque as function of steering wheel torque.

This last kind of diagram is shown on Fig. 4.25. We notice an hysteresis cycle
caused by mechanical friction and by viscous friction, mainly caused by the power
assistance system.

4.7 Design and Testing

273

Dry mechanical friction is due to relative motion and in localized on spheric heads,
rack with sliding block and pinion and steering column bearings and joints. This part
of friction is usually independent on steering angle, but is dependent on force.

Other major source of friction is the contact between tire and ground.
Viscous friction is due to oil choking and ﬂow, localizing on hydraulically assisted
steering boxes; also magnetic losses of electric power steering shows a similar effect.
The total amount of these frictions determines the hysteresis cycle; the area of
this cycle shows part of the work performed by the driver, during steering and should
be as small as possible.

Chapter 5
Braking System

5.1 Introduction

The braking system must accomplish three different jobs:
• to completely stop the vehicle; this function entails braking moments on the wheel

as high as possible;

• to allow speed control, when the natural deceleration of the vehicle, due to mechan-
ical friction and motion resistances is not enough; this function entails braking
moments on the wheels not very high, but applied for a long time;

• to keep the vehicle stopped also on a slope.

Because of the nature of these jobs the braking system is part of the safety systems
of the vehicle. As a consequence, the State Authority and, afterwards, the European
Union have introduced regulations that describe design conditions of this system and
its minimum operation requirements.

Vehicle manufacturers and their components suppliers are, therefore, responsible
for adequacy of products to regulations, including correct fabrication and system
reliability for a reasonable period of time; users too must play their role because many
parts of this system are subject to wear and the safety functions cannot be assured
without the necessary maintenance and part substitution. A periodic compulsory
control is addressed to assess the correct operation of this system.

If regulation determine minimum performance for this system, each manufacturer
considers this as a starting point, because more stringent requirements are requested
by the market and are a remarkable selling points.

For this fact, braking systems have reached in the normal praxis levels of perfor-

mance and reliability that are very high.

It should be remarked that the relationship between reliability and accident prob-
ability is not very evident; statistics on road accidents show, in fact, that less then
2% of road accident are caused by a not adequate operation of the braking system.
Within this total, 90% of accident is estimated to be due to a not sufﬁcient mainte-
nance and 10% to dynamic instability, consequent to a braking not compatible with
transversal accelerations.

The wide application of anti lock systems (ABS) represent an improvement for
braking safety, even if accident statistics not contain sufﬁcient witness of this fact.
Studies about accidents in Germany, after introduction of this system in 1976,
showed reduction on vehicles equipped with this system; most recent data show that
the presence of this system leads user to overrate its contribution and, therefore, to be
more exposed to dangers, in particular situations as icy roads or driving with reduced
safety distance.

Again in Germany, a study on taxis doesn’t show a relevant difference between

cars with and without ABS.

Before starting the description on braking system components, we prefer to intro-
duce some preliminary consideration on braking system design, that will be better
explained in the second volume of this book, dedicated to system design.

We have seen in the chapter about tires, that the maximum longitudinal force
exchanged with the ground depends on many factors, including, as ﬁrst, the vertical
load on the wheel. Secondly, this force is inﬂuenced by the ground nature, the vehicle
speed and the coexistence of cornering forces.

The system maximum performance is, therefore, conditioned by many factors
outside of the system itself; while the recognition of last factors is a drivers job,
who is in charge of limiting vehicle speed and controlling the distance between close
vehicle, vertical loads cannot be easily understood.
These are determined by different factors, as:

• payload and its distribution in the vehicle;
• road slope;
• longitudinal acceleration, in particular, the same braking acceleration.

To focus this fact, let us consider a vehicle of mass m, moving on a ﬂat road,

inclined of a slope angle α.

We assume that the vehicle is symmetric, with reference to its median plane and
its center of gravity G is distant a from the front axle and b from the rear axle; the
center G is high hG on the ground (see Fig. 5.1); ﬁnally:

l = a + b ,

is vehicle wheelbase.

We now assume that all acting forces are negligible, but braking forces Fx1 and
Fx2, applied to the front and rear axle. Each of these forces represents the sum of the
those acting on the wheels of the same axle, that in the assumptions we have made
are equal.

If we indicate with Fz1 and Fz2 the total vertical force on each axle and with ax
the braking acceleration (it should be remarked than it is negative, by braking), we
have:

5.1 Introduction

277

Fig. 5.1 Scheme of forces acting on a vehicle on a ﬂat road with slope α

From this system, we obtain:

⎧
⎨

⎩

(cid:5)

Fx1 + Fx2 − mg sin α = max
Fz1 + Fz2 − mg cos α = 0
Fz1a − Fz2b + mghG sin α = mhGax

.

Fz1 = m
l
Fz2 = m
l

(gb cos α − ghG sin α − hGax )
(ga cos α + ghG sin α + hGax )

.

(5.1)

(5.2)

These equations indicate clearly that vertical reaction forces depend not only on

the center of gravity position, but also on the vehicle braking deceleration.

In the chapter about the tire we have seen that the maximum obtainable longitu-
dinal force is proportional, through the friction coefﬁcient μx p, the peak value of the
curve μx (σ), to the vertical load on the wheel.

As a consequence, the following conclusions can be draught:

• maximum braking forces are determined by load conditions through m, b, a, hG;
• they are also determined by the braking deceleration ax ;
• braking forces distribution between the two axles is also determined by the obtained

longitudinal acceleration.

Therefore, a braking system should be able to change its geometry to adapt braking
forces to existing vertical loads. In particular the braking force on the rear axle should
be progressively limited when the total braking force is increased.

278

5 Braking System

This function is performed by the brake distributor valve, which will be described
in the following paragraphs; the ABS system can also take care of this operation very
carefully.

5.2 Car Brakes

According to the regulation, the functions mentioned at the beginning of the previous
paragraph, are to by accomplished in a vehicle by three different systems, that cannot
directly be matched with them; they are:
• service braking system, able to reduce the speed or stop the vehicle, in normal

driving conditions;

• emergency or secondary braking system, suitable for the same above function, but

to be used in case of failure of the service brake;

• parking braking system, suitable for parking only, also on slopes.

All these systems must exert an adjustable braking force on the vehicle.
Many components are common to the ﬁrst two braking systems, but some of them
are speciﬁc; redundancies guarantee reliability and availability of braking function.

5.2.1 Service and Secondary Systems

Figure 5.2 shows the scheme of a hydraulic braking system; it includes the service
and secondary systems.

Front and rear brakes are actuated by two completely independent hydraulic cir-
cuits A and B; this separation is present also in the master pump C, actuated by the
pedal and enlarged in the picture at the lower left.

This feature, de facto imposed by the law, allows to deﬁne the two circuits, when
they operate together, in normal conditions, as service circuits and the same, when
they operate separately, when one of the two has failed, as emergency circuits.

The kind of failure, considered in this approach, is the rupture of one of the ﬂexible
tubes connecting brake actuators, moving with the wheels, and the rest of the circuit,
ﬁxed to the vehicle chassis structure; if, for example, the tube connecting the left
front wheel would fail, at the ﬁrst braking, a deﬁned quantity of oil may be squeezed
out, but the rear circuit would be still able to work.

The homologation rules request that, on a perfectly paved road, for a car, this

stopping distance must be obtained:

s ≤ 0.1V + V 2
150

,

(5.3)

where s is the stopping distance, measured in (m) and V is the car speed, measured
in (km/h), at the beginning of braking.

5.2 Car Brakes

279

Fig. 5.2 Pictorial scheme of a car braking system; front and rear brakes are operated by two
independent hydraulic circuits A and B. C shows an enlargement of the master pump and D the
distributor

This condition must be applied for service system; an increased distance:

s ≤ 0.1V + 2V 2
150

,

(5.4)

is allowed, when one of the circuit is broken, when the emergency system only is
working.

Therefore, for a service circuit, an average deceleration:

is accepted, while, with the emergency circuit it can be increased up to:

a ≥ 2.9 m/s2 ,

a ≥ 5.8 m/s2 ;

these prescriptions are applicable for any load condition within those allowed by the
homologation form.

The braking circuit can be organized in different ways; the schemes described on

Table 5.1 are accepted.

Circuits 1 and 2 represent the possible conﬁgurations of the emergency circuit

when one of the wheels has its brake hydraulic ﬂexible pipe out of order.

The choice among these schemes must take into account the vehicle load break-

down on the axles.

Table 5.1 Braking circuits allowed by the regulations of the European Union; circuits 1 and 2
describe the still working brakes, when each one of the ﬂexible tubes, at a time, is broken
Symbol

Circuit 1

Circuit 2

5 Braking System

Rear axle

Front axle
Front right and rear left wheels Front left and rear right wheels
All wheels
Front axle and rear right wheel Front axle and rear left wheel
All wheels

All wheels

Front axle

280

TT
K
HT
LL
HH

The scheme TT, for example, is suitable to a car where the center of gravity is
located about at the mid of the wheelbase, as can happen on a front engine, rear drive
two seater.

The scheme K is, instead, suitable to a front wheel driven car, where, in the load
condition of driver only, it is necessary that one of the front wheels, at least, can
brake, to satisfy the requested performance.

The following schemes, as HH, have the advantage to grant the emergency braking
system a complete, or almost complete, braking circuit at a slightly increased cost;
this fact allows to reduce the torque applied by the braking forces unbalance to the
steering wheel to a minimum.

Also the safety margin on fading conditions must be taken into account for this
choice. We will discuss about fading later on; at this time we deﬁne fading as a loss
of braking efﬁciency because a partial evaporation of the braking ﬂuid, due to high
temperatures.

When the ﬂuid evaporates, it increases dramatically its elasticity and looses its
capacity to transmit pressure by compression. This phenomenon occurs near a heat
source and, therefore, near the wheel. For this facts circuits HT, LL, HH are more
vulnerable when the ﬂuid is evaporating near the front wheel.

Referring again to Fig. 5.2 we can see the valve D, including the pressure distrib-

utor, we will explain later on.

In addition to the prescription about stopping distance and braking acceleration, a
further condition is requested about the control force applied to obtain such stopping
distance; such force, applied to the pedal by the driver’s foot must be:

Fp ≤ 500 N ;

this condition causes often the application of a power assistance device, we will
explain later on.

5.2.2 Parking System

The parking braking system, operated by a hand lever or by a further pedal, is
requested to keep the vehicle stopped on a slope when the driver is not on the vehicle.

5.2 Car Brakes

281

The regulation requests for this system a mechanical, non hydraulic, connection

between the drivers control and the brake; tie rods and cables are allowed.1

The rationale for this prescription is to build up a further emergency system, to
increase system reliability, by adding a second chance in the very rare event of a
contemporary failure of service and emergency braking systems.

The parking braking system must be designed to keep the vehicle stopped on a

slope of:

or to reduce its speed, on a ﬂat road, by an acceleration of:

i ≥ 18%,

a ≥ 1.5 m/s2 ,

after having applied on the control a force:

Fp ≤ 500 N ; Fm ≤ 400 N;

the ﬁrst value applies to pedals and the second to hand levers.

The braking system must be able to generate an adjustable force, that can be
maintained also with to action on control; it works on the wheels of a single axle;
brakes can be the same as for the service system.

Figure 5.3 shows a hand lever parking system: the control lever 1 moves the tie
rod 17 and can be hold in any position by the spring loaded pawl 27 engaging in the
ratchet sector 23; the disengagement button 26 is used to unlock the pawl 27.

The tie rod 15 pulls the cable 6, through the sliding equalizer 16 the divides in two
equal parts the force on the two brakes. The cable is connected to the rear brakes,
through the pin 8, connected to the two shoes.

The variant with pedal is similar; the pawl can be unlocked by a push-push pedal

or by button on the dashboard.

paragraphs.

The connection with drum and disc brakes is explained in the dedicated following

5.2.3 Disc Brakes

This brake includes a disc, rotating with the wheel, on whose two faces two braking
linings can be pressed, made of high friction material.

On these linings, also called pads, work one or more hydraulic cylinders mounted

on a suitable calliper.

1Quite recently, also the possibility of operating brakes through a bistable separate hydraulic or
electric actuator has been allowed. In this case the braking force must be maintained indeﬁnitely
with no energy.

282

5 Braking System

Fig. 5.3 Scheme of a parking system with hand lever control; on the upper part of the drawing, we
can see the mechanism able to maintain the braking force also with no external force applied

Fig. 5.4 Examples of application of a disc brake to a rear axle; the disc can be mounted on the
wheel itself (left) or to the differential box and work on the half shaft (right), to reduce the unsprung
mass

5.2 Car Brakes

283

Fig. 5.5 Ventilated disc brake with ﬁxed caliper; the two pads are pressed against the disc by four
hydraulic cylinders, two for each pad

The disc brake, as the drum brake we will describe in the following paragraph,
can be applied in two different ways, shown on Fig. 5.4, where the disc is ﬁt together:
• on the wheel hub, directly;
• on an auxiliary hub on the half shaft, at the differential box.

The examples on this ﬁgure refer to a rear driving axle, but can be applied also
to a front axle or to a rear idling axle, by adding in this case, a shaft dedicated to
braking force.

The left ﬁgure shows the assembly of a disc brake on a guided trailing arms rear
suspension. The brake caliper is ﬁxed on the suspension strut, where the reaction to
the braking force will be applied.

On the right ﬁgure, instead, the caliper 2 is ﬁxed to the differential box, or to
the transmission, if differential and gearbox are integrated in a front wheel driven
vehicle; the reaction to the braking force is applied, in this case, to the car body
directly or through a suspension. The disc 1 is ﬁt to the shaft 4 that transmits both
driving and braking torque.

This kind of expensive conﬁguration allows a reduction of sprung mass, with

beneﬁts on suspension comfort.

There are two kinds of architectures for disc brakes:

• ﬁxed caliper;
• sliding or ﬂoating calipers.

By ﬁxed caliper architecture, shown on Fig. 5.5, pads are pressed against the disc
by two couples of independent hydraulic cylinders, inside the caliper, connected in
parallel to the same pressure source; the double cylinder arrangement can be exploited
to separate service circuit from emergency circuit.

284

5 Braking System

Fig. 5.6 Floating caliper disc; the caliper is assembled as to be able to move is a direction perpen-
dicular to the disc surface; the hydraulic cylinder can be single. An enlarged cross section of the
piston and cylinder is shown with the detail of the sealing

The disc shows inside semi radial channels of suitable shape; they behave as a
radial ventilator which activates air for brake cooling. The transversal drilling on the
disc improve the direct cooling of the disc too, on its working surface.

On lighter cars with less performance, therefore with smaller discs, a single couple
of cylinders might be sufﬁcient and ventilation channels and drilling can be avoided.
Discs are made by iron alloy; on high performance cars, the very expensive carbo-
ceramic discs are appearing, for their property of surviving very high operation
temperatures.

The ﬂoating caliper disc brake, on Fig. 5.6, shows, instead, a single cylinder 4,
working on the inside pad 5, while the outside pad 6 is pressed on the disc by the
caliper body 1, able to slide on its mounts 7 along a direction perpendicular to the disc
surface. This solution has the advantage of reducing cost and dimension, allowing
also to reduce king-pin offset to negative values.

Hydraulic cylinders are operated by the ﬂuid pressure applied by the master cylin-
der; as soon as the pedal is released, the piston of the master cylinder returns in the
initial position, because of a return spring, and the hydraulic pressure is set to zero.
The brake piston is pulled away of the disc because of the elastic force, determined
by the lateral deformation of the sealing ring, invested on each piston with a certain
radial load; the shape of the groove (see the enlarged detail of the sealing ring in
rest position) allows piston motion without sliding on the sealing. A similar design
feature is also applied to ﬁxed calipers.

5.2 Car Brakes

285

Fig. 5.7 Different controls for parking function on disc brakes; at left, the function is obtained by
an additional coaxial drum brake; at right, a lever 2 and a cam 1 act directly on the braking cylinder

Floating calipers have the inconvenience that cross sliding can be impaired or
blocked by mud sediments or by corrosion. For this reasons protection bellows and
special coatings on slide pins are applied.

An impaired sliding of the caliper can cause different wear on internal and external
pads; in some case the caliper can be blocked with asymmetric braking, affecting
vehicle path.

By disc brakes, the parking function is obtained with an additional coaxial drum
brake; this solution is necessary if the force to be applied to the disc pad results to
be too high.

This solution is shown on Fig. 5.7, at left: inside the disc bell 1, two additional
braking shoes are installed as by drum brakes; the control force application is done
as it will be explained in the following paragraph.

The second solution, on the right of the same ﬁgure, combines service and parking
functions in a single unit; brake pads are pushed by a crank and rod mechanism 1
(the crank is made by a cam ﬁt to the control lever 2) operated by cables. Usually
this control includes an automatic backlash adjuster.

By parking brakes a braking force difference on two wheels of the same axle is

not very important for safety.

5.2.4 Drum Brakes

Figure 5.8 shows a cross section of a drum brake and some design details.

This brake is made by a rotating hollow cylinder 7 (at left) ﬁt to the wheel hub;
on its inside surface works two symmetric shoes 6, on which are riveted or bonded
braking linings. Shoes are pushed against the drum by the double piston cylinder 1.
At one end of the shoe one of the pistons is pushing, while the other end is linked
with a hinge or is resting on a suitable surface. The two shoes are kept away from
the drum by two springs 5.

286

5 Braking System

Fig. 5.8 Section of a drum brake (at left) and of its actuation cylinder (at right)

Because of the necessary machining tolerance of the drum surface and of the
possible thermal deformations, the clearance between linings and drum must be well
above of that between lining and disc of disc brakes, which, because of their sim-
plicity, can be machined with higher accuracy and don’t show thermal deformations
in the pads motion direction.

On the same ﬁgure, at the right side, a cross section of the control cylinder is
shown: two pistons 2, the oil feed drilling 3 and the return spring 6 can be seen; two
pistons are assembled into the cylinder 9 and show their seals 4. The bellows 1 avoid
water or dust contamination on the cylinder sliding surface.

The cylinder is connected to the oil circuit trough the nipple 8; the bleeding valve

7 is used to remove the air that could be entered into the circuit.

On modern cars drum brakes are applied to rear wheel only and have, therefore,
the mechanical parking brake control. This is made by the push rod 3 and the crank
3, moved by cables.

The friction between linings and drum is causing their wear. This fact is obviously
present on disc brake too, but the particular shape of the seal (see again the detail on
Fig. 5.6) is eliminating the effect of the additional clearance caused by wear.

On drum brakes, where shoes are returned against a rest by a spring, this wear
could cause an increase of the distance between linings and drums and a consequent
increase of brake pedal stroke; this last could eventually become too large.

The rest position of the shoe must be therefore adapted to the actual wear, as to
maintain a constant clearance between shoe and drum. This adjustment can be made
by rotating manually the two cams 6 by a nut and a lock nut.

5.2 Car Brakes

287

Fig. 5.9 Section and view of a drum brake with automatic clearance adjustment. This function is
accomplished by two levers 9 and 10 gearing through a tooth sector, outlined by the oval line S

On most modern brakes this adjustment is made automatically. A possible solution

is shown on Fig. 5.9.

According to this system (Bendix system), one of the two shoes is made by two
pieces 9 and 10 with tooth sectors gearing together, according to the detail shown
within the oval line S, on this ﬁgure. The rest of the left shoe is made by the push rod
12; the clearance between rod and shoes determines the clearance between lining
and drum. Until this last clearance is higher as the shoe stroke, the two pieces 9 and
10 are working as a rigid system; as soon as the stroke is higher as the clearance, the
upper part is retained by the push rod. This fact is causing two sectors to rotate to a
different position, causing a reduction of the distance between linings and drum.

The same push rod 12 can be used for parking brake control.

5.2.5 Control System Components

Pump

The pedal works on the pump piston, through the push rod on the right of Fig. 5.10.
Between this push rod and the pump the power brake is set, we well explain on

the next paragraph.

288

5 Braking System

Fig. 5.10 Cross section of the master pump and of the vacuum power unit. Below is shown an
enlarged detail of the valve between the vacuum chamber and the ambient, used to modulate the
power assistance

The master pump or tandem pump is made by two pistons in series into the same
cylinder; on this cylinder wall the openings T are connected to the oil tank and the
openings A and B to the two braking circuits. This particular pump is feeding two
completely separated circuits (service and emergency circuits) each of them can be
connected to the brakes, according to the schemes on Table 5.1.

In rest condition, the two pistons are kept to the right by the coil springs shown
on the ﬁgure; the two piston chambers are connected to the tank at the atmospheric
pressure; in this way the additional ﬂuid necessary to adapt to a clearance increase
due to linings wear can be supplied.

As soon as the pedal is depressed the two holes T are closed and the pressure
inside the circuits is increased, in proportion to the pedal force; this pressure will act
on pistons working on pads or shoes.

This kind of arrangement for the pump guarantees the operation of one circuit
when the other has failed (is spilling, as a consequence of a pipe rupture); in fact,

5.2 Car Brakes

289

if one of the circuit would spill the two independent pistons will contact each other
and the pressure could increase in any case in the still working circuit. The increase
in the pedal stroke is warning the driver about the failure.

Braking Fluid

As we have seen the transmission of the pedal force to the braking surfaces is made
hydraulically.

The working ﬂuid for this purpose must have particular features and satisfy to the

following speciﬁcations:
• in normal working pressure conditions must be incompressible;
• its boiling point must be over a certain minimum value, in order to maintain its

properties also after a long lasting braking;

• must have a low viscosity also at very low temperature, in the range of −40 ◦C;
• must have suitable lubrication properties for parts on relative motion (pistons, seals

• must be chemically stable and non aggressive to metal and elastomeric compo-

and cylinders);

nents.

These conditions are fulﬁlled by some organic oils.
These oils must be changed after a certain period of use, because their are hygro-
scopic; water is present in the air as humidity and molecules of water can contaminate
the oil in the atmospheric tank, when the level is decreasing, as consequence of wear.

Water in solution decreases oil boiling temperature.
Because of brakes heating up, water in solution is changing to vapor; vapor bubbles
decrease oil compressibility and increase pedal stroke at the same level of pressure.
At critical conditions the pedal stroke can’t be enough to allow the desired braking
force. This lack of braking efﬁciency is called fading or vapor-lock.

Water absorption speed is largely dependent on climate; by humid and hot climate
a percentage of water of 3% of the oil can be absorbed, with a consequent 80%
reduction in boiling temperature.

The United States Department of Transportation certiﬁes ﬂuids called DOT3,
DOT4 and DOT5 deﬁning different boiling points as function of the water content.

Distributor

Because of vertical load transfer, due to the vehicle deceleration, the braking force
applied to front wheels must increase as compared to the static value; for the same
reason braking force applied to the rear wheels must decrease.

Also static load conditions are affecting braking force distribution between the
axles, because of the different position of payloads on the vehicle, with reference to
the axles positions.

290

5 Braking System

The function of adapting the braking force share between axles is performed by

the brake distributor.

The braking circuit is designed to grant rear wheels the maximum braking force,
they need, usually at static full load; the distributor is designed as to reduce this
pressure to the suitable value, corresponding to the actual static load and to the load
transfer.

This target is achieved according to the following rules:

• when the circuit pressure is lower than a threshold value, the rear pressure is not

reduced;

• when this threshold is overcome, the front pressure and the rear pressure increase,

according to a preset value lower than one.

This function is achieved by the valve sketched on Fig. 5.11.
The nipple 7 is connected with the pump and the front circuit, while the nipple 6
is connected with the rear circuit. In this valve a moving spool 1 is sensible to the
rear suspension stroke, through the tip 2.

The scheme at the right of this ﬁgure shows the installation on the vehicle; a
suitable leverage pushes on the tip 2 when the suspension moves to compression
(displacement in direction a) and vice versa in the extension direction (displacement
in direction b). The vehicle suspensions acts as a dynamometer measuring the axle
load through the suspension stroke.

Fig. 5.11 Cross section of a brake distributor and of its installation on the rear axle

5.2 Car Brakes

Fig. 5.12 Comparison
between the ideal
distribution curve of the
braking pressure and the
actual distributor curve

291

When the spool 1 is compressed to the upper direction, the valve 4 is lifted,
opening the passage 3; when the spool is descending, at a given position the valve
4 closes, interrupting the connection between the pump circuit and the rear brake
circuit. At this condition the pressure at the nipple 6 will be reduced with reference
to the pressure at nipple 7, according to the ratio between the areas on the spool 1.
The stiffness of the spring 5 determines the suspension load at which the braking
pressure is reduced, while the ratio between the surfaces determines the value of this
reduction.

Figure 5.12 shows an example of comparison between the curve of the ideal brak-
ing pressure distribution and the actual distribution made by a valve of the kind of
Fig. 5.11. By an ideal distribution, each wheel can brake at the maximum value of
the friction coefﬁcient. The parameter for this comparison is the pressure in the front
and rear circuits.

The disadvantage of a valve of this kind is that the real distribution curve is at any
condition lower as the ideal one and it doesn’t allow the rear wheels to reach their
maximum braking capacity; on the contrary, slip is completely avoided.

A further disadvantage is that is difﬁcult to obtain a result of this kind for any of

the possible load combinations of the front and the rear axle.

For reduced load variations (as on a two seater) simple pressure reducers can be

used.

There is a third class of valves that are sensible to vehicle deceleration. In this case
the change of slope of the distributor curve is determined by the braking deceleration.
This kind of valve takes into account also the weight distribution change. A possible
malfunction of this kind of valve is due to the effect of the internal friction of its
mechanical accelerometer.

ABS systems perform also the function of limiting braking pressure on the rear
axle, according to the actual vertical load; in this case the distributor valve is no long
necessary.

292

5.2.6 Power Brakes

5 Braking System

Power brakes allow to brake a vehicle with a reduced force on the pedal and a
reduced stroke, that can be contained within acceptable limits. Their application
purpose include braking safety and drivers comfort.

To design a power brake, the following requirements must be speciﬁed.

• A power brake must be sensible enough to allow the driver to modulate the braking
force, also by low pedal pressure; internal friction must therefore be limited. The
lower intervention point of the power system must be in the range of a pedal force
of about 15–20 N.

• The effort exerted on the pedal is the feed-back of the braking system to the driver;
is must be correlated to vehicle deceleration. The force on the pedal must be, in
any case, proportional to braking deceleration.

• The power system response time should be lower as 0.1 s; the response time is the
time necessary to reach the maximum assistance value, during a sudden braking,
where the pedal is depressed at a speed of about 1 m/s.

• The passage from the assisted mode to the unassisted mode at the saturation point
(see the deﬁnition of this condition later on) must be gradual to allow the driver to
further force increments during emergency situations.

• Reliability of this system must be absolute; power system failures can panic the

• Weight and volume must be limited to suit the installation condition into the engine

driver.

compartment.

The tip-in load of a power brake is the minimum load on the pedal necessary to

start the assistance of the system, during a braking.

The saturation load is, instead, the value of the load at which the diagram of force
on pedal, versus braking pressure is changing its slope, because the assistance of the
power brake has reached its maximum value. This load should be never reached in
practical conditions; therefore it must be over the braking force necessary to stop the
vehicle at maximum friction coefﬁcient and maximum vehicle load.

Vacuum Power Brake

The power brakes is ﬁt between the brake pump and the pedal and ampliﬁes the force
applied on the pedal by the driver, exploiting the difference of pressure between two
chambers, one connected with the ambient and one with the intake manifold, for a
throttled gasoline engine. When the vacuum manifold is not sufﬁcient, as for diesel
engines, a vacuum pump is driven by the engine.

With reference to Fig. 5.10, already used to explain braking pump, we can notice
the dimension of the actuator, bound to the modest value of the difference in pressure
between the manifold and the ambient.

The actuator includes a cylinder and a piston made of steel sheet, with a suitable

membrane seal; there are a front (at left) and a rear chambers in the actuator.

5.2 Car Brakes

293

The front chamber is always in communication with the intake manifold, down-

stream of the throttle valve or with the vacuum pump.

Three different situations may be identiﬁed or phases:

1. rest position, with pedal completely released;
2. pedal depressed;
3. pedal released.

When the pedal is released or the pedal stroke is zero (as in Fig. 5.10), the two
chambers are set at the same pressure ps. This pressure is equal to that of the vacuum
source.

Because there is no pressure difference on the two faces of the power brake

membrane, there will be no assistance.

On the same ﬁgure, on its lower side, is shown a detail of the shaft of the actuator’s
piston. On this shaft there is a valve which puts in communication the two chambers
of the power brake; on this ﬁgure the valve is draft when the pedal is depressed at
zero force, or any play is set to zero.

Let us assume now that a pressure is applied to the pedal. After a transient, the valve
will cut the communication between the two chambers. On the detail on the left of
the same ﬁgure, a plunger 1 is closing the communication between the two chambers
by a rubber surface.

After a short while, the rubber element 4, compressed by the braking force, will
assume a given deformation, opening a passage 2 between the rear chamber and the
ambient pressure.

The pressure difference between the two chamber will determine the assistance

The opening of the passage is function of the deformation of the rubber element
4, sensible to the load applied by the pedal. The passage will close as soon as the
driver reaches the desired load on the pedal; the pressure in the rear chamber will be
therefore proportional to the rubber element deformation and to applied load. The
rubber element 4 is measuring the desired load.

Phase 1

Phase 2

force.

Phase 3

When, at the end of braking, the pedal will be released, the communication with the
outside will be closed and that between the two chambers will be reopened. Both
chambers will be set at the same pressure, with no force applied to the braking pump.

5 Braking System

294

=0
>0
>0
>0

Table 5.2 Description of the states of a vacuum power brake, as function of the pedal force F and
of its derivative over time d F
dt
F

Outside duct

Inside duct

d F
dt
=0
>0
=0
>0

Open
Closed
Closed
Open

Closed
Open
Closed
Closed

Rear pressure Assistance
ps
No
ps < p (cid:2) p0 Yes
ps < p (cid:3) p0 Yes
ps < p < p0 No

Fig. 5.13 Example of the characteristic curve of a power brake; the braking pressure is shown as
function of the load applied on the pedal

In summary, the possible states of the power brake are shown on Table 5.2, as

function of the load applied to the pedal and of its derivative over time.

Figure 5.13 shows an example of the characteristic of a power brake. This curve
shows the braking pressure as function of the load on the pedal. The pressure can be
calculated by the following formula:

p = Fs + Fpτ

,

A p

(5.5)

where:
• Fs is the assistance supplied by the power brake;
• Fp is the force on the pedal;

5.2 Car Brakes

295

• τ is the leverage ratio between pedal and plunger;
• p is the braking pressure;
• A p is the useful area of the master pump.

This characteristic curve can be measured on a bench test, where the vacuum

value is kept constant, while the braking force is set to different values.

On this diagram, four zones are outlined.

• Zone 1: the braking force is not sufﬁcient to win the resistance of the springs that
have the function of keeping the brake in rest position. The braking pressure is
zero. The load value, where the power brake is starting to supply its contribution
is called tip-in load.

• Zone 2: after the tip-in load is reached there is a sudden increase of the assistance
force; this phase is called jump-in and jump-in pressure is the pressure value
reached at the end of this phase.

• Zone 3: in this phase there is a constant ampliﬁcation of the force applied by the
pedal. The ratio G between the pressure and the applied load is called power brake
gain.

• Zone 4: the power brake has reached the maximum value of the pressure differ-
ence, between the ambient pressure p0 and the vacuum source ps. The pressure
increment in this area is only caused by an increase of the force applied by the
driver to the pedal. This value is called saturation pressure.

Hydraulic Power Brake

By hydraulic power brakes the energy source is supplied by a pressurized ﬂuid. In
general, the pressure source is the same as for power steering system and the two
circuits share the same ﬂuid. The braking servo is completely similar to what we
have seen, but the actuator.

The higher working pressure allows a reduction in system dimensions and makes
this system available to heavy cars and medium size industrial vehicle, where the
vacuum pressure is not sufﬁcient.

The assistance system is made by a simple hydraulic cylinder, set in series with
the master cylinder and is fed by the powersteering pump, through suitable valves.
A solenoid valve puts in communication the powersteering pump with the braking
circuit. When brakes are in rest condition the pressure is available for the powersteer-
ing system. During braking, priority is given to this system. A second valve provides
to modulate assistance pressure, according to the pedal force.

A pressure accumulator contains a quantity of pressure oil suitable for 2 or 3

braking, in case of failure of the pressure source or engine stall.

For heavier vehicles, where a larger storage of energy is necessary, an additional
electrical pump is applied; this is used when the normal ﬂow of oil from the steering
pump is interrupted.

The power system ﬂuid and the braking ﬂuid are different and shouldn’t be mixed;

particular seals avoid contamination.

s ≤ 0.15V + V 2
103.5

,

s ≤ 0.15V + 2V 2
c

,

a ≥ 2.2−2.5 m/s2,

a ≥ 4.0 m/s2 .

296

5 Braking System

5.3 Industrial Vehicles Brakes

European homologation regulations impose to commercial or industrial vehicles a
minimum stopping distance of:

where s is the stopping distance in (m) and V the initial vehicle speed in (km/h). This
formula must be applied for the service brake and, as we can see, the prescription is
less severe than for a car.

With the emergency brake, the stopping distance can rise up to:

(5.6)

(5.7)

where c is 115 for industrial and commercial vehicles for goods transportation and
is 130, for buses.

Therefore, with the emergency circuit the accepted mean deceleration is:

while for the service circuit is:

This formulae apply for every load condition within those allowed by the homolo-

gation form.

For industrial vehicles, the so called additional retarding device ( retarder) is also
considered by regulations; this system is applied to maintain a reduced speed by long
descents.

The related test procedure requires that a full loaded vehicle is maintained for 6
km at a constant speed of 30 km/h on a downhill slope of 6%; after this test, the mean
braking deceleration must be:

a ≥ 3.3−3.75 m/s2;

the ﬁrst value applies to vehicle for goods transportation, the second for buses.

Retarders are not part of the hydraulic or pneumatic braking systems, but are

components integrated in the engine or in the transmission.

Those integrated in the engine are essentially devices that increase pumping losses
during the intake and exhaust strokes, by suitable choking valves or by changing
valves timing.

Those integrated in the transmission are electric or hydraulic machines that waste

mechanical work, converted into heat, exchanged by dedicated radiators.

5.3 Industrial Vehicles Brakes

297

We will not comment on these devices that are usually discussed together with
engines and transmissions; the second part of this volume contains the description
of some hydraulic retarder.

Medium size, heavy trucks and buses have pneumatic brakes; this choice is jus-
tiﬁed by the weight of these vehicles that can’t, at any rate, be braked by muscles
force only.

By this kind of plants, the energy vector applied to actuation and assistance is
compressed air, at pressures over 5 bar. A hydraulic actuated system with vacuum
assistance would request, in fact, a too large dimension for the actuators. Neverthe-
less, the braking system features a heavy weight because of the modest value of the
actuation pressure, as compared with the hydraulic one; as an advantage, this ﬂuid
is unlimitedly available in the atmosphere and allows a simple design if the working
ﬂuid is wasted at each braking.

In addition, compressed air is used also for other services on the vehicle, as
automatic door opening, cabin opening for engine inspection, gearbox and clutch
actuation, horns, etc.

This system is, for its nature, less quick as a hydraulic one, but with a suitable

design is possible to cope with this drawback.

The driver’s force on the pedal is used to modulate the air pressure, supplied to the
brakes actuators. The force transmission from pressure chambers to brake shoes is
made by levers or cams suitable to increase forces and to contain mechanical devices
dimensions.

There are also hydro-pneumatic systems, where forces generated and controlled

by compressed air are transmitted to braking pads or shoes by hydraulic pressure.

A pneumatic system is sketched on Fig. 5.14 in its simplest conﬁguration, includ-
ing a compressor 5, a control valve assembly 7, a reservoir 10, a distributor 13, a
pressure gauge 16 and a number of braking actuators (4 and 8), one for each wheel.
Vehicles pulling trailers feature also a connection valve to feed the trailer braking
system. In this case, regulations impose that the trailer is braked automatically with
an assigned performance, in case of failure of the hook or of the air connection pipe.

Fig. 5.14 Scheme of a hydraulic braking system applied to a bus

298

5 Braking System

When the engine is running, the compressor feeds the control valve assembly and
the reservoir. When a preset value for the reservoir pressure is reached, the air in
excess is downloaded to the ambient and the compressor is disengaged.

The distributor is controlled by the brake pedal and is connected to the reservoir
and the brake actuators; these operate on braking pads or shoes, through a mechanic
or hydraulic transmission.

When the driver depresses the brake pedal, the distributor conveys the compressed
air to the braking actuator in a measure and at a pressure that are dependent on the
pedal stroke; when the pedal is released, the compressed air is downloaded and the
brake actuator stop their function.

In the braking circuits there are two separate sections:

• automatic section, where the pressure is always the same as in the air reservoir;
• controlled section, where the pressure is present only by braking.

Suitable redundancies are provided to allow emergency braking also by failures.
On the same scheme, we can also see the reservoir, divided in two sections, for
front and rear brakes 9 and 11 and the serpentine tube 17 for air cooling after the
compressor outlet.

Other services relying on compressed air are present: horns 1, retarder actuator

6, an air tap to inﬂate tires and the pipe to feed windshield wipers 15.

The main components of this system are described in the following paragraphs.

5.3.1 Compressor

Piston volumetric compressors are used by this kind of systems; they feature auto-
matic disc or blades inlet and exhaust valves.

Their main components are represented on Fig. 5.15, as the cylinder 6, the piston
5, the connecting rod 34 and the crankshaft 25; these compressors, quite similar to a
small two stroke engine, apply roller bearing on all crankshaft pins.

The compressor is driven by the engine through a transmission belt. The opening of
the intake valve 28 occurs when the cylinder pressure is less as the ambient pressure,
while the exhaust valve 26 opens when the pressure of the cylinder is higher as the
reservoir pressure.

As by thermal engines, compressor cooling can be made by water or air or can
have an air cooled cylinder and a water cooled head, as in the drawing of the above
ﬁgure; lubrication can be separated (splash type) or can be integrated into the engine
system.

5.3.2 Control Valve Assembly

A control valve assembly is draft on Fig. 5.16; it includes a cleaning ﬁlter 7, a check
valve 8, a pressure regulator valve 5 and a safety valve 19; it includes also a pressure
gauge and a tap to inﬂate tires.

5.3 Industrial Vehicles Brakes

299

Fig. 5.15 Main cross sections of a piston compressor for a braking system, featuring automatic
valves

The ﬁlter function is to retain contaminants present in the atmosphere, while the

check valve avoids reservoir download to the compressor.

The pressure regulator valve, though the exhaust valve 13, has the job to maintain

the reservoir pressure below a preset maximum value.

To avoid that pressure reaches dangerous values, a safety valve is provided: it
opens as the reservoir pressure is higher of 1–2 bar as the regulator valve design
pressure.

When the air pressure is, instead, lower as a safety threshold, a pressure gouge

switches on a warning lamp on the dashboard.

It is also possible to use the compressed air to inﬂate tires; a connection pipe line,
with suitable check valves can maintain tires to their design pressure automatically
or the operation can be done manually, when the vehicle is stopped and the engine
idling.

The way of working of these valves is the following; when the engine is running
the compressor feeds reservoirs through the connection 1, the ﬁlter 7, the check valve
8, the chamber C and the duct 3; through the duct 9, the compressed air works on
piston 5 of the pressure regulator.

If the air pressure is lower as a minimum safety value (usually set at 3.8 bar), the
piston 5, pushed up by the spring 4 closes the switch 6, lightning the warning light
on.

300

5 Braking System

Fig. 5.16 Cross section of a control assembly valve; it maintains the system pressure below a preset
maximum value and warns when a minimum safety value is reached

When the pressure increases, the force on the piston increases consequently: at a
certain time the piston will be pushed down and the switch will be opened. When the
pressure reaches its maximum value (usually set at 5.8–6 bar), the piston 5, through
the yoke 10 and the push rod 11 will open the exhaust valve 13; from this time on the
air coming from the compressor is downloaded to the atmosphere through the holes
14 and 15, while the connection to the reservoir is closed by the check valve 8.

When, as a consequence of braking, the reservoir pressure decreases, the piston 5
rises and the exhaust valve closes, connecting again the reservoir to the compressor.
The safety valve 19 avoids that the pressure goes, in any case, higher as 7–7.5 bar.

5.3.3 Distributor

Simple Distributor

Figure 5.17 shows the cross section of a simple distributor valve.

The distributor valve is made by a control piston 6, a regulation spring 7, a ﬂoating

piston 8, an exhaust valve 3 and an intake valve 1.

The pressure on the pedal moves the control piston 6 and regulates the load on the
regulation spring, which controls the motion of the ﬂoating piston, opening intake
and exhaust valves.

5.3 Industrial Vehicles Brakes

301

Fig. 5.17 Cross section of a simple distributor valve, to control the pressure on brake actuators

At each position of the brake pedal corresponds a pressure in the braking circuit;
the driver has a feed-back on the actual braking force by the reaction on this piston
of the pressure in the circuit.

Let us analyze the operation of the distributor valve; by depressing the brake

pedal, the piston 6 is moved and, through the spring 7, also the piston 8 is moved.

The displacement of piston 8 closes the exhaust valve 3 and opens the pre-inlet and
inlet valves 2 and 1, supplying the air to the braking actuators through the chamber M.
The opening of the intake valve is very quick; when the pressure in the chamber
M (braking actuators pressure) is prevailing on the spring 7, the piston 8 is returning
and the intake closes.

By reducing the force on the pedal, the force exerted by the air is higher as the
force of the spring 7; as a consequence the piston goes back and opens the exhaust
valve 3, downloading the air pressure in the chamber M, through the duct 12 and the
hole 11.

The pressure on the braking actuator is decreasing until the spring 7 is again able

to close the exhaust valve.

If pressure is bleeding in the pipes or in the brake actuators, the pressure decrease
in chamber M can again close the exhaust valve and open the intake valve, until the
regulation pressure is again reached.

Double and Triple Distributors

Some braking systems feature double or triple distributors, for sake of safety.

302

5 Braking System

Double distributors are made by two equal simple distributors, similar to what
described in the previous paragraph; they are controlled by the same brake pedal by
a yoke or a rocker arm.

The two distributors control two independent sections of the braking circuit.
If one of the sections fails, it is possible to have a residual braking force by the

Triple distributors have a third distributor added; in this case, the three independent

other section.

circuits can include:
• front axle brakes,
• rear axle brakes,
• trailer brakes.

5.3.4 Braking Actuators

Figure 5.18 shows a cross section of a combined braking actuator suitable for service
and parking functions; it is made by a cylinder and a piston 2, which is connected
mechanically or hydraulically to the brake shoes or pads.

During braking, the pressure air controlled by the distributor works on the actua-

tors of each wheel; pad or shoes pressure is proportional to the air pressure.

Return springs shift pistons in rest position when the pressure is set to zero.
Because by pneumatic plants, the energy source is not available for an unlimited
period of time, the parking brake actuator is simply made by springs that keep the
actuator normally in brake position.

Pneumatic actuators can have a second chamber with a compressed spring, as in
Fig. 5.18; by this chamber the air pressure compresses the spring and relieves the
brake.

The parking brake function is therefore not inﬂuence by the reservoir residual

pressure.

Brakes not interested by parking function don’t feature this second actuator.

Fig. 5.18 Combined
actuator for a pneumatic
brake; the left actuator is for
the parking function, the
right one for the service
function

5.4 Design and Testing

5.4 Design and Testing

5.4.1 Braking System Mechanics

Deformations

It is extremely important that brake pedal stroke doesn’t increase over a certain limit
because of obvious space limitation and because excessive pedal displacements,
during braking, are perceived by drivers as malfunction; ﬁnally, an excessive pedal
displacement can obstruct the application of the maximum pressure by panic braking.
The stroke of the pedal, for example by a disc brake, is caused, during braking,
by the elastic behavior of the caliper, of the disc, of pads and pipings: the oil absorp-
tion connected to those displacements contributes to increase the pedal stroke with
reference to the theoretical value justiﬁed by pad clearance recovery.

By experimental tests results, it has been demonstrated that caliper deformations

only are causing more than 50% of the total pedal stroke.

To model this mechanism a two degrees of freedom mechanical system can be
considered, where the two independent variables are the absolute displacements of
the caliper x p and of the piston xc. This model describing simply one half of the
caliper, can be completed by a second half.

When braking pressure is set at the atmospheric value, the system is in rest posi-

tion, where pads are set at a certain distance of the disc surface and:

(cid:6)

x p = 0
xc = 0

.

When braking process starts and pressure rises, two different phases can be iden-

tiﬁed.

Phase 1

where:

At the beginning, the only displacement of the piston is considered, until pads touch
disc surfaces:

(cid:6)

x p = 0
d 2 xc
mc
dt 2

+ rc

d xc
dt

+ kcxc − p Ac = 0

,

mc
rc
kc
p
Ac

is the mass of the piston,
is the damping coefﬁcient between piston and cylinder,
is the compression stiffness of the piston,
is the circuit pressure,
is the piston cross area.

303

(5.8)

(5.9)

304

5 Braking System

This equation system is applied until the following condition is true:

0 < xc < ca,

where ca is the clearance between braking pads and disc surfaces.

Phase II

Over this limit, the piston is considered still, while the caliper is moving, according
to the equation:
(cid:5)

xc = ca
d 2 x p
m p
dt 2

+ rc

d x p
dt

+ kc(x p − c) + k px p − p Ac = 0

,

(5.10)

where k p is the caliper stiffness.

After having calculated x p and xc, the product:

Ac(xc − x p)

is the volume of oil absorbed by the deformation of half caliper.

Therefore, the total volume of oil absorbed by calipers deformation Vp can be
calculated by each half caliper contribution; we should remember that the rear brake
pressure is, in general, different as the front brake one.

If we summarize in a single term the contributions of the three parts of the system
(caliper c p, pipes ct and master pump c pd ), it is possible to evaluate the total pedal
stroke c ped :

c ped = c p + ct + c pd .

(5.11)

Calipers contribution c p is calculated by dividing total oil absorption Vp by the
area A of the master pump and by multiplying them by the transmission ratio of the
pedal τ :
c p = Vpτ
A

(5.12)

.

By determining the oil pressure in the circuit, it is easy to derive tubes radial and
axial deformations; pump deformation may be evaluated by experimental tests or by
ﬁnite elements analysis.

Figure 5.19 shows the result of one of these tests.

Dynamic Behavior

The dynamic response of a hydraulic system is characterized by a modest delay time
between input and output variables, generally lower as 0.1–0.2 s.

5.4 Design and Testing

Fig. 5.19 Diagram of the
absorbed volume V in a
master pump of a hydraulic
braking circuit, under the
pressure p

305

The dynamic behavior can be described by a static and a transient components.
This last is caused by quick changes of system variables, as circuit pressure, as
consequence of a pulse on the brake pedal. The quasi static behavior is associated to
slow variations of some characteristics as the friction coefﬁcient between pads and
disc, because of the wheel slowing down during braking.

Different contributions are considered in the following paragraphs.

Fluid

The ﬂow conditions of the ﬂuid in the hydraulic circuit, from master pump to actuator
pistons, depend on viscosity, cross section and length of tubes. The parameters that
determine ﬂow speed are:
• ﬂuid compressibility,
• tubes walls elasticity,
• ﬂow resistance and
• ﬂuid inertia.

Fluid viscosity contributes to increase the time lag between force application to
the pedal and braking force rise. It will increase also, later on, the time needed to
release the braking force.

By most vehicles, the tubes that feed brakes on the driving side are shorter as
those on the other side, because of the position of the master pump. This fact leads
to have the driving side brakes actuated more quickly as on the other side; this
difference is difﬁcult to be perceived for the low viscosity of the braking ﬂuid, in
normal conditions. But, if the ambient temperature is very low, the viscosity increase
can cause a yaw torque to be applied to the vehicle. The level of asymmetry of braking
is inﬂuenced by the speed of application of the force to the pedal.

306

5 Braking System

A viscosity increase, in addition, can increase the time needed to displace the
ﬂuid, which can induce an increase of the braking force application time. These
phenomena affect also ABS systems.

Vacuum Power Brake

The power brake brings a relevant contribution to the response delay of braking sys-
tems. The force ampliﬁcation is supplied by the motion of many different components
as pistons, valves, springs and push rods, each of them participates in determining
the dynamic behavior of the system.

On Fig. 5.20, at left the transient response (quick braking force application) and
the quasi steady response (slow braking force application) are shown, for a vacuum
power brake; the input variable is the force on the pedal, the output variable is the
pressure in the circuit. By a quick force application the pressure in the circuit is lower
as that obtained by slow application and this difference is decreasing only after a
certain time lag.

In general, this behavior is perceived by the driver as a pedal force increase as it

usually happens when the engine is switched off.

The effect of master cylinder is generally negligible, if compared with the rest of the
system, because masses are small and cylinder walls are very stiff.

Master Cylinder

Piping

It is possible to analyze the behavior of tubes of the braking system with equations
describing the longitudinal vibrations of the ﬂuid in the ducts.

Fig. 5.20 Left side: quasi steady and transient response of a vacuum power brake. Right side:
diagram of pedal force F, master cylinder pressure p and rear brake piston pressure pr versus time

5.4 Design and Testing

307

For small diameter tubes, the effect of viscosity is predominant.
A good correlation between calculated and experimental data can be obtained
with a simple model, where a rod, representing the ﬂuid, set in series with a spring,
representing the system elasticity, receives, as input, a force pulse at one end.

Brakes

The dynamic behavior of a brake (either disc or drum brake) should be analyzed by
different models, considering the following behaviors:
• thermal behavior, where the brake is considered as a device to convert kinetic

energy into heat, to be wasted into the ambient;

• mechanic behavior, considering the relationship between the braking force, as
function of the pressure and the friction between linings and brake, as a mechanical
system including masses, elasticities and damping;

• friction coefﬁcient variations.

Hydraulic Power Brake

Braking systems with hydraulic assistance, without pressure accumulator, allow, gen-
erally, shorter response time as vacuum assistance, because oil is less compressible
as air.

The absence of the accumulator will cause, in any case, a time lag to build up the

needed pressure, starting from a minimum.

By hydraulic power brakes with accumulator, the pressure is, instead, immediately

accessible.

On Fig. 5.20, at right, the dynamic behavior of a hydraulic power brake is repre-
sented on a diagram; this diagram reports, as function of time, the force F applied
to the pedal, the pressure p at the master cylinder and the pressure pr at an actuation
piston of a rear wheel.

The diagrams show that pressures follow quite well input force, with a small delay

due to mechanical properties.

5.4.2 Mechanical Design

The mechanical design of brakes includes braking system sizing, mechanical resis-
tance and deformation evaluation. As we have said, deformations and their conse-
quent increase in pedal stroke should be as low as possible.

Thermal stresses are added to mechanical stresses: in fact the energy converted
into heat is absorbed, as a signiﬁcant part, by the disc or the drum and, than, wasted
into the ambient.

308

5 Braking System

In this ﬁeld, ﬁnite element analysis can be fruitful applied.
On the following paragraphs we will describe shortly the design criteria for disc

and drum brakes.

Disc Brakes

Modeling the system for function calculations of a disc brake is a particularly simple
job.

Problem data are the following:

f
R1
R2
(cid:2)c
α

friction coefﬁcient between disc and linings,
pad outside diameter,
pad inside diameter,
piston diameter,
angular dimension of the pad.

The useful area of the piston is:

The useful area of the braking pad is, instead:

Ac = π
4

(cid:2)2
c .

A f = π(R2
1

− R2
2

) α
360

,

(5.13)

(5.14)

(5.15)

(5.16)

where α is measured in degrees.

The braking pad exerts on the disc a pressure p f that equals the total force Fc,
acting on the pad, divided by the pad surface; if p is the pressure in the circuit, we
obtain:

Fc = p Ac ,
(cid:2)2
π
c
A f
4

p f = p

.

Rm = 2
3

R3
1
R2
1

− R3
2
− R2
2

.

By this equation p f represents the average pressure between disc and pad and is

useful for the evaluation of the stress on the pad.

If we assume that this pressure is constant in any point, the resultant force Fc will

be applied at a radius:

The brake efﬁciency, usually indicated by ε, is the ratio between the braking
moment and the force acting on pads; this parameter allows an immediate perfor-
mance comparison between different brakes.

If we remember that the resulting braking force is the product of the normal force

by the friction coefﬁcient, if M f is the braking moment, we have:

5.4 Design and Testing

Drum Brakes

M f = 2Fc f Rm ,
ε = 2 f Rm

.

(cid:2)2
c
A f

309

(5.17)

On a disc brake the pressure exerted by pads on the disc surface is constant as far as
direction and intensity are concerned and formulae are consequently very simple.

By drum brakes, instead, the pressure distribution isn’t constant along the contact
arch neither in direction nor in intensity. Consequent modelling is more complicate.
Let us consider the drum brake on Fig. 5.9 where the wheel is rotating counter-

clockwise; we refer to the scheme on Fig. 5.21.

The two shoes don’t have the same behavior: by braking, tangent forces on the
shoe are such as to push away the right shoe (which is called trailing shoe) and to
attract the left one (which is called leading shoe), that, when approaching the brake,
rotates in the same direction as the wheel.

In particular, the leading shoe receives a braking contribution by the friction force
itself. In fact, if we consider the contribution of a lining element d S on the leading
shoe, for the equilibrium we will have that:

(cid:7)

Fca =

[ p f hd S − p f f bd S].

(5.18)

Fig. 5.21 Scheme for evaluating the self braking effect due to the leading and trailing shoe geometry

310

5 Braking System

In this equation the force Fc is less as it would be for the only equilibrium of
normal pressures acting on the shoe; the braking force itself is assisting the pedal
force.

For the trailing shoe, the equation will have the positive sign and the conclusion

will be opposite.

A good method to increase drum brakes efﬁciency is using two actuator cylinders,

each of them working on a single leading shoe.

In the leading shoe the assistance is the higher as the higher is the friction coefﬁ-
cient; over certain limits the brake can be self locking when the second term in the
above equations is equal or less than zero.

To avoid this inconvenience the actual friction coefﬁcient of linings should be

well below of the self locking value.

thermal and mechanical stress.

To these calculations, necessary to size brake shoes, other are added to verify

By a drum brake in particular it is usual to verify that the shoe bending is not too
high; a good practice is to admit an additional stroke of the pedal, for shoe bending,
not higher as 20% of the total.

Materials

An important issue by brakes design is the friction coefﬁcient between lining and
metal. Recent studies have demonstrated that even small variation of the alloy con-
tent of some metals and titanium, in particular, can affect dramatically the friction
coefﬁcient, up to 20% with the same lining.

This fact has caused a common practice of applying on the same axle of a vehicle,

discs and drums produced by the same casting batch.

Braking lining are usually composed by the following classes of component mate-

rials.
• Abrasive and solid lubricants; they impart the main physical properties; more than
one are applied, because each of them is active in a narrow range of temperatures.
This substances are diluted with ﬁllers with mechanical and chemical resistance,
but with limited abrasion or lubrication properties.

• Elastomers; they are added to modify physical properties, in order to increase

elasticity and reduce brittleness.

• Metal powders or ﬁbers; they improve thermal conductivity.
• Fibers; in addition to binders they allow to obtain a suitable mechanical resistance.
• Binders; they aggregate all the listed materials.

Discs and drums must show a good mechanical resistance and a notable capacity

of wasting heat: the mostly applied material, for these characteristics, is grey iron.

Silicon content improves castability, increasing, as a drawback graphite granules
size and brittleness, with a similar effect as carbon. Manganese, coming from metal-
lurgical process, must be limited at reduced quantities; in combination with sulphur,

5.4 Design and Testing

311

produces manganese sulﬁte, that impairs machinability. The maximum allowed con-
tent should be less than 1%.

For high performance cars other materials can be used, as composites with carbon
matrix; its cost discourages application to mass production. Also aluminum alloys,
reinforced with silicon carbides, are considered for their reduced weight; at the state
of the art, their limited thermal resistance reduces the potential advantages in weight
and dimensions.

Because of heat generation, temperature rise on brakes is signiﬁcant, especially
when stopping a vehicle from a high speed. As a consequence of the temperature
increase, the friction coefﬁcient will decrease, affecting brake efﬁciency, that will
reduce from the beginning to the end of the braking.

Figure 5.22 shows a diagram about this phenomenon. It is particularly relevant by
descents, where temperature is continuously increasing because continuous braking
doesn’t allow the time necessary to cool down.

Efﬁciency can be reduced signiﬁcantly and, as a consequence, pedal load can
increase, with reference to the beginning of braking. This natural behavior should be
partially compensated by a suitable selection of lining materials.

By heavy vehicles or high speed vehicles, self ventilated discs are applied, as that

shown on Fig. 5.5.

Also drums cool down can be improved by the application of outside ventilation

ﬁns, along the circumference or parallel to rotation axis.

During braking kinetic and potential energy of the vehicle are converted into thermal
energy, through linings and brake metal surface.

5.4.3 Thermal Design

Energy and Power

Fig. 5.22 Diagram of the
friction coefﬁcient between
pad and disc, as function of
the disc temperature

312

5 Braking System

If we neglect, for simplicity, the braking force exerted by driving resistance and
powertrain motoring, the thermal energy E to be wasted, during a braking from the
initial speed V1 to the ﬁnal speed V2, includes the following contributions:

E = 1
2

) + 1
2

m (V 2
1

− V 2
2

J ((cid:3)2
1

− (cid:3)2
2

) + mg(cid:4)h ,

(5.19)

where:

m
J
(cid:3)1
(cid:3)2
(cid:4)h

is the total vehicle mass,
is the moment of inertia of rotating masses referred to wheels,
is the initial rotation speed of wheels,
is the ﬁnal rotation speed of wheels,
is the altitude difference between the start and the end of the maneuver.

As a ﬁrst approximation, in case of normal conditions braking, tire longitudinal
slip can be neglected and the rolling radius is equal to the loaded radius; therefore:

(cid:3)1 = V1
Rsc

, (cid:3)2 = V2
Rsc

.

(5.20)

The pressure distribution between front and rear axles changes in function of the
braking pressure and is set at a value suitable to maintain vehicle stability during
braking, avoiding rear wheels skid.

If we call M f 1 and M f 2 the braking torques on the front and rear wheels, the

equation:

(cid:8)(cid:7)

(cid:7)

(cid:9)

E = 2L f 1 + 2L f 2 = 2

M f 1(cid:3)dt +

M f 2(cid:3)dt

(5.21)

deﬁnes the works L f 1 and L f 2 wasted by brakes; this equation can be equaled to the
previous one.

Figure 5.23 shows, as an example, the diagram of wasted power versus time in a
front brake of a car of 1500 kg of mass, during a stop braking from 100 km/h on a
high friction coefﬁcient ground.

The brake thermal analysis includes not only the determination of total energy

wasted by brake, but also its breakdown between disc and pads.

This breakdown is correlated to the thermal resistance of discs (Rd ) and pads

(R p), which are the elements on whose surface the heat is generated.

The heat transferred to the disc and to the liner ﬂows through a network of different
thermal resistances. In quasi steady conditions, the phenomenon can be represented
by the ratio:

γ = Qd
Q p

=

(cid:10)
R p(cid:10)
Rd

.

(5.22)

where:

Qd

is the ﬂux absorbed by the disc and

5.4 Design and Testing

313

Fig. 5.23 Diagram of the thermal power P, as function of time t, wasted by a front brake of a car
with a mass of 1500 kg, during a stop from 100 km/h

Q p

is the ﬂux absorbed by the pad.

Previous equation implies that disc temperature and pad temperature are equal at
their contact interface and that all generated heat during braking is absorbed by pad
and disc only.

The ratio γ can also be written as:

(cid:11)

γ = Qd
Q p

=

ρ pc pk p
ρd cd kd

(5.23)

where:

ρ
c
k

is the density,
is the speciﬁc heat,
is the thermal conductivity.

Subscripts p and d refer, as usual, to the disc and the pad.
While we can assume that density and conductivity of disc and pad remain con-
stant, this assumption isn’t generally true for speciﬁc heats. As far as the pad is
concerned, c p is assumed to be constant, while cd varies signiﬁcantly in the temper-
atures ﬁeld of interest.

The value of speciﬁc heat of disc material is shown on Fig. 5.24.
If the total generated heat, according to our assumption, is:

314

5 Braking System

Fig. 5.24 Diagram of speciﬁc heat of disc material, as function of temperature

it derives that the part of heat absorbed by the disc is:

while the part absorbed by the pad is:

Qd + Q p ,

γ
γ + 1

,

1
γ + 1

.

By introducing material characteristics of disc and pad, it derives that about 80%

of the friction heat during braking is absorbed by discs.

This kind of breakdown is convenient, because a too high temperature in the pad
would deteriorate the material and could increase ﬂuid temperature as much as to
induce local evaporation, with consequent braking torque decay.

The heat produced during braking should be wasted by the air in relative motion

with reference to the vehicle.

Considering the heat breakdown it appears reasonable to modify the disc geometry
only, in order to improve cooling. Suitable openings on fenders can be useful in most
critical cases; in the mean time the wheel disc shape can improve air circulation.

5.4 Design and Testing

315

While modeling this phenomenon to calculate temperatures, the following heat

exchanges should be taken into account:
• convection, between disc and ambient air;
• convection between disc hub and ambient air;
• convection between caliper and ambient air;
• convection between pad and ambient air;
• conduction between disc hub and wheel hub;
• conduction between disc hub and disc;
• conduction between pad and caliper;
• conduction between caliper and disc hub;
• radiation from the disc.

Temperature Analysis

Simpliﬁed Approach

In addition, part of the heat is absorbed by these parts as temperature increase.

During short braking at high speed, with high deceleration, braking time is shorter
as time needed to heat up rotating parts.

In these conditions convection doesn’t contribute to cool down and all heat energy

is absorbed by brake mechanisms and working ﬂuid.

For drum brakes, the crossing time, necessary to heat to reach the outside surface

is given by:

where L is the drum thickness and a is the thermal diffusion coefﬁcient, given by
the formula:

t = L 2
5a

,

a = k
ρc

,

(5.24)

(5.25)

where c is the speciﬁc heat of drum material, k is the thermal conductivity coefﬁcient,
ρ is the density.

The same expression for the crossing time can be used to determine the time
necessary for the ﬂux to reach the middle of the disc of a brake of this kind. In this
case L would be the half of the disc thickness.

For small drum brakes of for ventilated discs with small thickness, the crossing
time will be lower, but in any case the heat wasted by convection will be lower as
that stored in the rotor, during a short braking.

If we assume that braking power is linearly decreasing with time (constant braking

deceleration), the surface temperature can be written as:

316

T (L , t) − Ti =

(cid:12)

(cid:9)

(cid:8)
1 − 2t
3ts

,

5
4

q0
kat

5 Braking System

(5.26)

where Ti is the brake initial temperature, q0 is the thermal ﬂux to the drum or the
disc, immediately after the start of braking and ts is the vehicle stopping time.

We should notice that q0 represents also the braking power for unit of surface,

absorbed by the drum or the disc.

temperature will be reached at:

If we solve previous equation with reference to the time, the maximum surface

Therefore, the maximum temperature in this kind of short braking will be:

t = ts/2.

(cid:11)

Tmax,L =

5
18

q0 ts
ρck

.

(5.27)

(5.28)

From the previous formula we can notice that, for a given heat ﬂux, maximum
temperature decreases as density, speciﬁc heat and thermal conductivity increases.
Table 5.3 reports the average properties of materials used on pads, shoes and rotors

of disc and drum brakes.

Second Approximation Approach

A better approximation can be introduced by assuming the following hypotheses:
• the air temperature is constant and equal to T∞;
• the wheel hub is considered as a sink at temperature Tm;
• convection coefﬁcients are function of vehicle speed only;
• conduction coefﬁcients are assumed to be constant;
• pad and disc speciﬁc heats are function of the temperature only;
• the surface between pad and disc is the only heat source;
• radiation invests ambient air only;
• the radiated heat in included into the convection term.

Table 5.3 Typical values of the thermal properties of material used for drum and disc brakes

ρ (kg/m3)
c (Nm/kg◦K)
k (Nm/mh◦K])
a (m2/h)

Pads

2,030
1,260
4,170
0.00163

Shoes

2,600
1,470
4,360
0.0011

Rotors

7,230
419
174
0.0576

5.4 Design and Testing

317

According to what we said, we should concentrate our attention on the disc,

because the most relevant part of the generated heat is ﬂowing through it.

To calculate convection the disc can be modeled with concentrated parameters.
The disc is a single mass where temperature is everywhere constant; disc temperature
is function of time only and not of space.

The convection coefﬁcient is coming from tests on cooling discs with air. On these
tests discs are mounted on complete cars to take into account the covering effect of
car body.

Although the disc is exchanging heat by conduction with near parts, as wheel hub,

most of the heat is wasted by convection.

The thermal balance is done by the following equation:

ρcVe f f

= −S(Ha + Hi )(T − T∞) ,

(5.29)

dT
dt

where:

S
Ve f f
Ha
Hi

is the disc surface;
is the disc volume, relevant to cool dawn;
is the convection coefﬁcient between air and disc;
is the radiation coefﬁcient.

We recall that:

S = 2π(R2
e

− R2
i

) + 2π Res,

(5.30)

(5.31)

where Re and Ri are the outside and inside diameter of the disc and s is the disc
thickness; therefore:

Ve f f = π(R2
e

− R2
i

)s.

Integrating the equation above, we can determine the diagram of the disc temper-

ature as function of time and of the convection coefﬁcient.

This last could be identiﬁed by minimizing the difference between the results of

experimental tests and of calculations.

We can derive convection coefﬁcient as function of vehicle speed.
We have chosen for this example a linear correlation between convection coefﬁ-

cient and car speed.

Results are shown on Fig. 5.25.
It can be noticed that front brakes convection coefﬁcient is greater that rear one,

because discs are ventilated and the cover effect of the body is less.

The assumptions made for rotors about convection coefﬁcient cannot be applied
to pads because most part of their absorbed heat cannot be waste to the air but is
transferred to the calipers.

As a ﬁrst approximation their convection coefﬁcient has been set to the same value

of discs.

To perform a mono-dimensional analysis of the disc by the ﬁnite differences
method, the disc has been divided into ﬁve layers; those closer to pads are (cid:4)x/2

318

5 Braking System

Fig. 5.25 Diagram of the total convection coefﬁcient H for rear discs (left) and front discs (right),
as function of vehicle speed

thick, while the three inner layers are (cid:4)x thick. The temperature will be uniquely
function of the distance x from the contact surface and of time.

Outer layers have a half thickness to take into account the higher temperature

gradient near the contact with the pad.

Applying the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics to each layer, we obtain a system of
differential equations, whose solution allows to identify temperatures for all layers
at each time interval.

The thermal balance of the layers in contact with pads is:

ρc (cid:4)x

2 S ∂Ti

∂t

= −Ha(S + π Re(cid:4)x)(Ti − T∞) − 4
(cid:4)x
−kcπ Ri ((cid:4)x − sg
γ+1 Q.
s

) Ti −Tc
(cid:4)xc

+ 1
2

γ

3 k S Ti −Ti+1
(cid:4)x

+

(5.32)

In this equation:

γ
sg
s
S
Ha
Tc
Ti
xc
kc

is the ratio of heat ﬂux;
is the thickness between disc and hub;
is the disc thickness;
is the disc surface;
is the air convection coefﬁcient;
is the hub temperature;
is the temperature of the layer i;
is the thickness of the heat ﬂux to the hub;
is the thermal conductivity between disc and hub.

For elements of thickness (cid:4)x is, instead:

ρc(cid:4)x S ∂Ti
∂t
−qi,i−1 − kc2((cid:4)x − sg

= Ha2π Re(cid:4)x(Ti − T∞) − k S Ti −Ti+1

)π Ri

(cid:4)x
,

Ti −Tc
(cid:4)x

(cid:4)x
s

+

(5.33)

5.4 Design and Testing

Fig. 5.26 Diagrams of
temperature T inside brake
disc, as function of time t
and thickness s, in a stop
brake from 100 km/h

319

(5.34)

(5.35)

where qi,i−1 is the heat ﬂux that the layer i receives by conduction from the near
layer; it can be written in different way, if the element is closer to the outer or inner
elements.

In the ﬁrst case:

in the second case:

qi,i−1 = 4
3

k S

Ti − Ti−1
(cid:4)x

;

qi,i−1 = k S

Ti − Ti−1
(cid:4)x

.

Because temperature distribution in a solid disc is symmetrical, the study can be
limited, in this case, to half disc, considering the symmetry plane as an adiabatic
surface.

The calculation method has been applied to a car in a stop brake from 100 km/h,

lasting about 3 s.

The result of the calculation is shown on Fig. 5.26. The disc is 10 mm thick and
s = 5 mm is the middle of the disc; it can be noticed that at the end of braking the
temperature is almost uniform.

The temperature diagram as function of time can be read at s = 0 mm and s = 10

mm, where it is identical for the assumption that have been made.

A similar calculation can be made for the pad.
The hub and the caliper can be considered as concentrated masses; therefore their

temperature will be function of the time only.

320

Fading

5 Braking System

During ideal repeated braking, vehicle is slowed down from a higher to a lower speed;
after it has slowed down it accelerates again to the initial speed and than braked for
a number of times.

The reached temperature can be easily calculated in those conditions if braking

power, cool dawn intervals and braking time are kept constant.

In addition, rotors are modelled with concentrated parameter elements, with uni-

form temperature and heat transfer coefﬁcients and properties are kept constant.

If braking time would be much shorter the cool down time, this last could be

neglected.

In this case rotor temperature will increase uniformly according to the equation:

(cid:4)T = Qt
ρcV

,

where Q is the braking power, t is the braking time, c is the speciﬁc heat, V is the
rotor volume and ρ is the material density.

To describe the behavior after a braking, the following differential equation is

used:

ρcV

= h A(T − T∞) ,

dT
dt

where A is the rotor surface, h is the convection coefﬁcient, T is the temperature at
the time t and T∞ is the ambient temperature.

Starting from an initial temperature T0, the integration of the above equation leads

to this solution:

T (t) − T0
T0 − T∞

= e

−h At
ρcV

.

Combining equations it is possible to calculate the temperatures at the second and

following braking.

(5.36)

(5.37)

(5.38)

5.4.4 Test Methods

As other chassis components, brakes are tested also separated of the vehicle, to
concentrate on particular aspects of their performance and to reduce development
costs.

The test bench mostly applied is a dynamometer bench simulating also vehicle

inertia, as shown on Fig. 5.27.

The bench includes an electric motor 1, having the task of launching the ﬂywheels
2 at different speeds, simulating the initial vehicle speed at which the braking starts.

5.4 Design and Testing

Fig. 5.27 Scheme for
testing a brake separated by
its vehicle. The test bench
includes a dynamometer and
a set of ﬂywheels simulating
vehicle inertia

321

Inertial masses of ﬂywheels can be engaged to the bench, to simulate the vehicle

apparent rotating mass2 pertinent to the wheel, where the brake is applied.

After ﬂywheels the brake rotor 3 is installed, while the ﬁxed part of the brake

(caliper or shoes) is bolted to the bench block.

A reaction torque meter can measure the braking torque.
The simulation of braking includes working phases and rests: it is requested that
temperatures reach a deﬁned value and, if braking is repeated a predeﬁned rest time
must be waited to simulate cool dawn; a ventilator may be necessary to obtain realistic
results.

When the temperature is reached the rotation speed is adjusted to simulate car

speed and braking are performed.

circuit pressure.

Braking performance may be controlled at constant braking torque or at constant

During braking many parameters are recorded as speed, temperature, pressure,

torque and the temperature of some element on which the attention is focussed.

Many test procedures are applied:
• homologation regulation procedures;
• EUROSPEC procedures, standardized between car and brake components manu-

facturers;

• procedure derived by the company know-how.

A particular aspect to be evaluated by bench testing are mechanical and thermal
rotor deformations; this measurements can be made without interrupting tests, by
using capacitive transducers, that work without contact.

After a cycle of different test simulating the brake life on the car, linings and rotors

wear can be measured to check their performance on the vehicle.

2 See the deﬁnition of apparent rotating mass on the second volume.

Chapter 6
Control Systems

This chapter is dedicated to control systems working on steering mechanism, brakes
and elastic and damping elements of suspensions; sections are divided according to
this classiﬁcation.

Transmission control systems, working on gearbox and differentials will be exam-

ined in the second part.

This organization of subjects lays itself open to criticism, because the target that
this systems should obtain is sometime similar, even if they are applied to different
part of the chassis.

Most of this system, in fact, are addressed to improve the vehicle dynamic behav-
ior through a suitable control of the forces exchanged between tires and ground; this
control action can come from braking forces breakdown (through the brakes of each
wheel), from vertical forces breakdown (through the suspension elastic or damp-
ing elements), from a different steering angle and from driving forces breakdown
(through the axle differential or the central differential in four wheel driven vehicles).
The following sections are mainly addressed to explain how the cited chassis
elements are modiﬁed to become actuators in a controlled system; these chapters
will also outline the related control strategies, or the rules that the control system
must follow to obtain a result of improving the vehicle dynamic behavior.

The study of the interaction of control systems with vehicle systems requires to
model the entire vehicle, to foresee its dynamic behavior and modiﬁcations of vehicle
functions. This study will be developed later, in the second volume.

6.1 Steering Control

A control system quicker and more precise as an average driver, working on steering
angles directly can effectively stabilize and improve the vehicle dynamic behavior.
Steering angles calculated by the control system can be added or subtracted
to those imposed by the driver; in the ﬁrst case the function obtained will be an

improvement of maneuverability, in the second case, an improvement of stability
or active safety. The control system can modify the characteristics of the existing
steering mechanism or can work through a parallel mechanisms on rear wheels.

6.1.1 Rear Wheel Steering

RWS (Rear Wheel Steering) or 4WS (Four Wheels Steering) systems achieve an
additional steering of the rear wheels, in function of different parameters; they can
be front wheel steering angle, car speed, yaw velocity or lateral acceleration.

Schemes on Fig. 6.1 allow to understand the purpose of steering rear wheels, by
using the kinematic steering plot we have introduced in the chapter on steering system
for front wheel steering (scheme a).

In all cases we consider kinematic steering only, at speeds as low as sideslip angles

can be neglected; plots outline the curvature radius R of vehicle path.

The addition of rear wheels steering angles allows a better handling at low speed,
thanks to the lower radius that can be achieved applying an opposite steering angle,
as that of front wheels. With reference to the scheme b it is possible to move the
center of gravity of the car closer to the crossing point of perpendiculars to the wheels
equator plane.

In addition, is possible to increase stability at high speeds, by applying a concor-
dant steering angle to the rear wheels as front wheels; yaw velocity can be decreased,
with vehicle sideslip angle decrease. Theoretically it is possible to deviate vehicle
path with a pure translation motion with no yaw velocity, when perpendiculars to the
wheels are parallel because all wheels have the same steering angle.

Fig. 6.1 Kinematic steering of a vehicle with the only front axle steering (scheme a) or with both
axles steering in opposite directions (scheme b) or in same direction (scheme c)

6.1 Steering Control

325

There are different categories of RWS systems, each of them having particular

effects on vehicle dynamics:
• angle dependent;
• speed dependent;
• dynamic speed dependent;
• model following.

Angle Dependent

This classiﬁcation is more a trace of electronic control systems evolution on cars,

than a response to really different needs.

In an angle dependent system, rear steering angle is only dependent on front wheel
steering angle.

This condition can be obtained with a quite simple steering box, mechanically

connected to front wheel steering box.

For small steering angles, as it happens at high vehicle speed, rear wheels steer
in the same direction, reducing the vehicle sideslip and improving vehicle stability.
When the steering angle is over a certain threshold, typical of low speed maneu-

vers, rear wheel steering angle is opposite, to improve vehicle handling.

Typically the rear steering angle reversal occurs at about 200◦–250◦ of steering
wheel and the rear steering angle is less as 2◦ when in the same direction or 5◦ when
in the opposite one. This open loop control strategy can be implemented with suitable
mechanisms connected to the conventional steering mechanism.

An example of a purely mechanical four wheels steering mechanism appeared on
the Honda Prelude in 1987. Figure 6.2 shows the effect of this steering mechanism
on front and rear steering angles δ1 and δ2 as function of steering wheel angle δv.

Fig. 6.2 Steer angle on the
front axle δ1 and on the rear
axle δ2 as function of the
steering wheel angle δv

326

6 Control Systems

Fig. 6.3 Mechanical control of rear wheel steering angle, angle dependent type. We can identify:
control shaft 1, rear steering push rods 2, roller contacts 3 and 5, steering cam 4 and steering gear
6 (CRF Patent)

Another example of angle dependent rear wheels steering mechanism has been
patented in the same period by Fiat Research Center and is represented on Fig. 6.3.
Steering wheel rotation controls the rear axle steering box through a connection
shaft and a gear 6. A suitable cam shifts two push rods 3 and 5 with contact roller
and, as a consequence, the two rear steering rods 2, to which they are connected.
These steering rods act on rear wheels.

The cam proﬁle is such as to steer the rear axle in the same direction as the front
one, for small angles; for a clockwise steering angle (seen from above) on front
wheels, cam 4 rotates clockwise (in the enlargement at the upper right) shifting push
rods to the left, with the lower proﬁle, and then to the right with the higher proﬁle.
There is a steering angle by which rear wheels don’t steer; radial cam dimension

is constant and equal to the distance between rollers on steering rods.

Speed Dependent

A slightly more complex control strategy is the so called speed dependent one;
according to this strategy the average rear wheel steering angle δ2 can be deﬁned
with the formula:

6.1 Steering Control

δ2 = K (V ) δ1 ,

327

(6.1)

where K is function of the car speed only V and δ1 is the average front wheel steering
angle.

As obvious, a purely mechanical connection between steering axles is not viable
without unacceptable complications (we can imagine, for instance, how car speed
can be mechanically measured).

The most common target of a speed dependent rear steering system is to make
vehicle sideslip angle as low as possible. In such case the control law can be derived
by the mathematical models we will introduce in the second volume.

This approach is again an open loop one and makes reference to average vehicle

driving conditions.

Many applications have been introduced applying mechanical or hydraulic actu-

ators, that, today, are completely discontinued.

Honda Prelude, again, in 1992 introduced a system of this kind. In this case, rear
wheel steering is achieved through an electric motor; sensors are installed on the car
to measure steering angle and car speed. The control system maintains a quasi static
vehicle sideslip angle at all speeds.

A similar system is produced by Delphi (Quadrasteer) and is the only one still

present on the market.

Dynamic Speed Dependent

A more complete expression of a control law suitable to obtain β = 0 in all conditions
must have the following form:

δ2 = K (V )G(t) δ1 ,

(6.2)

where G(t) is a suitable function of the time elapsed from the starting point of a
steering input.

A qualitative diagram of K (V ) is shown on Fig. 6.4. We see that at small speed
(below 40 km/h) there is a negative gain, i.e. the rear steering angle is opposite to
the front one, to improve handling; at higher speeds front wheels steer in the same
direction to improve stability.

On the right part of the same ﬁgure a diagrams of steering angles versus time is
also shown. The steady state angle δr is modulated by the dynamic function G(t)
as to obtain the response shown. In the ﬁrst part of the diagram the opposite angle
makes the beginning of turning quicker while the following values are addressed to
regime stabilization.

To reach this target rear wheels are steered by a hydraulic actuator whose pressure
is electronically controlled: the neutral position of steering mechanism is deﬁned by
high stiffness return springs.

328

6 Control Systems

Fig. 6.4 Diagram of the front and rear steering angles versus time in a steering transient with a
dynamic speed dependent system

Model Following

The control law calculating rear wheels steering angle includes two contributions.

An open loop control performs as the most sophisticated of the previously intro-
duced strategies, while a closed loop control, is ﬁnalized to compensate for errors
detected between the actual parameters and theoretical ones predicted by a real time
mathematical model; these parameters can be yaw speed and vehicle sideslip angle.
In this way the control system can react to situations that cannot be foreseen by

a mathematical model as:
• changes in tires characteristics (wear, inﬂation pressure);
• changes in vehicle mass and mass distribution;
• effect of external disturbs as wind gusts (i.e. like when exiting a tunnel) or changes

of road friction coefﬁcient.

consequently improved.

Response is always calibrated to driving situation and handling and stability are

Figure 6.5 shows a cross section of the rear wheel steering actuator, applied to a

prototype developed by Fiat Research Center for a model following RWS system.

This actuator includes two proportional electrovalves PV1 and PV2 to control the
oil ﬂow to the piston 5 to steer rear wheels and two on-off electrovalves (HSV1 and
HSV2) to cut the oil ﬂow to the cylinder chambers; a further electrovalve, not shown
on the ﬁgure, opens the mechanical safety brake 4.

To move the actuator, all on-off valves must be open and the safety brake 4
released. This is made by a tapered bush around the steering rod 5. A set of bevel
springs pushes the bush and keeps the brake naturally engaged; only the oil pressure,
if available, can disengage the brake.

6.1 Steering Control

329

Fig. 6.5 Rear steering angle actuator for a dynamic speed dependent control. Proportional valves
2 and on-off valves 3 are shown on the drawing, together with the safety brake 4, to keep the system
blocked in case of failure to the pressure circuit (FCA Patent)

It is important to outline the intrinsic safety feature of this system, required by
regulations; the actuator guarantees steering angles to be ﬁxed at the last actuation
position; this feature alert the driver positively, in case of system failure.

Rear steering systems, after a period of relative interest during the ’990, at least on
sport cars are now discontinued, because of the higher cost, as compared with VDC
systems, paid by marginal advantages; handling advantages can induce to reconsider
this system for vehicles with penalties on minimum turning radius, as front wheel
driven cars with large engines.

6.1.2 Variable Ratio Steering Box

The variable ratio steering box represents a technology in evolution, particularly for
high segment high performance cars.

BMW, in cooperation with ZF and Bosch has developed such system with a

continuous variation capacity of the transmission ratio of the steering box.

330

6 Control Systems

Fig. 6.6 Actuator for front wheel steering control, made with an epicyclic gear adding to the
steering wheel angle the contribution of an electric motor. At right the steering box; at left the
kinematic scheme (BMW)

Figure 6.6 represents, at right, the modiﬁed steering box; between steering column
and pinion, a device made with an epicyclic gear 2 is applied, operated by an electric
motor 1.

The scheme of the epicyclic gear is shown on the left of the same ﬁgure. The
electric motor 1, controlled by an electronic circuit, acts through a worm gear V on
the carrier P of an epicyclic gear 2, able to modify the transmission ratio between
steering column i, connected to the steering wheel, and pinion u, geared with the
rack 3.

The system preforms like a conventional steering box, in case of sudden failure,
without affecting steering angle, as required by law. In fact, in case of stop of the
electric motor, the worm gear gearbox, irreversible by its nature, keeps the carrier
stopped in the last actuated position. The gear acts as a double reduction, with planets
at ﬁxed position, while their rotation axis s is blocked, with a transmission ratio of
1:1 between sun gears S, without motion reversal.

An electronic control box is able to correct vehicle path as function of yaw speed

and lateral acceleration detected by sensors applied for the purpose.

At low speed the electric motor contributes to reduce the steering effort to improve

handling.

A different variable ratio steering box has been developed by Honda.
The regulation of the transmission ratio is made by an electric actuator between

the steering column and the pinion of the steering box.

For low ratio the actuator moves the pinion closer to the rack, to reduce its pitch

radius; for a more direct ratio the rack is pulled away to increase pitch radius.

The control is able to change steering wheel rotation angle from stop to stop from

a minimum of 1.4 turn to a maximum of 2.4 turns.

6.1 Steering Control

6.1.3 Steer by Wire

331

A steer by wire system, or a system where the mechanical connection between
steering wheel and steering box is replaced by an electric or hydraulic transmission
is able to obtain all functions described on previous paragraphs (auxiliary power,
ratio variation, stability control) with a simpler mechanical system, at least from a
conceptual standpoint.

The steering wheel drives a position sensor and is driven by a torque actuator
able to replicate on controls the driving feed-back; wheels are steered by an angle
actuator under the full authority of the control system.

The steering wheel can be substituted by different controls, as, for example, joy-
sticks or control sticks. The actuation power can be hydraulic or electric, with a
preference to the last for the easiness of interfacing electronic control circuits.

The expected advantages include also a better control layout with advantage in
passive safety (reduce aggressiveness to the driver after crash) in roominess and
drivers seat adaptation; controls could be easily moved from one side to the other of
the vehicle.

These systems could be also easily adapted to the speciﬁc need of handicapped

drivers.

This interesting conceptual simpliﬁcation involves complication to guarantee the
expected reliability; these systems are still not admitted by existing regulations that
still request a default positive mechanical drive between control and steering box, in
case of failure.

A system of this kind could easily integrate rear steering function.
With two different and independent control inputs (δ1, δ2), it is possible an inde-
pendent control of two degrees of freedom as yaw speed and vehicle side slip angle.
Some additional potential advantages should be investigated by controlling each

steering wheel separately on each axle.

The idea behind of such control should be to steer each wheel always in kinematic

condition, improving vehicle handling especially on narrow turns.

6.2 Brakes Control

Longitudinal forces generated by braking system can affect not only longitudinal
dynamics, but also lateral dynamics.

We suggest to look at Fig. 2.34, where the longitudinal friction coefﬁcient μx
is shown as function of the longitudinal slip σ. In addition, the application of a
longitudinal braking force Fx changes, at a given side slip angle α and vertical force
Fz, lateral force Fy and self aligning torque Mz, as shown on Figs. 2.63 and 2.64.

An empirical formula, commonly adopted to describe this phenomenon, has been

proposed by Pacejika and commented on the chapter dedicate to the wheel.

332

6 Control Systems

Non symmetric braking torques applied to the wheels can produce yaw moments

able to affect vehicle path.

Brakes are therefore actuators not only suitable to change vehicle speed, but also
to control vehicle path and its traction capacity. The many control systems that are
based upon this actuator are described in the following paragraphs, using for their
identiﬁcation Bosch trademarks and acronyms; they have entered in the common
technical language.

6.2.1 ABS System

The objectives of ABS systems (Antilock Braking System) are, as already announced,
avoiding too high longitudinal slips that can reduce braking capacity and lateral
dynamics control.

This objective must be reached for every possible value of friction coefﬁcient (in

principle, different for each wheel) of road slope and vehicle load.

In the mean time, the control system must minimize any disturb coming from sud-
den variation of the friction coefﬁcient (as driving on puddles, pits, manhole covers,
etc.), suspension vibrations or tolerances of the fabrication or assembly process.

In addition, braking capacity should not be affected by transmission inertia (vehi-
cle inertia at the driving wheels is affected by gear ratios and by the engagement
or disengagement of the clutch); ﬁnally, yaw torque disturbs, coming from different
friction coefﬁcient on the wheels (the so called μ-split conditions), are to be reduced
as vibrations on the brake pedal, caused by braking torque regulation.

Input parameters of this control system are wheel speeds, measured by sensors
on wheel hubs, while the controlled parameter is the time derivative of the braking
pressure at each brake. In fact, ABS controls are not able to set a given value of the
braking pressure, but control increase, holding on or decrease of pressure.

Also if in the past simpler systems have been built, we will refer to the four
channels system only, now universally applied; this system is characterized by having
a speed sensor and an independent pressure control for each wheel.

To reach this function, an ABS system must include:

• a master pump with power system, same as by traditional systems;
• a brake actuator for each wheel (disc or drum) same as by traditional systems;
we should notice that disc brake are preferred to drum brakes, because they are
simpler to be regulated, being free of potential self-locking.

• a speed sensor for each wheel;
• a hydraulic pressure modulator, including an electronic control unit, regulation

valves and a recirculation pump.

This components will be explained in a following paragraph; we will start now to

explain the control strategy applied to fulﬁll the objectives.

6.2 Brakes Control

333

Fig. 6.7 Diagrams of speed, acceleration and braking pressure in braked wheel controlled by an
ABS system

Figure 6.7 presents a typical diagrams for a wheel of some fundamental parame-
ters, during a progressive braking on a friction surface, with the intervention of the
ABS system.

The ﬁrst graph above shows the diagram versus time of:

• vehicle speed V : it is not measured by the control system, but is shown on the

graph for reference;

• reference vehicle speed Vri f : this parameter is estimated by the control system by

algorithms that elaborate wheel speeds;

• wheel peripheral speed Vr : it is the product of the wheel speed (cid:2)r , measured by

sensors, by the rolling radius R0;

• limit speed Vl: it is the threshold of the wheel peripheral speed, below of which

slip is too high as to guarantee control targets.

The second diagram (in the middle) shows the peripheral acceleration of the
wheel ar , while the third, at the bottom, is about the effective braking pressure on
the actuator p f as controlled by the electronic unit.

The electronic unit calculates the acceleration ar , deriving the speed Vr measured
by wheel sensors; particular techniques are applied to ﬁlter signals from magnetic
pick ups, suppressing noise.

334

6 Control Systems

Some characteristic threshold values are identiﬁed on the acceleration diagram;

they are:
• threshold a (value <0): this value certainly higher than the maximum vehi-
cle acceptable deceleration shows a high difference between the actual braking
moment and the maximum stable braking moment, due to a too high braking
pressure or a sudden transient to the unstable area;

• threshold A (value >0): it shows a braking torque remarkably lower as the max-
imum stable braking torque; the corresponding slip has small value, below the
maximum;

• threshold b (value >0): near to zero, underlines the return close to the maximum

of the (Fx , σ) curve.

Seven characteristic phases of a braking can be identiﬁed, under the control of an

ABS system.

Phase 1

The time t = 0 of diagrams corresponds to the start of braking. During all phase 1,
there is no intervention of the control system.

In fact, in this phase the wheel speed Vr is greater than the threshold Vl and
the peripheral acceleration ar is negative, in the same order of value as the vehicle
deceleration. Its value is lower as the threshold a, that indicates the transition to the
unstable ﬁeld.

As a consequence, in a progressive braking, the piston pressure is continuously
increasing, according to drivers will and circuit delay. The acceleration will be main-
tained almost constant because the slip increase is such as to keep the friction torque
increasing as the braking torque.

Before of reaching the threshold a, the acceleration will show a sudden change,

underlining the boundary with the unstable area is near.

Phase 2

As soon as the threshold a is overtaken, phase 2 starts, where braking pressure is
kept constant.

This occurs only after the threshold has been overtaken. In fact a sudden high
speed braking, characterized by a high braking torque gradient, by tires with a low
slope of the stable part of the characteristic, implies a slow increase of the friction
torque. Therefore it is possible to reach the threshold a in stable condition and is not
necessary to reduce the pressure in those conditions.

If the beginning of phase 2 represents the transition from stable to unstable area,
the value of slip that has been reached is the optimum one, to be held constant during
braking, to have a good performance.

In this phase the wheel deceleration keeps decreasing.

Phase 3

Phase 4

Phase 5

6.2 Brakes Control

335

This explains why the braking torque is constant while the slip increases, with

reduction of friction torque (the limit of the Fx -σ curve has been overtaken).

Below the value Vl the slip is very high, close to wheel block; therefore crossing the
corresponding threshold for the wheel speed Vr implies the entrance in the phase 3,
characterized by pressure decreasing.

The consequent decrease of the braking torque makes an inversion of the accel-
eration diagram possible, which even below the threshold a, starts increasing, while
the wheel speed keeps decreasing, but with a reduced slope.

In phase 3 the wheel is still in the unstable area and the slip is still increasing. The

friction torque decreases with a lower speed as the braking torque.

For this reason the acceleration start increasing.

As soon as the acceleration overtakes the threshold a, we enter the phase 4, char-
acterized by keeping the pressure constant. While in phase 1 crossing the threshold
a means the entrance to the unstable area, in this case crossing means the return to
the stable area, because in the mean time the braking torque has been stabilized to a
lower value, corresponding to (cid:3)pab, on the third diagram.

This fact allows the acceleration to continue increasing, till becoming positive.
As a consequence wheel speed Vr will decrease in the ﬁrst part of this phase till a
minimum and than will start again to increase.

The acceleration growth is due to the fact that, while braking torque is kept

constant, friction torque grows till it will become bigger as braking torque.

This growth occurs because of the slip decrease.
In the middle of this phase the deceleration overtakes again the threshold b. If
this wouldn’t happen, it should be necessary to proceed to a further decrease of the
braking pressure.

This could happen because the pressure decrease in phase 3 has not been enough

to allow the friction torque to become higher as the braking torque.

As soon as the acceleration overtakes the threshold A, the phase 5 begins; it is
characterized by a pressure increase.

In the ﬁrst part of this phase, the longitudinal slip decrease causes an increase of
the friction torque and a consequent increase of the acceleration, until this increase
is changing the trend of the acceleration.

During this phase, the wheel speed continues increasing, because the acceleration

is, in any case, always positive.

6 Control Systems

Phase 6 starts as the acceleration overtakes, with negative slope, the threshold A,
where the pressure is kept constant. In this phase the wheel speed continues increas-
ing and the slip decreases, but because the slip is again in the stable region, also
friction torque decreases, together with acceleration, until this overtakes, always
with negative slope, the threshold b.

336

Phase 6

Phase 7

At this time the phase 7 begins, where the pressure in increased by steps, to avoid a
steep increment of the braking torque.

This kind of increase allows a better exploitation of the tires and decreases the
inﬂuence of wheel inertia. At the beginning of this phase, wheel speed continues
increasing and slip further decreases with decrease of friction torque.

Acceleration continues decreasing till zero, returning then to negative values.
The value of zero corresponds to having both torques equal. As soon as the
acceleration is negative, slip begins again increasing toward optimum values. They
will be reached when the acceleration will decrease below the threshold a, starting
a new cycle, as what we have described, starting from phase 3.

We observe that, by ABS controls, the actuator pressure cannot never overtake
the pressure of the master pump. In other terms the braking torque cannot overtake
the action of the driver on control.

In case of braking on low friction grounds some antilock systems, recognize this

situation and adopt slightly different strategies.

Other strategies are addressed to improve vehicle dynamic behavior.
For instance, the strategy Select Low, designed by Bosch, provides that the pres-
sure of rear actuators is determined by the wheel with lower friction, while front
wheels are controlled with different pressures.

By this strategy the yaw torque (consequent to different braking forces, for
instance on μ-split grounds) is decreased with a contained damage on braking efﬁ-
ciency.

Another strategy, again by Bosch, brakes front wheels with higher friction with
a delayed pressure. In this case the yaw moment is only delayed, but to the driver
is left a better chance to compensate for this disturb with a different steering angle.
This delay should be calibrated to vehicle characteristics in order not to decrease too
much braking performance.

6.2.2 EBD System

The acronym EBD derives of Electronic Brake Distributor.

6.2 Brakes Control

337

As known, during braking, the inertia force applied to the center of gravity deter-
mines a vertical load transfer, increasing vertical load of front wheels and decreasing
that of rear wheels.

If a braking moment simply proportional to the vertical static load would be
applied, rear tires would loose their adhesion as ﬁrst, compromising vehicle path
stability.

To avoid this fact, on braking circuits without ABS control, a distributor valve
has been introduced, we have described on a previous paragraph, addressed to limit
the rear wheel braking pressure.

This function can be performed by an ABS system too and this added feature is

called EBD.

For a given vehicle is possible to calculate ideal pressure distributions, as shown
on Fig. 5.12; this curve represents the locus of points, on the pant - p post plane that
guarantees the maximum braking force on both axles.

This curve must be modiﬁed for each possible load combination on the vehicle.
For instance the full load curve allows a higher rear braking as the empty condition,
because, usually, load variations affect rear wheels load mainly.

EBD control tries to copy the ideal curve in a better way as mechanical brake

distributors.

To reach this target, vehicle mass is estimated by comparison of the master pump
pressure and vehicle deceleration; the value of the mass can be used to guess mass
break down too.

Until the control action on the brake pedal is low the distributor follows the full

load curve; additional slips of the rear axle are contained.

At higher master pump pressures, EBD control diversiﬁes pressures using ABS

valves.

It should be noticed that such strategy implies a precise calculation of the slip,
which depends on vehicle speed. But this cannot be estimated precisely from wheel
speeds. A control system keeping the difference between rear and front wheels slips
is simpler and effective in the same way.

The components that are necessary to an EBD control system are the same as an
ABS system; only software is affected, because speciﬁc algorithms are added for
this function.

We should remember that EBD system, as a mechanical distributor, is subjected
to regulations on minimum deceleration in case of failure; the system must include
a recovery mode including a non dangerous brake down of braking forces in case of
failure.

6.2.3 VDC System

VDC (Vehicle Dynamics Control) is also known through different commercial names,
as ESP (Electronic Stability Program) or VSC (Vehicle Stability Control).

338

6 Control Systems

The objective of such system is to obtain a vehicle dynamic behavior always
stable and predictable and to avoid that tires are working over their stable limit. The
actuator of this system is again wheel braking torque applied as to obtain a suitable
yaw moment on the vehicle.

Components necessary to a VDC control include:

• the master pump, with vacuum servo, as on a traditional system;
• brake actuators, as on a traditional system;
• wheel speed sensors, shared with ABS and EBD systems;
• hydraulic pressure modulator, including valves and load and recirculation pump,

shared with ABS and EBD systems;

• a steering wheel angle sensor;
• yaw speed and lateral acceleration sensors;
• a connection line with the engine electronic control unit.

Steering wheel angle, yaw speed and lateral acceleration sensors are used to

identify main parameters describing vehicle lateral dynamics.

The electric pump and valves are used for this system to generate pressure pulses

for singles brakes, independently of driver’s will.

When the vehicle is driven on a curve and the cornering force of one of the tires is
less as what needed locally for the equilibrium with the centrifugal force, the vehicle
deviates of the previous path.

If this deﬁciency is localized on the front axle, the phenomenon is similar to
understeering1 and the vehicle describes a path with less curvature as in normal
conditions; if it is localized on the rear axle, the phenomenon is similar to oversteering
and the vehicle describes a path with higher curvature as in normal conditions.

The VDC control system tries to recover the initial path, with a correction yaw

torque, compatible with tires limits.

To do this, the electronic control unit calculates from steering angle and vehicle
speed the expected yaw speed on the maneuver. If there are differences with the
measured yaw speed, four braking torques are calculated that are useful to correct
this situation or to reduce at least vehicle speed, if friction limits are overtaken.

To this speed reduction contributes also a reduction in engine torque; this is the
purpose of the communication channel between engine control and VDC control
systems.

Engine torque in reduced by spark advance reduction, by injected fuel reduction

or by throttle valve reduction by engines driven by wire.

These interventions mustn’t induce slips that bring the tire to side slip or longitu-

dinal slip unstable region.

Two control loops are necessary. One calculates braking forces necessary to sta-
bilization; an innermost loop controls wheel slip as to obtain the desired longitudinal
and lateral forces.

A mathematical model must be suitable to predict vehicle motion consequent to

load variation, at different vehicle load, road friction and tire wear.

1See deﬁnitions on understeering and oversteering in the second volume.

6.2 Brakes Control

6.2.4 ASR System

339

This acronym derives of Anti Spin Regulator.

Critical driving situations rise not from braking or curves only. Also by accelera-

tions, traction forces may cause vehicle instability.

ASR systems correct for these situations avoiding excessive slips on driving

wheels.

This result is achieved either by temporarily reducing the torque applied by the
engine to the driving wheels and by applying a braking torque by control system,
that, also in this case, must be capable of generating torques autonomously.

ASR is again an additional function of ABS systems, implying a communication

with engine electronic control unit.

ASR control unit is integrated with ABS control and shares with it a number of

components, as wheel speed sensors and pressure control valves.

The components necessary to an ASR system are:

• brake actuators, as for a traditional circuit;
• wheel sped sensors, shared with ABS and EBD systems;
• hydraulic pressure modulator, including valves and load and recirculation pump,

shared with ABS and EBD systems;

• a communication line with the engine control unit.

If throttle valve and brakes are available as actuators, the best performance can
be obtained; since most engine controls are now driven by wire, there are no more
difﬁculty for this option.

The control strategy can be outlined according to ﬁve phases.

The driving wheels longitudinal slip is calculated by comparison of their speeds with
idle wheels speeds.

The beginning of this phase is characterized by the longitudinal slip of one of the
driving wheels overtaking a limit threshold; a suitable braking force is calculated to
reduce this slip and consequently the driving force.

Phase 1

Phase 2

Phase 3

The slip is again below the safety threshold and the braking pressure is decreased.

6 Control Systems

Phase 4 is similar to phase 1, but starts if an excessive slip is shown also by the other
wheel.

340

Phase 4

Phase 5

During this phase, if all driving wheel were braked, also the engine torque would be
reduced as to limit longitudinal slip.

ASR system can be implemented by the MSR system (Motor Spin Regulator),
which provides to reduce the engine braking torque during gear box down shifts or
at sudden accelerator pedal release.

A potential slip situation could occur on low friction grounds (snow, mud, etc.)
by low gears. In this case MSR systems require an increment of the engine torque,
as to reduce the engine braking effect.

6.2.5 BAS System

BAS systems (Brake Assist System) have the task of applying a constant full braking
pressure, independently of driver’s will, trying to decrease the stopping distance as
much as possible, in emergency situations.

Such control system is useful by panic braking of non expert drivers; also expert
drivers not suited to ABS systems may instinctively decrease the force on brake
pedal, trying to avoid slips that will be, in any case, avoided by the control system.
For impaired drivers, the pedal force could be inadequate to exploit the full braking
capacity.

Two alternative strategies may be applied:

• when a panic situation is detected, the system generates the maximum braking

force, independently of drive’s will;

• when a panic situation is detected, a supplementary braking force is applied, mod-

ulated by driver’s action on brake control.

A panic situation is usually detected when the braking pressure time gradient is

over a threshold value.

By the second strategy the deceleration is modulated by drivers force and speed.

An ampler ﬁeld of intervention can be reached as for the ﬁrst strategy.

The components necessary to a BAS system are again the same as for the ABS

system, having modiﬁed the hydraulic circuit with a suitable storage capacity.

The pressure modulator maintains a certain quantity of high pressure oil in a
reservoir. The BAS system can apply a larger pressure as that determined by the
master pump.

6.2 Brakes Control

341

6.2.6 Brake Controls Hardware Components

All brakes control systems apply the following sensors and actuators.

Sensors

Wheel speed sensors are toothed wheels with magnetic pick-ups.

The toothed wheel RF on Fig. 6.8 has a rectangular proﬁle made by ferromag-
netic material, facing a magnetic pick-up; wheel rotation changes the magnetic ﬂux
captured by pick-ups.

Pick-ups are made by a magnetic core 1 and a soft iron core 2. The magnetic
ﬁeld created by the magnetic core is periodically altered by the proﬁle motion of the
wheel and its value is measured by the coil 3, which will supply a voltage where
period and amplitude are determined by rotational speed.

On the diagram at the top right the voltage is shown qualitatively as function of
time, for a low revolution speed (dotted line) and for a high revolution speed (solid
line). This signal is ampliﬁed and squared by an electronic circuit; peaks count is
supplying the requested speed value.

On current wheel speed sensors, electronic ampliﬁer and signal conditioner are
integrated into the magnetic pick-up, that can be directly interfaced with the control
microprocessor.

The yaw speed sensor (gyrometer) and the acceleration sensor (accelerometer)

are usually integrated into a unit, including a solid state electronic circuit.

Fig. 6.8 Installation scheme for a wheel speed sensor; RF is the toothed wheel. The enlargement
shows the detail of the magnetic pick-up; at right are shown two diagrams of the generated voltage
at low speed (dotted line) and high speed (solid line)

342

6 Control Systems

The working principle of the accelerometer is simple and consists in measuring
deformations of a small structure subject to the vehicle inertia forces. This measure-
ment can be made by piezoelectricity, where an elastic deformation is converted to
a voltage variation.

Also yaw speed is converted to an acceleration; it is measured by the Coriolis
acceleration of the prongs of a diapason, brought to a forced oscillation by external
means.

Steering wheel angle is measured by a potentiometer on the steering column or
by an optical encoder. The requested precision is in the range of a tenth of a degree.
The encoder is still made by a toothed wheel, interrupting periodically the light
beam received by a photo diode; the voltage pulse is measured and counted by an
electronic circuit.

At the state of the art all those signals, converted to digital units, are made available
to the CAN network of the vehicle that make them available to the brake control unit
and to other services, as for instance, an electric power steering system.

Actuators

Figure 6.9 illustrates the functional scheme of a hydraulic modulator for an electronic
brake control system.

Two independent hydraulic circuits can be identiﬁed, in this case, according to

the X scheme, required to satisfy regulations on emergency circuit.

Fig. 6.9 Functional scheme of a hydraulic brake modulator for a four-wheeled vehicle. ENO valves
are normally open; ENC are normally closed

6.2 Brakes Control

343

Six electrovalves normally open (ENO1...ENO6; normally open means that the
hydraulic circuit is open when the coil is switched-off) are present in the circuit
and six electrovalves normally closed (ENC1...ENC6); the circuit includes also two
pressure accumulators, two electric pumps used to speed up pressure decrease by
ABS and VDC modulation and to create pressure during VDC and ASR modulation.
These pumps are made by two radial pistons moved by a cam and an electric

motor.

We make reference to the front right wheel (FR) only; the default conﬁguration,
when no intervention is required to the control system and all electrovalves are
switched-off is represented in the ﬁgure. There is a direct connection between the
master pump and the brake actuator FR.

This condition allows a conventional operation of the hydraulic circuit also in

case of control system failure.

When is necessary to maintain a constant pressure in the brake actuator, inde-
pendently of the driver’s will, the electrovalve ENO1 is switched-on and isolates the
actuator from the rest of the circuit.

If it is also necessary to decrease the pressure, the electrovalve ENC1 will be
also switched-on to allow to part of the oil in the actuator cylinder to return into the
master cylinder atmospheric pressure reservoir, with the help of the electric pump,
if necessary.

To increase the pressure independently of the pressure in the master pump (VDC
and ASR regulation), the electrovalve ENC2 is switched-on putting in communica-
tion the pump P1 with the reservoir on the master pump; in the mean time also the
electrovalve ENO2 is switched-on to avoid pressure oil return into the reservoir.

6.2.7 Function Integration and Further Developments

The number of functions assigned to the braking system has dramatically increased
during the time; often, many of these new functions have been conceived as product
options, originating a huge family of new add-on devices.

We think it may be useful to report an exhaustive list of the functions that are

presently assigned to the components of the braking system.

Brake Functions

These functions modify the braking force exerted by the wheel to increase braking
efﬁciency; they are performed by the ABS system and are known as:
• EBD or electronic brake distribution, modifying the brake pressure acting on rear

wheels, in order to avoid their lock-up before front wheels:

• ABS or anti lock braking system, modulating the brake pressure acting on wheels,

in order to avoid their lock-up with low longitudinal force coefﬁcient.

344

6 Control Systems

• CDF or controlled deceleration function, slowing down the vehicle on request of

other control system as, for example, adaptive cruise control.

• SMC or enhanced μ-split control, modulating the brake pressure acting on the
wheels of one side of the vehicle, in order to avoid their lock-up when the longi-
tudinal force coefﬁcient has different value on the two sides of the vehicle.

• T-ABS or turning ABS, modulating the brake pressure acting on the wheels also

in narrow turns.

Brake Booster Functions

imminent collision.

Stability Functions

These functions modify the boost efﬁciency, to enhance the braking force indepen-
dently of the driver’s intention; they are performed by the booster and known as:
• HBA or hydraulic brake assist, increasing the boost efﬁciency in panic stops.
• EPB or electronic brakes preﬁll, preparing an automatic sudden stop in case of

These functions apply braking forces on some of the wheels automatically, to enhance
the vehicle stability; they are performed by the ABS system and known as:
• VDC or vehicle dynamics control, avoiding yaw speed to become too different

from its cinematic value.

• ERM or electronic roll mitigation, avoiding the risk of rollover in case of sudden

lane changes or long turns driven at too high speed.

Traction Functions

These functions apply braking forces on some of the wheels automatically to avoid
slippage; they are performed by the ABS system or by dedicated electric valves and
known as:
• ASR or anti-spin regulation, avoiding the slippage of a driving wheel with low

longitudinal force coefﬁcient.

• HH or hill holder, avoiding the vehicle to move backwards during uphill starts.
• HDC or hill descent control, avoiding the vehicle to take speed, in downhill driving

on dirty roads with low longitudinal force coefﬁcient.

The opportunity offered by having a hydraulic pressure source in ABS systems
that are from some years compulsorily installed on every car has suggested the idea
to attribute all this function to the hydraulic brake modulator; in this case all braking
actions are operated by the modulator and the brake pedal becomes simply a sensor
able to interpreter the driver’s intention.

6.2 Brakes Control

345

Fig. 6.10 A modern brake modulator including an internal electro-hydraulic one-piston pump to
return the correct feedback to the driver. 1: master pump; 2: ball screw pump; 3: one piston pump

To the brake modulator is added an internal electro-hydraulic one-piston pump
that pressurizes the brake ﬂuid in the master pump according to the brake pedal
travel/force, to return the correct feedback to the driver.

The circuit is design in such a way that, in case of failure of the electronic control
or the electric actuators, there is hydraulic continuity between the master pump and
the braking circuit, to allow at least unassisted operation.

Very compact modulators are now installed instead of the vacuum power brake
that integrate also the master and the feedback simulator pump, as shown in Fig. 6.10.

The advantages of this system are:

• The brake assistance is vacuum independent, therefore is not affected by the engine

operating conditions.

• Diesel engines don’t need a vacuum pump, with consequent advantages in cost,

reliability and fuel consumption.

• The pedal feel can be adapted to the driver’s preference or to driving conditions.
• Regenerative braking in hybrid and electric vehicles can be obtained without inter-
vention of mechanical brakes, with a seamless pedal feel between mechanical and
electric braking.

• The cost is reduced and the braking plant layout simpliﬁed.

6.2.8 Hybrid and Electrohydraulic Circuits

Hydraulic braking systems, we have examined until now, have reached a high level
of performance but have also become quite complex and expensive.

346

6 Control Systems

Fig. 6.11 Cross section of
an electric actuator for rear
brakes, also used for parking
function. We can see: 1 disc,
2 linings, 3 caliper, 4
actuator cylinder, 5 ball
recirculating screw, 6 electric
motor, epicyclic reduction
gear, 8 brake to keep the
actuator in position

The transmission of the force from pedal to actuators is made using the hydraulic
pressure; the need to contain this force within limits that are ergonomically compat-
ible with the average driver has justiﬁed the addition of a vacuum actuator.

The vacuum pressure, sometimes not sufﬁcient or unavailable as by diesel engines

has required introducing electric vacuum pumps.

Control force generation only requires three different energy vectors.
Control systems require again oil in pressure and electric pumps; with two addi-
tional energy vectors. Electric energy looks to be the primary source for control force
generation and regulation.

This irrational situation is justiﬁed by historic and by economic reasons, because
any of the above devices have been born as optional accessory, to be implemented
into a conventional system, and the high volumes of each of this components has
discouraged the development of different, even more rational, solutions.

In some cases also regulations have required redundancies for reliability and

safety, contributing to maintain this situation.

The diffusion of power brakes and ABS, now at 100% on new cars, encourages the
development of new system architectures, addressed to avoid vacuum energy with
hydraulic power source only or to avoid any other kind of energy, but the electric
one, used for actuators and regulation.

Even if not largely present in series production, some vehicles feature so called
hybrid systems that have a state of the art circuit on front wheels and electric brakes
on rear wheels.

Hydraulic elements are eliminated for rear wheels only, on actuators and regulat-
ing circuits. The cost advantage is limited, probably interesting for electric parking
brake application only; but it could be the starting point of the development of a new
interesting technology.

Figure 6.11 shows the rear brake actuator for a hybrid system.

6.2 Brakes Control

347

This system is completed by an electronic control for electric motors and a pressure
sensor to interpret driver’s intentions from master pump pressure; this sensor is
already present on VDC control systems.

To have an adequate clamping force on rear pads with a small size electric motor a
reduction gear with very high transmission ratio is adopted; in our case a double stage
gearbox is used, including an epicyclic gear and a worm gear with balls recirculation:
this feature is necessary to reduce friction and to guarantee a quick release of the
braking force.

A position sensor, not shown on this ﬁgure is used to release the braking force
maintaining the clearance between pads and disc at a preset value, independent of
wear.

An electromagnetic brake 8 is actuated with inverted logics; when the electric
motor is off, the electric brake in on, stopping the motor and avoiding pads motion.
This condition occur at stopped vehicle, with the parking brake, or by failures. The
maintenance of the state of the braking system before the failure is judged to be the
best policy. When the electric motor is on, the electric brake is off, leaving pads free
to move.

This kind of brake allows a further brake control system to be implemented, called

EPB (Electric Parking Brake).

The purpose of this control includes a power assisted control of the parking brake
(no energy is requested from the driver) and the HH (Hill Holding) function, where
parking brakes are actuated automatically when the vehicle is stopped on a slope.
The stopping condition is identiﬁed by having the brake pedal depressed once, the
accelerator pedal released and the car speed zero. At next start up, the parking brake
is released only when driving wheel are able to move the car, without undesired car
move back.

Hybrid systems and electrohydraulic brakes, we will introduce later on, are the
precursor of remote braking systems (brake by wire), that probably will be developed
in the next years.

Electrohydraulic brakes (EHB, Electronic Hydraulic Brakes) include in a con-

ventional electric control system also the function of power ampliﬁcation.

Brake actuators are the same, but the master pump is without vacuum actuator,
now no more necessary; the brake pressure is generated by the electric pump only,
while the master pump guarantees the residual braking capacity of the emergency
brake.

The pedal feedback is given by regulating the pressure from a pressure accumu-

lator.

The signal from the pedal to the electronic control unit ﬂows through two parallel
redundant ways: a pedal position sensor and a pressure sensor at the outlet of the
master pump.

For pressure regulation only proportional valves are used, that regulate the pressure

coming from an accumulator according to the pressure on the pedal.

Two on-off valves cut the circuit of the master pump; these valves can put the
circuit on pressure also when the pedal is not depressed for VDC and ASR function.

348

6 Control Systems

The ultimate goal will be a fully electric system with no hydraulic energy contri-

bution, the so called EMB (Electro Mechanical Brakes).

The actuators could be similar to what we have presented on Fig. 6.11 and there

will be no positive connections between the pedal and the actuators.

This kind of system will require the development of redundancies able to obtain
a level of safety and reliability at least equal to that of present systems; this objective
will not only affect sensors and actuators design, but also the communication network.

6.3 Suspension Control

Suspension systems must satisfy conﬂicting objectives in term of comfort and active
safety. In fact, as it will be explained in the second volume, suspension able to
guarantee a high comfort should be very soft and poorly damped, while to guarantee
a constant contact of wheels with the ground should be rigid and damped.

Suspension systems made by springs and dampers are also called passive, because
they react to forces coming from the road with energy contributions that are negative
only; they can, in fact, only waste energy.

Passive suspensions are designed to offer a reasonable compromise between com-

fort and passive safety, considering the character of the vehicle in question.

The characteristics of vehicle suspensions depend in fact on precise design
options. Sport cars have stiff suspensions, not suitable to absorb an important road
unevenness, but ﬁnalized to a superior stability, also by high cornering forces; nor-
mal cars, instead feature softer suspensions, that allow a higher comfort with some
limitation on dynamic performance.

The limit of these passive suspensions can be easily explained by the impossibil-
ity of managing two independent parameters, body vertical accelerations (related to
comfort) and vertical force variations (related to active safety) with a single param-
eter, the suspension damping coefﬁcient. The two objectives are independent and
their optimum values are obtained with different damping coefﬁcients.

At least conceptually, the best compromise can be obtained by adapting the sus-
pension damping coefﬁcient to the most important priority, changing from time to
time.

Tangible improvements have been obtained by adopting suspension components
able to adapt their mechanic characteristic to the changing needs of different driving
situations.

Applying micro electronics and improved mechanical components, passive sus-
pensions have evolved to adaptive or controlled suspensions; they need positive
energy contributions from the outside; if these contribution are important they are
called also active suspensions.

For controlled suspensions a classiﬁcation is made considering the intensity of

the energy contribution:

6.3 Suspension Control

349

• semi-active suspensions have a limited energy consumption as by static vehicle
trim control or by damping control; the energy contribution is not sufﬁcient to
modify the vehicle trim in a time consistent with suspensions oscillation period;
• active suspensions have a signiﬁcant energy contribution as by dynamic vehicle
trim control; the energy contribution is sufﬁcient to modify vehicle trim in a time
consistent with suspensions oscillation period; the control system is able to keep
vehicle trim unchanged almost at any time, on any road.

Both suspension kinds should include the following components.

• An actuator suitable to apply a force depending on what is calculated by the
control system. Sometimes electric valves are used that supply a deﬁned ﬂuid
ﬂow, corresponding to a speed of the actuator; therefore the actuator speed is
controlled, more than actuator force.

• Sensors measuring the signiﬁcant parameters of vehicle kinematics.
• An electronic control system.
• A power plant, feeding actuators through valves; this plant is always present with

different size, according to system active or passive features.

Considering the objective of the suspension control system, the following alter-

native may be considered:
• trim control: a quasi static control provides for a constant vertical static displace-

ment of the rear axle or of both axles, at any vehicle load;

• damping control: shock absorbers damping coefﬁcient is adapted to different sit-

uations; static displacements are not affected;

• roll control: vehicle roll and roll speed are limited dynamically, as compared with

conventional systems;

• stiffness control: spring rate is changed during vehicle operation;
• full active control: all above objectives are pursued in any dynamic situation.

The energy requested by the control system is signiﬁcant in the third system and

maximum in the fourth one.

6.3.1 Trim Control

Rear axle trim controls correct the height of the rear axle by decreasing the natu-
ral compression stroke when payloads increase. This effect can be obtained using
hydraulic and pneumatic actuators.

Figure 6.12 shows the layout and functional scheme of this system on a car. This
system includes an oil reservoir 1, at atmospheric pressure, a pump 2 driven by the
engine, a pressure or trim regulator 3, connecting the two hydraulic actuators 5 with
the pressure oil accumulator 4.

If the vehicle load has been changed, the rear suspension stroke variation is per-
ceived, when the vehicle starts its new trip, and some oil is sent to the actuators in

350

6 Control Systems

Fig. 6.12 Hydraulic rear axle trim control; we can identify: 1 reservoir, 2 oil pump, 3 regulator,
4 accumulators, 5 hydraulic actuators (FCA)

order to obtain the desired trim. Hydraulic actuators work in series with suspension
springs and compensate for the spring compression.

A pneumatic system can be easily made by using elastic elements, similar to those
introduced in Fig. 3.62; in this case, springs and actuators are integrated in a single
component, the air spring. The control system can change the quantity of air in the
elastic element, changing the pressure and obtaining the same position of equilibrium
with an increased load.

It should be noticed that pneumatic systems change suspension ﬂexibility too, as

explained in the chapter dedicated to suspensions.

Another solution, quite popular on cars, is the Nivomat system, developed by
ZF. It is made by single integrated units, that substitutes rear shock absorbers; they
integrate pump, actuator and regulator.

The energy necessary to rise the suspension after a load increase is derived by the
suspension strokes on an uneven road. Figure 6.13 shows a section of this unit and
its functional scheme.

In a single unit, two chamber are built: the low pressure chamber 1, at the bottom,
and the high pressure chamber 2, at the top; this chamber is divided in two sections
by the diaphragm 3. The outside section is ﬁlled with compressed gas, while the
inside section is ﬁlled with oil. At empty vehicle the two chambers are at the same
pressure, about 25 bar; at full load, the low pressure chamber is at about 8 bar, while
the high pressure one is at about 80 bar.

Inside the unit there is a conventional shock absorber 4, whose rod 5 is connected
with the piston 6, bearing the choke valves. A drilled rod 7, at the bottom of the unit,
moves inside a hollow cylinder 8 and works as an oil pump. On the outer surface of
the rod 7 a hole 9 acts a trim (vertical suspension displacement) sensor.

Because of the vertical suspension stroke, produced by ground uneven, the oil in
the low pressure chamber is aspirated by the pump, through the drilled rod 7. The

6.3 Suspension Control

351

Fig. 6.13 Cross section of a Nivomat unit (at right) and its functional scheme (at left). On this
scheme, we can see the low pressure chamber 1, the high pressure chamber 2, the shock absorber
4 (ZF)

pump sends the oil through the lower chamber of the shock absorber 4, into the high
pressure chamber 4, compressing the gas separated by the diaphragm.

The higher pressure built, works on chamber 4, extending the rod 5 and rising
the vehicle. When the hole 9 exit the cylinder, the desired trim is reached and the oil
ﬂows to the low pressure chamber, through the driller rod 7.

Some systems make front and rear axle trim control possible.
They are substantially two hydraulic or pneumatic systems working on each axle.
A characteristic system of this kind has been developed and adopted by Citroën. It
uses a hydro pneumatic suspension, which matches air springs with high pressure gas
(nitrogen) with original shock absorbers, integrated into a single hydraulic circuit.

6.3.2 Damping Control

The idea behind damping control systems is to apply shock absorbers with a damping
coefﬁcient that can be adjusted at different values; the adjustment can be continuous
or at discrete levels. The damping coefﬁcient is modiﬁed as function of the vehicle
speed and vertical acceleration, with strategies that can be very simple or more
sophisticated.

352

6 Control Systems

Fig. 6.14 Adjustable shock absorber; a solenoid valve (magniﬁed at right) can change the choke
oriﬁce dimension and, consequently, the damping coefﬁcient

The scheme on Fig. 6.14 shows a shock absorber with a solenoid valve used to

change damping coefﬁcient.

By controlling the current into the solenoid 2, is possible to change the position of
the anchor 3, under the reaction of the spring 4; the position of the anchor determines
the passage oriﬁce and, therefore, the damping coefﬁcient of the shock absorber.

Controlled dampers can be classiﬁed according to the kind of control strategies,

as:
• adaptive;
• semi-active.

The operation principle of an adaptive control includes typically the following

sensors:
• vertical accelerometers applied to the vehicle body, at least 1, with a maximum of

• a lateral accelerometer on the front of the vehicle or, in alternative, a steering angle

• an pressure on-off switch on the braking circuit;
• a car speed sensor (may be the same as for the instrument cluster or the ABS

3;

sensor;

system).

6.3 Suspension Control

353

At very low speeds the damping coefﬁcient is set to high levels as to limit car

bounce at parking maneuvers.

To improve comfort, the damping coefﬁcient is reduced very rapidly at higher
speeds and kept at small values till about 120 km/h; at higher speeds is again increased
to improve vehicle stability; high speed roads are, usually, even.

The longitudinal acceleration sensor is used to identify a medium speed sport
driving, characterized by a frequent use of brakes and accelerator. Simple logic
algorithms elaborating these two parameters are used to increase the damping coef-
ﬁcient, in order to reduce pitch angles. The detection of lateral acceleration over
certain thresholds can increase further the damping coefﬁcient to reduce roll angles
and to better stabilize the vehicle in turns.

Semi active systems applied to vehicles are more complex but enable a better
control of body motion, with a better performance; they are, usually, based upon the
sky-hook damping theory.

According to this theory, the ideal situation could be reached when the vehicle
body could be connected to the inertial reference system (the sky) by a shock absorber.
Since this architecture is not feasible, the control system provides to calculate a
damping force proportional to the absolute vertical speed of the suspension, taking
into account body and wheel speeds, with the formula:

Fza,i = Cs

˙Z G + C(˙zi − ˙Z G) ,

(6.3)

where:

Fza,i
˙Z G
˙zi
Cs
C

is the force exerted by the shock absorber of the wheel i,
is the absolute vertical speed of the vehicle center of gravity,
is the relative vertical speed of the suspension of the wheel i,
is the sky-hook damping coefﬁcient,
is the damping coefﬁcient of the suspension of the wheel i.

The body speed is calculated by integrating the signals of three accelerometers
on the car body, measuring the three components of the vehicle reference system.
Relative suspension speeds are calculated by measuring the relative displacements
of shock absorbers.

When directions of absolute and relative speeds are opposite and their difference
is big, the ideal damping force Fza,i , to be applied, could have an opposite direction
as the compression or extension speed of the actuator. In this case a full application
of the sky-hook theory would mean applying double effect actuators with energy
contribution from the outside. This fact would complicate very much the system
complexity.

To avoid this problem, a simpliﬁed theory has been developed using conventional

adjustable shock absorbers (semi active system).

An adjustable shock absorber allows to satisfy all conditions, where the requested
force has the same direction as the relative suspension speed. By other situations,
where force and relative speed are opposite, the force is set as low as possible, in
order to minimize errors between the desired value and the actual one.

354

6 Control Systems

The results obtained with these techniques are quite interesting and signiﬁcantly

superior to those that are obtained with adaptive techniques.

New components are appearing on the market, based upon a new technology; they

are the magneto-rheologic shock absorbers.

Magneto-rheologic ﬂuids modify their viscosity when a magnetic ﬁeld is applied.
They are made by a suspension or ferromagnetic particles in a mineral or synthetic oil;
additives are provided to reduce wear in restricted oriﬁces and maintain suspension.
Particles in suspension represent a fraction between 20 and 60% of the total

volume. With no magnetic ﬁeld, the ﬂuid behaves like a Newtonian one; we have:

τ = νγ ,

(6.4)

where:
τ is the shear stress,
ν is the kinematic viscosity,
γ is the deformation speed.

When a magnetic ﬁeld is applied, particles tend to aggregate in chains along ﬁeld
lines and the ﬂuid can be modelled according to Bingham; the shear is given by the
formula:

τ = τ0 + νγ ,

(6.5)

where τ0 is the limit shear induced by the magnetic ﬁeld.

Under the action of the magnetic ﬁeld, the particle aggregation makes the ﬂuid
similar to a solid body, until the shear stress is below a limit value τ0; if this value
is overcome, chains begin to break and the behavior is again modelled by Newton’s
formula.

This limit value is controlled by the magnetic ﬁeld intensity. The magneto-
rheologic shock absorbers have reduced response time, in the order of 5–8 ms, that
allow a more punctual control, but need faster elaboration times, to take full advantage
of this feature.

Magneto-rheologic components are conceptually simpler as electro hydraulic
ones; on the contrary, they must have a stiffer structure to avoid damages because of
the ﬂuid, when at the solid state.

6.3.3 Roll Control

A ﬁrst classiﬁcation of roll control systems can be made considering the kind of
actuators.

These actuators can be set on the anti roll bar, at its middle or at one end; the

choice is decided by installation issues.

A second alternative is to intervene on elastic element ﬂexibility, only by roll

motion; this is possible by hydro pneumatic suspensions.

6.3 Suspension Control

Fig. 6.15 Hydraulic rotary
actuator to control an anti
roll bar; this actuator is set in
the middle of the central span

355

Figure 6.15 shows an example of actuator set in the middle of the central span of
an anti roll bar. This actuator performs its function by imposing a preload to the two
sections of the bar.

The body 2 and the rotor 1 are ﬁxed to the two halves of the bar; the blades 3

divide the internal volume of the actuator in four different chambers.

Through a four ways solenoid valve is possible to send the oil in pressure (∼=150
bar) to two opposed chambers and to exhaust it from the others or vice versa; two rota-
tion directions are available being the angle proportional to the volume of displaced
oil.

The actuator can be also made by a simple hydraulic cylinder working on one of

the ends of the anti roll bar, between the bar and the suspension.

Figure 6.16 shows the scheme of a recent hydro pneumatic suspension system by

Citroën.

This system, here represented for one of the two axles, includes the trim control

function and the roll angle function.

The trim control function is obtained by charging or exhausting oil in the cylinders

6, communicating with the pneumatic suspension elements.

In addition to the four hydraulic units, one for each wheel, two supplementary
elements 1 are provided, which increase roll ﬂexibility and decrease damping, when
put in parallel to the elements of the same axle.

The insertion of these supplementary elements is controlled by the solenoid valve
7, on the same ﬁgure. The solenoid valve moves a spool 3, communicating with the
two main elastic elements; this spool is represented at left in open position, at right
in closed position. The body of the supplementary unit includes the roll control valve
(4 on the same ﬁgure).

This is a simple check valve that, in a curve, interrupts communication to the
wheel inside the curve, limiting in this way the roll angle. The spool is locked in
neutral position when the trim control is active.

356

6 Control Systems

Fig. 6.16 Scheme of hydraulic pneumatic suspensions, able to control vehicle trim and roll stiffness;
on A position (at left) the axle has a low roll stiffness, while on B position (at right), the stiffness
is higher (Citroën)

Two different roll stiffness values can be obtained, in A and in B positions; at B

position the ﬂexibility can be further decreased by the valve 4.

A second classiﬁcation criterion considers the type of control adopted; this can

be active or passive.

By a passive control the system can have two conﬁgurations:
• low roll stiffness (free anti roll bar) for driving on a straight road;
• high roll stiffness (pre-loaded anti roll bar) for driving in a curve.

Actuator control is done by a simple on-off valve; the energy supplied to the

system is very low.

By an active control the system features two proportional valves, one for each
axle; this system can stabilize the vehicle dynamic response, with a higher energy
consumption.

6.3.4 Stiffness Control

Despite the fact that designing the suspension stiffness is an inevitable trade-off
between ride comfort and handling, where soft suspensions allow a top performance
in terms of road unevenness absorption and hard suspensions the fastest and most
stable response to steering, a variable or adaptable stiffness suspension could in prin-
ciple satisfy the two opposite conditions or, at least, allow a vehicle to be comfortable
or responsive at a driver’s choice.

6.3 Suspension Control

Fig. 6.17 A double
wishbone suspension, with
one of the arms made with a
leaf spring with moveable
bearing, could feature
variable stiffness, as any
spring where some device is
provided to change its free
length

357

A mechanical variable stiffness suspension, that should not be confused with a
progressive stiffness suspension, could be very simple in principle; for example a
double wishbone suspension, with one of the arms made with a leaf spring with
moveable bearing, could have this property as any spring where some device is
provided to change its free length, as in Fig. 6.17. Nevertheless a mechanism of this
kind would be very difﬁcult to be integrated in a car suspension and to be easily
adjusted when the car is in motion.

A solution to the problem is offered by pneumatic spring suspensions if the air
volume is changed. Porsche2 presented an interesting solution of this kind, shown
in Fig. 6.18, with a spring assembly featuring a main volume of reduced capacity,
for responsive behavior, and two additional chambers adding capacity for improving
comfort. These additional volumes can be put in communication with the main
volume by fast response electro valves.

This enables a considerably large spread of stiffness. The chassis can be set to
a lower basic spring rate for increased comfort, as the spring rate can be changed
electronically in a fraction of a second where necessary—for example, during accel-
eration and braking or to reduce rolling motion. In addition, as any air suspension,
it offers the beneﬁts of self-leveling with the ability to choose different degrees of
ground clearance. The stiffness can be decreased from 80 N/mm to about 34 N/mm.

2Gantikow M., Boyraz E., Kallert N., Legierski R., The new multi-chamber air spring by Porsche—
future innovation in chassis mechatronics and integration, Proceedings of the 7th International
Munich Chassis Symposium 2016.

358

6 Control Systems

Fig. 6.18 Porsche air spring with a main volume of reduced capacity, for responsive behavior, and
two additional chambers adding capacity for improving comfort

6.3.5 Active Suspensions

Active suspensions could avoid, in principle, the application of elastic elements and
is inspired by the model of suspensions capable of retracting wheels, while climbing
an obstacle, or extending them when descending.

This function is quite different of that of traditional shock absorbers; by them, in

fact, the applied force oppose the suspension motion every time.
This kind of suspension is usually classiﬁed in two categories:

• slow active, or narrow band systems;
• full active, or broad band systems.

Slow active systems control 4 pressure regulating valves, one for each suspension.
These valves are able to control body motion (band in the frequency ﬁeld between
0 and 5 Hz), while higher frequency motions are managed passively by pneumatic
springs, in parallel with the suspension hydraulic actuator.

The active function is able to control pitch and roll motion of the body; the scheme

is shown on Fig. 6.19.

The control strategy can follow the sky-hook damping theory for slow frequencies
only; for higher frequencies, as the tire frequencies, excited by small obstacles they
behave as passive suspensions with optimized damping coefﬁcients.

In addition to sky-hook damping they can improve vehicle maneuverability and

stability and perform anti dive and anti squat functions.

Full active systems are able to manage dynamic phenomena in the range between
0 and 25 Hz, having ﬂow regulating solenoid valve; in this way also pulse maneuvers,
like driving on an obstacle, can be managed.

6.3 Suspension Control

359

Fig. 6.19 Hydraulic scheme of an active suspension; the suspension motion is controlled by four
double effect actuators in communication with a pressure circuit, through solenoid valves; peak
pressures are faced with pressure accumulators

A peculiar characteristic of these systems is the high demand of hydraulic power
from the engine (8–10 kW), at high pressure (150–180 bar); large pressure accumu-
lators are necessary to face peak demands.

Actuators speed must reach, at least, 2–2.5 m/s.

Chapter 7
Chassis Structures

Chassis structures are stressed by internal and external loads.

External loads are coming from wheel-ground interface, through suspension
mechanism and its elastic elements and from the aerodynamic ﬁeld around the car
body.

Internal loads are caused by vehicle and payloads masses (as passengers and
baggage). Signiﬁcant internal loads are caused by the reaction forces of the powertrain
suspension.

Chassis structures can be separated from the body, as by industrial vehicles and by
some commercial and off-road vehicles or can be integrated, as by unitized bodies.
In this case, sometimes auxiliary structures are applied, to better distribute local
loads to the body, as for carrying suspension mechanisms, engine or powertrain,
transmission and ﬁnal drive.

Chassis structures in these three cases are also respectively called frames, under-

bodies and subframes.

A typical example of front subframe, provided to carry-on lower suspensions

joints, some of powertrain mounts and the steering box, is offered by Fig. 3.6.

7.1 Underbody

The name unitized body derives by the fact that the body structure is designed to
bear all vehicle loads directly; the other case of separated body doesn’t mean that
the body is only one of the external loads stressing the chassis structure, the frame;
separated body contribute to carry-on external loads too and the adjectives separated
and unitized should be better referred to the assembly technology.

By unitized bodies, chassis structures cannot be disassembled after the production
process, while by separated bodies they can be conceptually disassembled; separated
Fig. 7.1 Unitized welded body shell for a two volumes, two doors sedan; the body shell is what
remains of a unitized body, after removing interior trimming, doors, hood and other element not
relevant to the structural function (FCA)

body technology allows the vehicle manufacturer to supply a complete running chas-
sis to a body manufacturer.

In this paragraph we will give a short description of the body of a two door mass
production two volumes sedan; we will make reference to the most diffused technol-
ogy of a spot welded stamped steel sheet solution. The purpose of this description is
to identify chassis structures in a unitized body.

Other solutions are present on the market, usually dedicated to niche cars, adopting
different materials or joining techniques. Considering the objective of these book we
will neglect them.

Figure 7.1 shows the body shell; this name is used for calling what remains of a
car body, after having separated all parts without structural function, as removable
parts, interiors and glasses.

Removable parts are side doors, rear or trunk door and hood. In many cars, also
front fenders and the front end can be easily removed, to make their substitution
easier, in case of collision damages. These components have a limited structural
function, as far as body stiffness and resistance are concerned and are not considered
to be part of the body shell.

The same can be said for glasses, with the exception of the windshield, when
bonded to the body; in this case its contribution to the body stiffness is not negligible.

7.1 Underbody

363

Fig. 7.2 View of the underbody of the body shell of the previous ﬁgure giving evidence of the
integrated beams performing the function of the chassis structure

The body shell can be imagined as a space frame (all beams making up the frame
are not lying on a single plane, as by conventional frames) with many thin panels,
as ﬁre wall, roof, sides and ﬂoor bringing a structural contribute with their shear
stiffness.

A view from the bottom side of the same body shell is shown on Fig. 7.2 and puts
in evidence the integrated beams performing the function of the chassis structure;
longitudinal elements are still called side beams, and cross beams are the elements
across. The layout of these beams is imposed by the requirement of offering stiff
mounts to suspensions, powertrain, bumpers and other components of the chassis.

Their shape plays also a major role in determining the behavior of the body

(deformation, energy absorption and occupants protection) in case of crash.

The underbody has a functional analogy with the chassis of an old car or an
industrial vehicle; this subassembly is sometimes called platform and even if it is
not able to perform any function without the rest of the body, it has some interesting
technological and organizational feature.

In fact, this part of the body shell can be conveniently shared between vehicles
that can be also very different in appearance, as two doors and four doors sedans,
station wagons, minivans, coupés, roadsters, etc., as major components of the chassis
with beneﬁcial effects on investments and costs.

Having this objective in mind, modular underbodies are designed where inter-
changeable side beams and cross beams of different length can be assembled together
to generate also platforms for different wheelbase and tracks, produced by common
facilities.

A further technology feature is that this subassembly can have a production life

longer as that of models based upon it.

The organizational issue, consequent to technological issue, is that the underbody
can be designed and developed by a different team, together with other chassis
components, as it is made now by many car manufacturers.

364

7 Chassis Structures

Fig. 7.3 Side view of a four door body shell showing references of the cross sections presented on
the following ﬁgure

The underbody, represented on the pictures above, is made by two main longitu-
dinal beams (which are the most important structural member of this assembly) long
as the entire vehicle; ﬂoor panels are welded on them. The ﬂoor between the axles
is trimmed by two additional side beams, part of the body sides.

Cross beams connecting these side beams feature a closed section that is obtained
by welding an open stamped proﬁle to the ﬂoor panel; by looking to the different
section we can realize how is possible to obtain very stiff beams for the body space
frame by joining thin stamped panels.

The body space frame is therefore composed by a ladder structure for the under-
body, a top frame, below the roof, connected by vertical elements, the so called
pillars; usually, are called A pillars, those ahead of front doors, B pillars, those
behind front doors and C pillars those behind rear doors.

To understand how this space frame is made we can analyze the cross sections
shown on Figs. 7.3 and 7.4; numbers shown on cross sections refer to same stamped
elements.

Section A-A refers to the side beam of a frame surrounding the windshield inte-
grated with the A pillar; this frame is composed by the side panel of the body 1 and
by two reinforcements 2 and 3.

Section B-B cuts the roof side beam, part of the frame of the rear door; the beam
is again made by the side of the body 1 and by an internal double frame 20 and 21;
the roof panel 5 is also welded to this beam.

Section C-C refers to the lower part of the A pillar, where front door hinges are
assembled: the beam is made again by the body side 1 and by an internal side panel
15 with a reinforcement 10; the hinge is bolted to the plate 12; to this element also
the ﬁre wall panel 16 is connected by welding.

Section D-D refers to the part of the B pillar where rear door hinges and front seat
safety belts are connected; the beam is again made by the body side 1 and by the
internal side 20, with a local reinforcement 21; the hinge is bolted to the plate 23.

7.1 Underbody

365

Fig. 7.4 Section A-A: vertical member of the windshield frame; section B-B: roof side beam;
section C-C: A pillar; section D-D: B pillar; section E-E: front section of main side beam; section
F-F: rear section of main side beam; section G-G: left half of the ﬂoor

Section E-E is cut on the front of the main side beam (see also Fig. 7.3): we can
notice an inside panel 30, an outside panel 31, a reinforcement 32; to this beam is
also welded the inside panel of the front fender 33, connecting to the upper pivot of
the Mc Pherson suspension.

Section F-F represents the rear part of the main side beam (see also Fig. 7.3)
connecting with the rear twist beam suspension; this beam is obtained by joining
different panels as rear ﬂoor 44 and the wheel well 43.

Section G-G, ﬁnally, cuts the ﬂoor across and shows another section of the main
side beam (element 52 and ﬂoor 50) and of the lateral side beam (elements 53, 54
and body side 1); a third side beam is shaped beside the tunnel, made by the ﬂoor 50
and a reinforcement 51.

7.2 Subframe

Subframes or auxiliary frames, on a unitized body structure, perform the following
functions:

366

7 Chassis Structures

• they offer suspensions and powertrain mounts and they distribute the consequent

loads to body area more suitable from a structural standpoint;

• they built up a secondary suspension, when mounted on the body with elastic ele-
ments, able to ﬁlter vibrations from powertrain and wheels, at frequencies critical
to acoustic comfort;

• they contribute to manage body deformations following to crash;
• they offer an assembly support to many elements of the chassis, with beneﬁts on

work organization;

• their reduced dimensions, as compared with body dimensions, allow a better con-
trol of tolerance of suspensions mounts, with beneﬁts on their elasto-kinematic
behavior.

Subframes are often applied to the front of the car and offer mounting points for

suspension lower arms, anti roll bar, steering box and part of the powertrain.

Figure 3.6, in the chapter dedicated to suspensions is a quite essential example
of this kind of structure; it is made by a very stubby beam ﬁxing the Mc Pherson
suspension arms. This subframe allows to have a stiff connection for the suspension
in an area where the body structure would be rather distant.

The same ﬁgure shows the anti roll bar mounts and the Fig. 3.9, in the same
chapter, shows the installation of the rack and pinion steering box. It is quite easy
to understand how is possible to guarantee for this small structure a high precision
for all assembly holes, eventually with a multiple drilling machine. The precision of
their positions is important for toe angles and steering wheel spokes alignment.

All these chassis elements are assembled on the subframe on a dedicated prepa-
ration line and this subassembly can be installed on the body in a shorter time,
compatible with the main assembly line speed.

This subframe is connected to the body through two large mounts, visible in its
rear area; this mounts are ﬂexible rubber bushing, designed to ﬁlter powertrain and
wheel vibrations. The remaining mounts, further of the passenger compartment are
instead rigid (on the two vertical cantilevers).

The subframe is made by two stamped steel shells (see section A-A on Fig. 3.28),
which are spot welded along a mounting ﬂange. It is also possible to have a structure
of this kind made with an single piece aluminum casting, with almost the same shape;
the choice is bound to a trade-off between weight and cost.

The powertrain (including engine, transmission and differential) is mounted on
the underbody main side beams through elastic suspensions; only a reaction rod (for
powertrain reaction torque) loads the lower part of the subframe.

This kind of subframe is very diffused for front wheel driven small and medium

size cars.

By larger cars a different kind of subframe is used, surrounding the perimeter of

the lower part of the engine compartment, as shown on Fig. 7.5.

Figure 3.42 shown in the chapter dedicated to suspensions offers a partial view
of the suspension matched to this subframe; the car is again front wheel driven with
transversal powertrain. A similar solution could be also applied to rear wheel driven
cars or to front wheel driven cars with longitudinal powertrain.

7.2 Subframe

367

Fig. 7.5 Perimetrical subframe for large front wheel driven cars; the front of the car should be
imagined on the left side of the picture (FCA)

With a perimetrical subframe of this kind is possible to avoid any direct connection
to the body of lower suspension arms, anti roll bar and steering box even when the
distance between these mounts is larger as in previous example; the powertrain too
can have no direct mount on the body.

Figure 7.6 shows a view from the top of this kind of subframe (car front at right)

with references of the most important cross sections.

The joining points with the body shell are set at the four vertices of the frame;
sections 5-5 and 7-7 put in evidence the rubber bushings seats for an elastic suspen-
sion. The frame is a monolithic beam (see section 6-6), bent to a U shape, welded
on a multiple elements cross beam, cut on section 2-2.

The monolithic beam is made by hydroforming. This process, whose implementa-
tion is relatively recent, provides that a steel tube, with no welding, is bent to the ﬁnal
U shape. This semi ﬁnished part is set an dye, reproducing inside the ﬁnal external
shape, and then pressed inside by a very high pressure ﬂuid (about 1,000 bar); this
pressure brings steel to its yield point and imparts the ﬁnal shape to the beam.

The advantage of this process is rather evident; tooling is simpler as conventional
stamps and the beam cross section is not weakened by welding or made heavier by
ﬂanges or overlaps. In addition, the cross section can change along the beam axis.

On the contrary the ﬁnal shape has no aesthetic ﬁnishing (not important for this
kind of application) and requires that the cross section perimeter is almost constant
along the axis, to avoid excessive thickness decrease or rips.

The closure beam of the subframe, cut by section 2-2, is made by two shells,

welded together and to the hydroformed beam through arc welding.

368

7 Chassis Structures

Fig. 7.6 Perimetrical subframe showing its most important cross sections

7.2 Subframe

369

Fig. 7.7 Subframe for a multilink rear suspension for a large front wheel driven car; on the upper
right image the complete assembled suspension is shown for reference (FCA)

The ﬁgure puts in evidence two powertrain mounts, for large rubber bushings; one
of them is cut by section 8-8; powertrain mounts (4 in total) are all on the perimetrical
subframe.

Where suspension arm rubber bushing are installed, the hydroformed beam is cut
and reinforced; this feature is shown by cross sections 1-1 and 4-4. Openings allow
to position arm rotation axis closer to the center of the car, with a more suitable
elasto-kinematic performance.

Section 3-3 shows also one of the steering box mounts; all mounts are made with

projection welded threaded bushings.

Many other holes allow a complete installation of powertrain accessories, harness

and piping before of ﬁnal assembly of subframe on car body.

Another example of subframe is shown on Fig. 7.7; this example is applied to a

rear suspension for a large front wheel driven car.

Car front should be imagined at right.
The frame has in this case an H shape and features on the side beams of the H the

mounts of suspension arms and spring and shock absorber seats.

The eyes at the tips of the longitudinal beams are used for rubber bushings instal-

lation for assembly with car body.

be directly applied to the body shell.

By small cars the rear subframe can be avoided and the suspension mounts can

370

7 Chassis Structures

Fig. 7.8 Relevant cross sections for the rear subframe of the previous ﬁgure

By front wheel driven cars with suspended differential box, the subframe is mod-
iﬁed to install differential and its dimension is increased longitudinally to offer a
good reaction to the torque that is applied by the differential in the y direction.

Figure 7.8 shows some cross sections of the rear subframe of previous ﬁgure.

7.2 Subframe

371

The simpler structure, as compared with the front subframe, can be obtained by
bent tubes with local stamping, welded together; hydroforming is, in this case, not
necessary.

A U bent tube (The U end are upwards in the ﬁgure) with two short beams compose
the ﬁnal shape. Section 3-3 shows an overlap area for welding the two elements; a
reinforcement diaphragm is also added. The same section shows the coil spring seat.
Sections 2-2 and 4-4 shows the U shaped tube in two different points; section 1-1

shows the front mount of the lower suspension arm.

7.3 Industrial Vehicles Frames

Industrial vehicles frames have saved through the time the conﬁguration developed
for the ﬁrst cars, the ladder or grillage structure, composed by side and cross members.
As a matter of fact all considerations reported in the chapter dedicated to design

evolution still apply to industrial vehicles.

Bearing in mind the enormous diversiﬁcation of ﬁnal applications of these vehi-
cles, body manufacturers are still dedicated specialists different than vehicle man-
ufacturers; many bodies (as ﬂat trucks, vans, dumpers, etc.) cannot be suitable for
structural jobs, as they are described at the beginning of this chapter.

The cabin too, even if made by technologies similar to the car body have dimension

too limited to carry on signiﬁcant loads.

For all these reasons a real frame is provided to carry on all the loads and to
connect the chassis components. Some exception is applied to buses and some tank
trailer, whose study is outside of the scope of this book.

The frame is made by side members and cross members that should be ﬁxed to
the ﬁrst ones as stifﬂy as possible; the rigidity of this ﬁxation is responsible for the
most important part of the torsional stiffness of the frame, that is the only element
able to react to torques applied along the vehicle x axis.

Figure 7.9 shows an example of chassis frame for a heavy duty truck and some

design details useful to understand how this structure works.

Side beams are shaped to different widths, in their top view; the narrower part is
suitable to accommodate steering wheels and twin wheels, while the larger one is
adapted to install the engine and the drivers cabin.

In addition, side beams are also tapered in their elevation view, to allow the

suspension stroke of rear wheels, due to the large range of pay loads.

The side beam cross section is shaped like a C, even if an open section is not the
most suitable one for a high torsional stiffness. Open cross sections, widely applied,
can be easily bent, starting from high thickness, high resistance steel sheets. Where
necessary, their cross section is reinforced with the application of additional larger
C beam or by platbands.

Cross beams carry on the job of distributing local loads applied by suspensions
and powertrain; an example of their layout can be seen on Fig. 3.69 and on others of
the same paragraph, dedicated to industrial vehicles suspensions. In addition, cross
beams contribute to the torsional stiffness of the frame.

372

7 Chassis Structures

Fig. 7.9 Side and top view of a chassis frame for a heavy duty truck (at left). Details a, b, c, d
and e show different types of joints used to connect cross with side beams. Details 1, 2 and 3 show
different joining technologies, addressed to exchange high intensity shears in the side beams plane

7.3 Industrial Vehicles Frames

373

(7.1)

As a matter of fact, if the two side beams were completely disconnected, the
moment of inertia of the frame would be the double of that of a single section.
Because this section is built up with an open proﬁle, characterized by rectangular
elements of thickness s, much smaller as their length h, we have approximately:
η

Ix =

(cid:3)hi s3
i

,

3

where hi and si are the dimensions of the three rectangles building up the side beam
cross section; the parameter, in this case, is η ≈ 1, 12.

Cross beams ideally constrain side beams to remain parallel and the torsional
deformation of side beams is limited by the bending stiffness of cross beams, increas-
ing the torsional stiffness of the assembly.

Cross beams can be made by a simple C proﬁle, with their ends bent and deprived
of platbands, inserted in the inside of side beams (as in ﬁgure a) or they can be
reinforced locally with C proﬁle cuts, welded at their ends, to improve the connection
with side beams (as in ﬁgure b).

Further local reinforcements can be obtained by shaping the ends of the cross
beams (as in ﬁgure c) or applying two (cid:4) proﬁles shaped for the purpose and welded
together (as in ﬁgure d).

When is necessary to reduce dimensions of cross beams, also tubular cross section

can be applied, welded to ﬂanges at their ends (as in ﬁgure e).

It should be noticed that all joints with side and cross beams are made with rivets or
bolts if their are to be disassembled for repairs (details 1 and 2); this choice is caused
by the large dimension of the frame. Arc welding, with its high heat introduction,
would induce too large deformations and consequent residual stress, that are difﬁcult
to be eliminated by heat treatment.

Arc welding (detail 3) is limited to small components or to cross beams, during

their preparation process.

7.4 Structure Tasks

Tasks of the chassis structure are substantially to bear forces and payloads and to
contain consequent deformations.

Speaking of deformations, we shouldn’t forget the this issue must be approached
not only from a static point of view, but also from a dynamic one, considering
vibration amplitudes and their consequent noise in the passenger compartment.

Some considerations on this topic are made in the second volume.

7.4.1 External Loads

External loads applied to chassis structure, during its life, can be classiﬁed under two
different categories:

374

7 Chassis Structures

• instantaneous overloads;
• fatigue loads.

An example of the ﬁrst category can be supplied by imagining what happens by
driving of pits of large dimension, by hitting curbs of side walks, by sudden braking
on high friction grounds or by starting up in low gears.

It is common practice to consider those loads as static loads, by introducing
multiplication coefﬁcients to their steady state values. For loads bound to friction
between wheel and ground, prudential friction coefﬁcient μy, p = μx, p = 1.2−1.3
are taken into account; as far as shocks are concerned, accelerations 5–7 times higher
as the gravity accelerations are considered.

Emblematic fatigue loads can be imagined by driving on bumpy roads, with almost
full loads; typical roads are those paved with cobble stones or with asymmetric waves.
The expected life of a car structure is at least 200,000 km of average use; each
manufacturer has designed and built test courses that for their increased severity
allow to simulate the vehicle average life in only 50–100,000 km; the completion of
a mission like this requires at least few months of driving, with drivers organized on
multiple shifts.

Loads recorded on these courses, that are empirically correlated to the car life,
can be further synthesized, by eliminating loads under the structure fatigue limit;
load histories are elaborated that allow to reproduce average life in shorter time.

Static Loads and Mass Properties

Vehicle weight is always present. The reaction to this load is coming from tires
contact points with ground, through the elastic and structural elements of suspensions.
Suspensions, according to their architecture, distribute reaction loads through their
connections with the chassis structure, in all direction, not necessarily vertical.

We have seen, for example, in the Mc Pherson suspension, that the vertical reaction
applied to the wheel, the lower arm and the shock absorber assembly generate a
bending torque that is equilibrated by a lateral force applied to the chassis structure.
We should remember that unsprung masses (wheels, tires, struts, brakes and part
of the mass of suspension arms, springs and shock absorbers) rest on ground directly,
without interesting vehicle structure.

Vehicle weight and reaction forces distribution are function of passengers on board

and of transported baggage; this set of parameters is called weight condition.

Table 7.1 summarizes axle loads and longitudinal center of gravity positions for
different load condition of a medium size front wheel driven car, assuming a mass of
70 kg for each passenger, including driver. On this kind of car, passengers seating in
front have their center of gravity almost at mid wheel base and their weight is shared
at 50% by the two axles. Rear passengers are seated at about 80% of the wheelbase,
while the baggage center of gravity is usually set at about 105% of the wheel base.
Each added mass shifts the position of the center of gravity, according to this

formula:

7.4 Structure Tasks

375

Table 7.1 Axle loads Fz1, Fz2 and center of gravity position a, measured from the front axle,
divided by the wheel base l as function of load conditions, on a medium front wheel driven car. M
is the sprung mass
Load condition

Curb weight
1 pass. (driver)
2 pass.
3 pass.
3 pass. + 30 kg
5 pass. + 50 kg

Fz1 (N)
6,800
7,150
7,500
7,630
7,610
7,860

Fz2 (N)
4,770
5,120
5,470
6,040
6,360
7,710

Fz (N)
11,570
12,270
12,970
13,670
13,970
15,570

a/l %
41.2
41.7
42.2
44.2
45.5
49.5

M (kg)
1,030
1,100
1,170
1,240
1,270
1,430

xG = m1xG1 + m2xG2

,

m1 + m2

(7.2)

where xG1 is the initial position of the center of gravity of a vehicle of mass m1 on
the x axis and xG2 is the position of the added mass of value m2.

The table shows also an estimate of the sprung mass, made by car body and

interiors, powertrain, passengers and their baggage.

Load conditions affect also the moment of inertia of the sprung mass, useful to

predict the vehicle dynamic behavior.

Considering the standard reference system x, y, z with its origin in the sprung
mass center of gravity, the vehicle system is characterized by an inertia ellipsoid,
whose main axis are generally not coincident with reference axis.

The vehicle inertia tensor is therefore characterized by three inertia moments Jx x ,
Jyy, Jzz and by three centrifugal moments Jx y, Jx z, Jyz often neglected, at least at
curb weight condition.

Mass contribution of passengers and baggage modiﬁes the moments of inertia

according to the following formula:

Jii = Jii,1 + Jii,2 + m1d 2
1

+ m2d 2
2

,

(7.3)

where subscripts 1 and 2 refer to the original reference mass and to the added mass,
Jii is the moment of inertia of the added body, according to the i direction, through
its center of gravity, m is the added mass and d is the distance between the center of
gravity of the added mass and that of the reference condition.

With a similar formula also centrifugal moments can be calculated.
The experimental determination of the center of gravity position can be made by
weighing. The ISO 10392 standard provides that, having measured sprung masses
m1, m2, m3, m4 at the wheels positions (1 is front left, 2 is front right, 3 is rear left
and 4 is rear right), the center of gravity position can be measured by the following
formula:

376

7 Chassis Structures

xG =

m3 + m4
m1 + m2 + m3 + m4

l ,

where xG is the distance of the center from the front axle and l is the wheelbase.

The transversal position of the center of gravity, with reference to the vehicle mid

plane (positive to the right) is function of the front and rear tracks t1 and t2:

yG = t1(m1 − m2) + t2(m3 − m4)
2(m1 + m2 + m3 + m4)

.

Center of gravity elevation can be obtained by rising an axle and measuring the
masses on the axles remaining on the ground m(cid:2). If the rear axle is raised, we can
use the following formula:

zG = l(m(cid:2)

+ m(cid:2)
2
(m1 + m2 + m4 + m4) tan ϑ

− m1 − m2)

1

+ Rl,i ,

where ϑ is the angle of rising, Rl,i is the rolling radius of the axle remaining on the
ground; an analogous formula applies when rising the front axle.

To measure moments of inertia, see the procedure described on the second Volume.

(7.4)

(7.5)

(7.6)

Driving Loads

Because of drivers maneuvers, the chassis structure is subject to loads, that change in
time and are to be added to the static one. Control forces on steering wheel, accelerator
and brake pedals cause additional loads on contact points between wheels and ground,
because of side and longitudinal slip implied.

These loads again are transferred to the chassis structure by suspensions.
The ﬁnal result are longitudinal and transversal accelerations that affect vehicle

motion.

By modern production cars a transversal acceleration of 1 g is reached in bending

at limit conditions, while about 0.5 is reached by longitudinal accelerations.

Inertia forces cause, in addition, pitch and roll angles of the sprung mass and

transfer loads from one wheel to the other.

Figure 7.10 shows sprung mass transversal acceleration and some of front suspen-
sion loads, calculated for a car during an ISO overtaking maneuver. The simulation
has been made by a multi body mathematical model of the vehicle, including a
complete description of the quadrilateral suspensions.

Often loads are calculated from a simpliﬁed model (where suspensions are func-
tionally described by their elasto-kinematic curves) applying then these loads to
multibody or FEM models of the vehicle suspension.

7.4 Structure Tasks

377

Fig. 7.10 Records of steering wheel angle (above left), transversal acceleration at the center of
gravity (above right), vertical force on suspension upper pivot (below left) and transversal force on
the lower suspension arm (below right) by an ISO overtaking test

Loads Due to Ground Uneven

Vehicle structure is subject to dynamic loads coming from ground uneven too. Under
these forces, vehicle subsystems react dynamically and load their connections with
chassis structure.

Figure 7.11 shows some results of a simulation of a car driving on an uneven road,

used for fatigue life prediction.

The calculation is made by using a multibody model of the entire vehicle, including
all mechanical details of suspensions and engine mounts. High level of forces are
evident, either through suspension joints or engine mounts. The ﬁrsts are inﬂuenced
by suspension stops, that for large displacements make suspension characteristic
stiffer. Similar phenomena occur for the seconds.

7.4.2 Internal Loads

Vertical accelerations generate, as we have seen, inertial forces by powertrain mounts
to the chassis. Also torque applied to driving wheels reacts on suspension, gearbox an
differential. By front wheel driven cars all reaction torques are applied to powertrain
suspensions.

378

7 Chassis Structures

Fig. 7.11 Simulation of loads on the suspension stop of a rear axle and on an engine mount, during
driving on an uneven ground

Other internal loads are due to reciprocating masses in the internal combustion

engines.

The engine mechanism is made by a crank rod system, that applies a reciprocating
motion to the piston; to represent forces applied to engine crankcase, we are used to
decompose the reciprocating mass of the rod in two parts concentrated into the crank
and piston pins (see second Volume). The masses of the two parts, together with part
of the crank and the piston, deﬁne the so called reciprocating mass ma and rotating
mass mr .

Having deﬁned as:

(cid:4) the rotary engine speed,
r the crank radius,

7.4 Structure Tasks

the rotation of the crankshaft will induce on each crank an unbalanced centrifugal
force:

Fc = mr (cid:4)2r .

By neglecting engine block ﬂexibility, centrifugal forces will be composed with

those of other cylinders, generating often a totally balanced system.

379

(7.7)

If we call with:

ϑ the rotation angle of the crank,
l the distance between centers of crank pins,
α the aspect ratio of the mechanism r/l,

each reciprocating mass will apply to the engine block a force:

Fa = − ma(cid:4)2r (cos ϑ + α cos 2ϑ) .

(7.8)

This formula approximates the piston acceleration with a Fourier series of two
members only; also in this case forces applied to different cylinders must be com-
posed, taking into account the different orientation of different cranks.

These are not the only moving masses; also other suspended masses, as the steering

wheel or the exhaust pipe can generate internal non negligible forces.

7.4.3 Stiffness

Structure stiffness plays a fundamental role in vehicle driving and vibratory behavior.
In addition it is also important to limit deformations, because important loads
may affect vehicle operation, for instance by preventing doors opening or closing or
altering the kinematic behavior of suspensions.

Flexural stiffness K f is deﬁned by the ratio between a load applied to the mid
of the wheelbase and the deﬂection of the same point; reaching acceptable values is
usually not difﬁcult, if other structural requirements are satisﬁed, but by very long
vehicles.

Torsional stiffness Kt is instead the ratio between a roll torque applied to wheels
hubs of front axle and the consequent rotation, when rear axle hubs are ﬁxed to the
reference system. In this ideal experience, elastic primary and secondary elements
of each suspension are substituted with rigid elements of equal geometry.

To justify the importance of torsional stiffness on car dynamic behavior, let us

consider the very simple model on Fig. 7.12.

The vehicle is modelled with four element with torsional deformations, respec-

tively:

the body shell, with torsional stiffness Ktc,
the frame, with torsional stiffness Ktt ,
the front axle suspension, with torsional stiffness kta,
the rear axle suspension, with torsional stiffness kt p.

380

7 Chassis Structures

Fig. 7.12 Elementary scheme for modelling the torsional deformation of a vehicle: kta and kt p
represent the torsional stiffness of the two axle suspensions, while Ktc and Ktt represent torsional
stiffness of body and chassis frame in an hypothetical vehicle with separated frame

In this simpliﬁed scheme, we suppose that axles are ﬁxed to the frame on non
deformable sections, as well as body shell to frame; in other words there is no other
displacement but that induced by the considered elements. We assume in addition
that the sprung mass is concentrated in its center of gravity and that its position is
not affected by deformations.

If the vehicle is driven in a curve, if Fy is the centrifugal force, a roll moment will

be applied to the vehicle as:

Mx = FyhG ,

(7.9)

where hG is the elevation of the center of gravity on the ground.

The roll torque must be equal to the elastic reaction of axles and of two structural

elements of the vehicle, given by:

(cid:2)(cid:3)

Mx = ϕ

2
Ktc + Ktt

+ 1
kta

2
Ktc + Ktt

+ 1
kt p

(cid:4)

(cid:3)

+

(cid:4)(cid:5)

,

(7.10)

where ϕ is the roll angle.

This formula considers the conﬁguration in series or in parallel of the deformable
elements: those in parallel as body shell and frame add their rigidity, while those in
series, like suspensions and vehicle structures add their ﬂexibility.

We have seen the importance of load transfer in determining cornering stiffness
of an axle and we can argue, even if not explain yet, the inﬂuence of roll stiffness of
the two axles in determining the understeering behavior of the vehicle.

As a matter of fact, the axle that is going to absorb the most important part of the
load transfer will be subject to larger side slip angles at the same value of cornering
forces; in our example the ratio between load transfers is given by:

381

(7.11)

(7.12)

(7.13)

7.4 Structure Tasks

(cid:6)

(cid:6)

Rt =

(cid:7)

(cid:7) .

2
Ktc+Ktt

+ 1
kta

2
Ktc+Ktt

+ 1
kt p

This ratio is controlled by suspension roll stiffness of both axles (ratios kta and
kt p) only if frame and body shell rigidities are much larger, as to make negligible
ﬁrst members of the numerator and of the denominator deﬁning Rt .

In other word if the vehicle structure is not sufﬁciently stiff the understeering

behavior will be determined by this last, instead of suspensions and anti-roll bars.

If we suppose now to cross with our car an asymmetric obstacle, as to impose,
for instance to the front axle a roll angle ϕ, because of this fact a torque Mx will be
applied to the vehicle as to satisfy the following condition:

(cid:3)

Mx

1
kta

+ 1
kt p

+

1
Ktc + Ktt

(cid:4)

= ϕ .

The torsion angle applied to the structure is given by the term in brackets; since
frame and body shell must rotate of the same angle for their congruency, the ratio
Rc between the torques insisting on the two elements is given by:

Rc = Ktc
Ktt

.

The stiffer element will carry on the larger portion of the torque; stiffness and

resistance must therefore be proportioned.

A very stiff body shell should be also well resistant; this explains why wooden
bodies on steel chassis frame have been made with ﬂexible joints in their skeleton or
we can understand why, by a unitized body, a roof can crack because of a too ﬂexible
ﬂoor.

We can assume that a reasonable bending stiffness target should be set within the
interval of 700–1,000 daN/mm, while a reasonable torsional stiffness target between
70,000–150,000 daNm/rad.

7.5 Structure Design

It is not our intention to supply in this paragraph a complete knowledge about vehicle
structure design; as we have seen for modern cars, underbody and body shell are
completely integrated and technical disciplines necessary to afford the design process
are part of the body development teams.

On the contrary, we want to supply some highlights on methods to be easily
applied already by concept development useful to predict the consequence on the
vehicle structure of the application of a suspension or of a subframe.

382

7 Chassis Structures

The objective of this approach is to understand in advance if an assigned chassis

component is compatible with the rest of the vehicle.

To be able to predict structure performance of a vehicle is important to verify the

feasibility of the project targets.

The numeric analysis methods today available, together with the always increas-
ing calculation capacity of computers are perfectly adequate to this purpose, but
their need for detailed mathematical models of the structure makes their application
difﬁcult during the preliminary design phase, because many information they need
will be only available later on. Vehicle structure is perfectly adherent to body visi-
ble shape, that is frequently modiﬁed, because body style is under development or
many competing shapes are under development in parallel. In addition, aerodynamic
performance optimization, to be also performed in parallel to this phase, introduces
frequent shape changes.

During preliminary design of a vehicle, synthesis capacity and decision speed are

essential.

This implies to be able to identify a set of critical performances to be predicted and
taken under control within the project targets, starting from informations superﬁcial,
incomplete and frequently modiﬁed.

For this limited purpose we will introduce the structural surface method and the
beam model method, partly interchangeable in this kind of application; the second
one is particularly useful for separated frames or for industrial vehicles frames.

7.5.1 Structural Surface Method

The body shell structure can be idealized, to study its performance during preliminary
design, with a system composed by beams shaping up a spatial grid and by closure
panels; the contribution of these panels to the global structure behavior is quite
important.

The structural surface concept introduces many assumption to simplify the model

to the essentials.

A structural surface is an elementary ﬂat panel, that because of its limited thickness
can accept loads contained in its mean plane only; loads directed to other directions
cannot be withstood because of its high ﬂexibility.

The simplest structural surface is given by the rectangular panel shown on
Fig. 7.13, deﬁned by two sides of dimensions a and b and by its thickness s, which is
assumed to be negligible with respect to other dimensions. For such panel the inertia
moments of the cross sections are:

Jx = a

, Jy = s

, Jz = b

b3
12

s3
12

.

s3
12

(7.14)

7.5 Structure Design

Fig. 7.13 Very simple
structural surface composed
by a ﬂat rectangular panel

383

Because of our assumption, Jx and Jz are much smaller than Jy and the structural
surface so deﬁned will be able to withstand only bending moments along the y axis
and forces parallel to the sides.

For example, the application of a force Fz to one side of this panel can be balanced
by two shear forces Q1 and Q2 applied to the two sides, as to satisfy the equation:

Q1b − Q2a = 0 ,
Fz − Q2 = 0 .

(7.15)

But in consideration of the limited thickness, these shear forces can be really
applied if there are other constraints, able to limit shape instability of this thin surface
on the compressed side (the lower one in our example). This constraint can be another
panel, laying on a perpendicular plane, welded to the ﬁrst or by a beam, probably
shaped up by a closed section with the near panel.

The entire body shell can be modelled with a set of plane structural surfaces,
which approximate its curved surface. The contribution of the beams can be also
neglected, by retaining only their role for avoiding wall instability.

Panels can be made with different shapes, but in any case they are characterized

by their capability of reacting with forces contained in their plane only.

Figure 7.14 shows some useful example for the following applications. The next
Fig. 7.15 shows instead an example of a schematic model of a three volumes sedan.
A car body structure can be modelled for a simpliﬁed structural analysis as a
combination of structural surfaces; now we can look at the consequences of these
assumptions.

384

7 Chassis Structures

Fig. 7.14 Examples of panels for a structural surfaces model: a rectangular panel, b panel with
reinforcement grooves, c panel with lightening hole, d door frame panel

Fig. 7.15 Many kind of panel, necessary to build up a model of a two volumes four doors sedan

Let us consider a roll moment applied to the body shell of Fig. 7.15, at the front
axle position; this moment can be balanced by two shear forces acting on panels
simulating the interior walls of the front wheels wells.

For example the panel AA(cid:2)BB(cid:2) receives a force contained in its mean plane and
directed upwards; as for the panel in Fig. 7.13, it is possible to calculate the shear
forces that must be applied to its sides by adjoining panels.

The shear reaction on the side of this panel will load the near CC(cid:2)D(cid:2)D panel and,
from this, its near panels. It should be noticed that the neighboring triangular panel
BB(cid:2)C cannot bring any contribution, because is perpendicular to the force direction,
as the roof panel or the ﬂoor panel.

A similar logical process can be applied to all forces that front suspensions apply

to the body structure, through the front panel AA(cid:2)B(cid:2)B.

If we consider a lateral force applied to the suspension, because of a bend, of
because of their arms inclination, we must conclude that the panel AA(cid:2)B(cid:2)B isn’t able
to react properly; in this case, the triangular panel BB(cid:2)C will do the job.

7.5 Structure Design

385

Similar considerations can be made if we consider a concentrated load applied to
the car ﬂoor, as a seat mount or a rear suspension arm. The structure will be able to
react only if in the load application point a panel with its mean plane directed parallel
to the force is applied.

This explains why ﬂoors must show also vertical panels (as side walls of side

beams and lateral side beams) where loads are applied.

Even if resulting of rough approximations, this rule must be followed meticulously

in order to design a good structure.

The structural surface method has the following advantages:

• allowing the behavior evaluation with simple calculations in two following steps;
• enabling design modiﬁcations of a single surface without necessarily affecting the

neighboring ones.

The ﬁrst step consists in deﬁning loads on the sides of the structural surfaces. These
loads can be kept unchanged, as a ﬁrst approximation, even if their surface is going
to be modiﬁed; this can speed up evaluations when design is changed frequently.

The second step consists in determining shear stress on each surface, where the

previously deﬁned loads act.

The many subassemblies as vehicle sides, with door frames, roof and ﬂoor can

be studies separately as plane problems.

7.5.2 Beam Model Method

Beams are mathematical objects that allow a simpliﬁed description, in terms of stress
and strains, of the vehicle structure under the action of external loads and constraints.
By structural analysis these mathematical models are deﬁned according to the
ﬁnite elements method (FEM). If we assume limited displacements, we can accept
the usual relationship between forces and displacements:

Ku = f ,

(7.16)

where:

K is the structure stiffness matrix;
u is the displacement vector;
f is the vector of forces applied to the structure.

By preliminary design the mostly applied numeric models are beam FEM models.
In fact the beam is the simplest element: a segment joining two nodes with six degrees
of freedom, to which the characteristic features (section area and moment of inertia)
of a body shell closed section can be attributed. Examples of beams of this kind of
approach can be designed from cross sections on Fig. 7.4.

The beam element formulation and the De Saint Venant theory are coincident.

386

7 Chassis Structures

By using elements of this type the structure can be described by a space frame
made of beams only to them the characteristics of cross sections joining the nodes
are assigned.

This approach is similar, even if more complex, to what is used to describe plane

frames as those used by industrial vehicles or, as subframes, by cars.

A beam model of a car structure is composed by:

• beam elements describing the structure: they join the nodes in the space as elements
with 12 degrees of freedom (6 for each node) and are characterized by appropriate
sections and bending and torsional moments of inertia; panel contributions are
neglected or included in the beam;

• nodes joining the beams that can be simulated by rigid or ﬂexible joints.

During preliminary design of a new car, the informations available for a structural

analyst are very few.

Usually only wheel base, tracks, suspensions and body shell components shared
with already existing cars (carry-over); in some case the underbody is entirely carried-
over.

In addition, a style development center has developed shapes for the external
volumes, for openings cuts (doors, hood and hatch) and glasses; this informations
are usually included in a mathematical model implemented in a computer aided
styling system (CAS).

A beam model can be synthesized starting from:

• a CAS model on whose surface and opening cuts a structural space frame is

adapted;

• existing models of carried-over elements;
• structural cross section; if missing they can be scaled from already existing cars of
the same segment or from a data base prepared for the purpose; these informations
can be again retrieved from drawings as those of Fig. 7.4.

The steps of this activity are the following.

• Repositioning existing carried-over structural models on the new style model.
• Adapting carried-over parts to the new dimensions.
• Identifying nodes positions of the new structure.
• Deriving from style surfaces beam center lines.
• Describing areas and moments of inertia of beam cross sections.
• Identifying relevant loads and constraints.

The result of this process is described on Fig. 7.16 for a small car body. The

versatility of this approach is easily understood.

• A change in style can be introduced into the model by laying down beams below

the new surface.

• Cross sections can be easily modiﬁed by their description tables.
• A node stiffness can also easily modiﬁed by their description tables.

7.5 Structure Design

387

Fig. 7.16 Final scheme of a beam model; the shape of the beams is determined by lying down
them below the styled exterior shape and by assigning to them compatible cross sections, scaled
from existing data bases

A synthesis beam model allows, in addition, to draw ﬁrst conclusions on how
different parts of the body cooperate to the ﬁnal result and to perform a ﬁrst weight
optimization. By scaling up dimensions of each section at a time it is, in fact, possible
to affect system performance and to ﬁnd out iteratively the most effective dimensions.
The beam model method assumes an opposite approach as the structural surface

method, by neglecting the role of panels.

The two methods should not be considered as in competition to solve the same

problem.

The ﬁrst, for unitized bodies only, can be applied for concepts development,
regarding the general architecture of the body. It is very simple and allows to consider
many different alternatives in short time.

The second one consists in a better approximation and can be applied after the
ﬁrst for optimizing an already deﬁned structure. As a difference with the ﬁrst, the
second method is sensitive to exterior shape modiﬁcations too. Finally, the second
method is better suited to frames and space frames.

7.6 Structure Testing

Test benches used for structure fatigue evaluation are similar to those introduced
while speaking of suspensions; for economy and considering that real suspensions
are the simplest tool to apply loads to structures, in an accurate way, usually body
shell, frames, suspensions and powertrain mounts are tested together.

388

7 Chassis Structures

Fig. 7.17 Universal bench prepared for torsion test; the articulated frame in the front is used to
apply a roll torque

The most important test, speciﬁc to chassis structure and to body shell is the

overall evaluation of torsional stiffness.

In addition to what we already commented about inconveniences of an insufﬁcient
structure stiffness, we would like to point out that the analysis of local deformations
by bending and torsion tests is useful to ﬁnd out discontinuities on the structure
function of the vehicle.

In fact, areas where deformation discontinuities appear evident represent potential
rupture points during the on the road operation, because of the cyclic application of
deformations by road obstacles.

We now concentrate on torsional and bending stiffness testing.
The torsion test simulates what happens when a vehicle steps on a side walk,
while the bending test is oriented to what happens because of payloads application.
Both tests are performed on the same bench that is reconverted according to the

purpose of the test.

The test bench (shown on Fig. 7.17 for torsion and on Fig. 7.18 for bending test)
is made by a basement block characterized by a stiffness well above the values to be
measured.

On this block additional structures are installed to ﬁx the body or the frames

properly; other mobile structures are use to apply loads.

In case of a unitized body, it is deprived by interiors (dashboard, seats and side
panels), complete powertrain (engine, transmissions, exhaust pipe, etc.), bumpers and
wheels. Suspensions are maintained, but springs and shock absorbers are changed
with rigid spacers, in order to freeze the geometry under investigation.

7.6 Structure Testing

389

Fig. 7.18 Universal bench prepared for bending test; the beam in the center is used to apply a local
vertical load

It is common practice to verify the contribution to the total stiffness of removable
parts (side doors, hatch door, trunk lid, hood, removable fenders) and of structural
glasses (bonded windshield, bonded rear window glass) by testing the structure with
and without their contribution; this allows also to understand if joining techniques
are suitable for the purpose.

Constraints are similar for the two tests: wheels hubs are welded or ﬁxed by brakes
and are used to connect the structure to cross beams used for interfacing block and
load application frames.

By torsion test, the rear axle is linked to the block while the front axle to the torque

application structure; both links avoid longitudinal and transversal motion.

By bending test both axles are ﬁxed to the block, but one is free for longitudinal

motion.

frame.

auxiliary beam.

where loads are applied.

Loads are applied by these two tests in a different way.
By torsion test, a pure torque is applied to the front axle through an articulated

By bending test a vertical load is applied to the center of the structure, by an

In both cases precautions are taken to avoid the inﬂuence of local deformations

Displacements are measured by linear transducers with vertical axis.
By torsion test a couple of transducers is placed for each suspension upper pivot.
By bending test one transducer is placed in the mid of the car and others are used

to check local deformations.

390

7 Chassis Structures

Torsional stiffness is conventionally measured by the following formula:

Kt =

Mx
(ϕa − ϕ p)

=

arctan zda +zsa

ta

Mx
+ arctan

,

zd p+zsp
t p

(7.17)

where:

Kt is the torsional stiffness,
Mx is the applied torque,
ϕ is the roll angle at the two axles,
z is the vertical position variation of each wheel,
t is the track.

Subscripts refer to:

a front axle,
p rear axle,
d right side,
s left side.

wheelbase.

To compare different cars, often torsional and bending stiffness are divided by

During this kind of test, also local deformations are recorded.
Many linear sensors are applied along main side beams and lateral side beams, in
order to measure vertical displacements. In case of torsion, they are used to calculate
local rotation angle of structure.

These displacements or these rotations are used to draw diagrams in function of
the coordinate x of the body, to supply an indication of the stiffness distribution.
Local variations of the slope of this curve, that can be detected through the ﬁrst
derivative diagram, put in evidence local critical areas (as local instability of panels
where sensors are applied) or structural discontinuities, due to a not accurate welding
or to design mistake.

During torsion test it is important to measure also deformations of frames, where
doors and glasses are applied: usually the difference between the diagonal lines of
the opening is taken as an indicator to be compared with project speciﬁcations.

Total stiffness is changing when parts are added to the body shell; usual references

include body shell, body shell with ﬁxed glasses, body shell with doors.

Table 7.2 Torsional stiffness Kt (daNm/rad), bending stiffness K f (daN/mm) and masses M (kg)
of body shells of two volume small cars of different years of commercial launch; the second subscript
shows body conditions (n body shell, v with ﬁxed glasses, c complete). The contribution of glasses
to torsional stiffness can be noticed
M. Y.

Kt,n
34,200
42,800
57,300

Kt,v
40,400
57,900
70,700

Kt,c
47,800
68,300
79,600

K f,n
430
580
630

K f,v
445
600
640

K f,c
475
620
670

Mn
152
193
190

Mc
207
271
264

1990
1995
2000

7.6 Structure Testing

391

Table 7.2 shows some values of torsional and bending stiffness measured for

bodies of different model years. They are small two volumes cars.

Fixed glasses are mounted on the body shell to examine their contribution; they
are the windshield and the rear windows that cannot be opened; their contribution is
due to the bonding joint, that limits the window frame deformation on the body. This
contribution is negligible for bending stiffness, because of the limited deformation
of glasses frames.

The body weight increase is due, in part, to increased dimensions, in part to more

severe passive safety regulations.

Part II
Transmission Driveline

Introduction

Any kind of road motor vehicle needs a transmission, in order to convert the rotational
speed and the torque of its engine.

Under the name of transmission are usually included start-up device (either clutch
or torque converter), variable ratio gearbox, power takeoff used to operate equipments
that are external to the vehicle, ﬁnal drive, and differential that move the wheel; in
other words, it includes the entire kinematic chain connecting wheels to engine.

The transmission function is to adapt the torque available of the engine, to the
vehicle needs, which are imposed by the nature of the road, the will of the driver,
and environmental requirements. The transmission is particularly relevant to deter-
mine some of vehicle functions, such as dynamic performance, fuel consumption,
emission, drivability, and, last but not least, reliability.

Automotive transmissions (we include under this deﬁnition, cars, industrial vehi-
cles, and buses) are characterized, in comparison with industrial transmission, by a
higher level of stress. The speciﬁc mass (the ratio between the transmission mass and
the processed power) of an automotive transmission is included in a range between
0.5 and 1 kg/kW; in an industrial transmission, same values are almost doubled. In
addition, the number of available ratios of an automotive transmission is deﬁnitely
higher than in an industrial one.

Transmission technology could be assumed as mature, but we don’t mean that
there will be no further evolution, particularly as automatic transmissions are con-
cerned. As a matter of fact, a signiﬁcant growth of this kind of transmission is
expected in the European market. The particular needs of this market have justiﬁed
the development of a new generation of robotized manual transmission that should
not negatively affect the vehicle performance and should leave drivers the pleasure
of driving manually at their will.

The fast and continuous development of electronics, both in terms of performance
and cost, will have a signiﬁcant impact on this kind of transmission and will cause a
fast development.

We should also not forget that the possible growth of hybrid vehicle market will

stimulate development of particularly sophisticated automatic transmission.

A last point relevant to transmissions is that their production and development

capacity is leaving OEMs to become a specialists business.

394

Transmission Driveline

This is true both for manual and automatic transmissions. It is particularly impor-
tant both for those that will devote their career to vehicle design or to component
design, to develop sound system knowledge of this kind of component.

This trend is conﬁrmed by the growing importance in Europe of Getrag, ZF, GM,
FCA Powertrain, and Graziano; the same could be said in the United States for Dana,
Eaton, New Venture Gear, and Allison and in Japan for Aisin and JATCO.
A signiﬁcant growth of automatic transmissions is expected in Europe.
The most diffused kind of this transmission is the power-shift type, with four or
more transmission ratios; many manufacturers have decided to adopt on their car a
continuously variable transmission, with steel belt and variable gouge pulley; beside
some penalty on mechanical efﬁciency, they show a superior vehicle performance
for the availability of an inﬁnite number of transmission ratios.

Power-shift transmissions are leaving the pure hydraulic control, in favor of more
sophisticated electronic controls that take advantage of the contemporary develop-
ment of engine control system, including throttle automation.

On the other side, many applications with more than ﬁve transmission ratios were
born and the lock-up function of the torque converter is extended to almost all gears.
Six-gear manual transmissions are starting to be diffused in the market, while
ﬁve ratio conﬁguration is standard on all applications; many of these transmissions
have received an electro-hydraulic or electro-mechanic actuation system, with the
aim to offer costumers a similar or superior performance, in comparison with the
conventional automatic transmission, without affecting the traditional advantages of
lower cost, high efﬁciency, and pleasure of driving.

The functions that can be obtained by this kind of transmission include the fol-

lowing:

• Clutch automation.
• Servo assistance in selecting and shifting gears, with positive effects on comfort

• Availability of more ergonomic shifting commands of sequential type, also

• Total automation of the choice of the transmission ratio and of the shifting

and actuation speed.

included on steering wheel.

sequence.

Many other functions could be added, in consideration of the almost unlimited

performance of microprocessors.

Transmission architectures are determined by the kind of traction that is adopted
on the vehicle. On the other side, the choice of the kind of traction has a strong impact
on the vehicle performance, in terms of handling, ride comfort, safety, and interior
space organization.

The engine can be installed in the front or in the back of the vehicle; in the ﬁrst
case, the traction can be on the front axle, on the rear axle, or on both axles; in the
second case, the traction can be on the rear axle or on both axles. Rear wheel driven
cars, with longitudinal engine in the front, are usually called cars with conventional
or traditional layout.

Transmission Driveline

395

Fig. II.1 Different types of transmission architectures, available for front wheel driven cars; the
impact on external dimensions is deliberately exaggerated

Figure II.1 shows all known conﬁgurations available for the front wheel drive.
Sketch a shows the longitudinal layout, with powertrain on driving axle; it also
shows how some advantage can be obtained on the maximum steering angle of the
wheel with some disadvantage on the front overhang. In this case, every transmission
ratio can be obtained with a single stage of gears; the rotation axis of the gearbox
output shaft must be turned of 90◦ with a pair of bevel gears.

Sketch b shows the same previous layout, where the front overhang is shortened
by installing the engine over the front axle; in this case, an additional shaft and some
modiﬁcation on the oil sump are needed.

Sketch c shows the very highly diffused solution of the transversal powertrain
with engine and transmission in line. Also, in this case, a single stage transmission is
necessary; the output shaft is connected to the differential with a pair of spur gears.
Vehicles can be more compact because the front overhang can be shorter; on the other
side, the minimum turning radius is negatively affected. The solution is optimum if
the engine is not too big.

Finally, the sketch d shows a not widely applied solution, where engine and
gearbox are transversal and parallel; the gearbox can be in the front behind or beneath
the engine. Advantages and disadvantages are in between, as compared with the
previous case; an additional double stage transmission or a chain transmission is
necessary to connect the engine shaft with the gearbox input shaft.

In all these cases, the subsystem including engine and transmission is called

powertrain or transaxle.

Figure II.2 shows two possible architectures applied on conventional vehicles; the
type a is the most diffused one, while the type b is applied primarily on sport cars,
when a more uniform weight distribution is requested. In these cases, the gearboxes
will be of the double stage type (also known as countershaft type), where input and

396

Transmission Driveline

Fig. II.2 Different types of transmission, suitable for rear drives, with front or rear engine

output shafts are in line. A bevel gear ﬁnal drive is also necessary. The front overhang
can be reduced; the interior roominess is negatively affected by the transmission shaft
under the ﬂoor.

Also, the rear engine layout, that is applied very seldom, shows two possible
architectures, shown on the same ﬁgure, with transverse powertrain arrangement (c)
and with longitudinal arrangement (d).

The kind of architecture is now only applied on sport cars, where weight dis-
tribution and yaw inertia are more important than interior roominess; the same
considerations made on solution a and c of the previous ﬁgure apply on solutions
c and d.

Architectures applied to commercial vehicles (people or goods transportation with
GVW of less than 4t1) derived from car architectures d of the ﬁrst ﬁgure and a in the
second ﬁgure.

Figure II.3 shows the architectures that are known for four wheel drive vehicles;
conﬁgurations a, b, and d derive from the corresponding layouts of the single axle
vehicle. They are primarily applied on road vehicles or sport utility vehicles with
permanent four wheels drive; solutions a and d are easy to be designed, because the
transfer box can be integrated into the powertrain. Architecture c is, instead, applied
on vehicles specialized for off-road mission; the transfer gearbox necessary to move
the other axle can easily integrate a range-change unit and the differential lock.

Considering transmission conﬁgurations used on industrial vehicles (people or
goods transportation with GVW of more than 4t), we must discriminate between
trucks and buses, taking also into account that a low price market segment exists,
where bus is strictly derived of a truck.

1This limit value is not coincident with the legislative one (3,5 t), but it is our guess about what is
technically feasible with vehicles designed with car technology.

Transmission Driveline

397

Fig. II.3 Transmission architectures applied to four wheel drive; the solution c is particularly
suitable to off-road vehicles, because an additional range-change unit can be easily integrated into
the transfer box

Architecture conﬁgurations for two-axle industrial vehicles are very similar to
those described for conventional drive. The longitudinal powertrain is installed in
the front in a position depending on the type of driver cabin that is adopted. In
the same way, the four wheel drive conﬁguration is similar to what explained is in
Figure II.3c. In very heavy duty applications, a second rear driving axle is moved
through the ﬁrst.

Buses, initially derived from trucks, have recently received a dedicated architec-
ture, ﬁnalized to assure an easy passenger access to the vehicle. This last depends on
the height of door threshold; the desired value for this dimension has also differen-
tiated the architecture of urban and suburban buses.

In the ﬁrst case, the easy access must be obtained with no compromise for all
doors and the corridor ﬂoor must not show steps or important ramps, because of the
necessity of transporting standing passengers.

Figure II.4 shows two different examples; a represents a typical layout for urban
buses, where b represents a typical layout for suburban buses. In the ﬁrst, the engine
and the transmission are installed in the back, under the last row of seats. The corridor
ﬂoor is very low, and is only conditioned by the axle’s shape, that is usually developed
for this purpose; the slope of the corridor is limited and is also possible to have doors
in the back of the vehicle.

Suburban buses or long range buses, represented in b, don’t show a high need
for a lower door threshold; on the contrary, they usually have the baggage compart-
ment under the ﬂoor. Standing passengers are seldom; the most suitable layout has
longitudinal central engine and rear wheel drive.

398

Transmission Driveline

Fig. II.4 Transmission architectures designed for urban buses (high) and suburban buses (low);
the engine shift-back lowers the vehicle ﬂoor behind the front door

Independent of transmission conﬁguration, vehicle transmissions include the fol-

lowing components that are named starting from the engine:

Start-Up Device

Gearbox

Start-up devices are usually made with a friction clutch, with pedal operation, and
in some cases assisted by an external source of energy (electric, pneumatic, or
hydraulic); by most automatic gearboxes, start-up devices are made by a hydraulic
torque converter, with lock-up clutch.

Gearbox is the transmission component devoted to transmission ratio change; it can
be made with conventional or epicycloidal gears. Gear shifts can be made manually
(with the only force of the driver), semiautomatically (with the help of auxiliary
energy) or automatically. We can ﬁnd in the gearbox the following mechanisms in
addition to gears:

• Gear shifting mechanisms: They are classiﬁed into internal and external, with
reference to the fact that they are contained in the gearbox or not. The function of
gear shifting mechanisms is affected by powertrain suspension motion that could
affect gearshift quality. These mechanisms are particularly important in manual
transmissions, because they have a big inﬂuence on driver’s feeling of precision
and positivity.

• Shifting sleeves and synchronizers: They are addressed to engage and disengage

the pair of wheels necessary to obtain the desired transmission ratio.

Transmission Driveline

Range-Change Units

399

They can be considered as additional gearboxes with a limited number of speeds that
are inserted on the transmission line after or before the main gearbox; they increase
the total number of speeds by a number greater than the added gear pairs; under this
category, we also include the so-called splitters.

Final Drive and Differential

Final drive and differential can be integrated into the gearbox; they further reduce the
rotational speed of the wheel; the differential divides the torque for the two wheels
theoretically in equal parts and can be free, self-locking, or manually locking.

Transfer Boxes

Transmissions and Joints

Transfer boxes are gearboxes that divide the torque for the axles of an all wheel drive
or for vehicles with more than one driving axle.

Transmissions and joints connect the several rotating sections of the transmission; in
conventional drives, the gearbox with the differential and in independent suspension,
the wheel with the differential.

The second part of this volume, dedicated to automotive transmissions, begins

with a chapter dedicated to the historical evolution of transmission design.

Main types of manual transmissions applied to cars and industrial vehicles will
be described in the following chapter. Schemes and drawings will be explained for
this purpose.

Particular attention will be addressed to internal and external shifting mechanisms

and to their design and evaluation criteria.

Main start-up devices will be explained and the design and speciﬁcation rules will
be discussed. For the torque converter only, the methodology for calculating vehicle
performance and consumption will be introduced.

As far as differentials are concerned, in addition to design criteria, a short study on
the inﬂuence of controlled and not controlled units on the vehicle dynamic behavior
will be afforded.

Some kinds of automatic transmissions in use on cars and industrial vehicles will
be introduced; main control strategies that are implemented in their control systems
will be also discussed.

The book is completed with some complementary notion on transmission com-

ponents design and on methods for car and bench testing.

Chapter 8
Historical Evolution

Gearbox and clutch, or other start-up devices used as alternative, are essential to
obtain from a reciprocating internal combustion engine a driving torque suitable to
traction.

In fact, this category of engines is characterized by a useful torque almost constant
with rotational speed and sometimes increasing with it; in an ideal case, on the
contrary, the driving torque should decrease with vehicle speed.

We can say that having decided to install an engine of a given power, in view of the
desired dynamic performance, this value of power should be made available at any
vehicle speed; therefore traction force should be inversely proportional to vehicle
speed.

This choice would also guarantee that any value of car speed would be stable,
because a driving force decreasing with speed would balance a resistance force
increasing with speed.

In addition, the internal combustion engine is unable to supply a positive torque
if its rotational speed is less than a minimum value, whose amount is determined,
as ﬁrst approximation, to the torque period of the cycle and from the inertia of the
crank mechanism; the vehicle, instead, must be able to start-up when stopped and
should be able to exploit, at this condition, the maximum driving torque.

For these reasons it is necessary to have available a mechanical system able to
adapt the transmission ratio between engine and wheels to the need of the vehicle
and to the deﬁciencies of the engine. This transmission ratio should be very high,
ideally inﬁnite, at vehicle start-up.

Finally, the transmission has the purpose of transmitting the motion of the engine
crankshaft to wheel hubs; as we know wheels and engine have a relative position not
deﬁned with precision, because of suspensions motion and of wheels steering.

By very ﬁrst cars, the gearbox has been confused with a device for speed ad-
justment; from this misinterpretation has been born also the name of this device,
almost equivalent in many European languages (for instance, changement de vitesse,
in french), instead of torque converter or torque adaptor, more suitable to its real role.
Fig. 8.1 Drawing of the
transmission mechanism
from the piston to the wheel
by the steam engine cart
designed by Cugnot in 1769

These considerations that are taken today for granted, were not so evident to the
designers of the ﬁrst cars, also because these were equipped with a steam engine, that
among many disadvantage for the vehicular application, has the advantage of being
able to supply a notable torque at crank stopped, very suitable for vehicle application.
This situation is testiﬁed from the Cugnot cart of 1769, unanimously recognized

as the ﬁrst self propelled vehicle.

Figure 8.1 shows a drawing of the transmission mechanism between pistons and
driving wheel. The sole driving wheel is positioned in front of the vehicle and can
steer together with the steam cylinders and the boiler (not represented); no suspension
is applied.

Engine rods are directly connected to the wheel through ratchet gears that convert

the piston reciprocating motion into wheel rotation.

This direct link, eventually made, more simply, with a crank mechanism was

applied also to other steam coaches and widely on steam train locomotives.

8 Historical Evolution

403

The ﬁrst marching internal combustion engine vehicle was probably introduced
by De Rivaz in 1807. It adopts a similar transmission and exploits the ratchet gear
mechanism to leave the vehicle marching under the action of inertia, during the non
useful strokes of the piston.

8.1 Manual Gearbox

Patent documents of 1784 give evidence that Watt predicted the use of constant mesh
gear box, with dog clutches, to improve traction performance of a steam engine; it
is rather difﬁcult to demonstrate how this idea might have inﬂuenced the design of
following cars that didn’t follow this scheme indiscriminately.

Unanimously the ﬁrst commercialized internal combustion engine cars are those
born of the efforts of Benz and Daimler in 1885 and 1886; the transmission problem
received a complete solution using a scheme completely different of that proposed
by Watt.

The complete Daimler’s car transmission is shown on Fig. 8.2. There are two
different transmission ratios made with leather belt transmissions with pulleys of
different diameter; belts are always wound on their pulleys, but the motion is trans-
mitted by only one of the couples, when one of the two tensioners 55 (for the ﬁrst
speed) and 56 (for the second speed) sets its belt at work.

Belt slip capacity is exploited, when the tensioner is not completely engaged, to

start-up the vehicle when stopped.

Wheel suspensions are missing and the driveline is consequently simpliﬁed.
Many improvements of this scheme are applied to the following Benz car. The two
speed transmission is inspired to contemporary workshops, where a single steam or
water engine was moving a number of working machines. This kind of transmission
was probably invented by Anderson in 1849.

The two driven pulleys (in the center of the lower drawing on Fig. 8.3) are coupled
with as many idling pulleys (at the outside faces of the driven ones); these have a
slightly smaller diameter than the driven ones and the active cylindrical surface of
the driven pulleys is rounded to join the active surface of the idling pulleys.

The two driving pulleys (in the back of the car, aligned with the engine crankshaft)
have an adequate with to bear the belt on both driven and idling pulleys. Two ten-
sioners can shift the leather belts from matching driven pulleys to matching idling
pulleys.

Belts are crossed in order to increase the winding angle on the pulleys; belt tension

is adjusted periodically, by changing center lines distance.

The rounding on the surface of the driven pulleys makes belt shifting easier; the
lower diameter of the idling pulleys decreases working tension of belts when they
are not working, retarding the need for further tension adjustments.

The start-up function is performed again by exploiting the belt slip capacity; the
almost vertical motion of driving wheels, already with suspension, is compensated
by two chain transmissions, that connect driven pulleys with rear wheel hubs.

404

8 Historical Evolution

Fig. 8.2 Complete transmission of the Daimler’s car of 1885. There are two transmission ratios
available, made with a leather belt transmission. The slipping capacity of belts is exploited to start-up
the car

It should be noticed that the literature on these and other cars of this time didn’t
suggest a sequential use of gears to accelerate the car, but starting-up was allowed
with both gears, being their choice bound rather to the desired cruise speed, that to
the necessary traction force.

The idea introduced by Watt will be applied on next generation design. This is
usually commented by saying that the ﬁrst cars demonstrated how the technical
skills of their inventors were polarized on engines, neglecting some times other
achievements that had been already obtained by the contemporary state of the art.
This fact could be also explained by the objective difﬁculty of having exchanges of
ideas throughout technical communities of different countries.

A typical example, more similar to contemporary ones, is represented on Fig. 8.4,

where a drawing of the FIAT 8/16 HP of 1902 is reported.

The gearbox features three speeds and a reverse; on oldest car the reverse speed

was missing.

8.1 Manual Gearbox

405

Fig. 8.3 Two speeds transmission of the Benz car in 1886, leather belt type. Two tensioners can
shift belts from a position engaged with a driving pulley to that engaged with an idling pulley

The engine rotates the lower shaft, on the left view, that represents a side view
of the gearbox. This gearbox has a single reduction stage, where all driving tooth
wheels are aligned on the input shaft and all driven wheels on the output shaft; from
the engine side, we see the reverse gear, as ﬁrst, followed by ﬁrst, second and third
gears.

An idle tooth wheel can be noticed, to reverse the rotation speed of the output

shaft on the cross section at the left of the side view.

Driving wheels are always meshing with driven ones and must, therefore, be
idle with the output shaft; we will see later on how they are engaged. The output
shaft rotates a bevel gear, which moves through a differential two shafts. These are
coupled through drive chains to rear driving wheels, according to the scheme already
commented on previous ﬁgure.

406

8 Historical Evolution

Fig. 8.4 Single stage, three
gears gearbox of the FIAT
8/16 HP of 1902. The
internal shifting mechanism
is made by a cylindrical rod,
mounted inside the driven
shaft

8.1 Manual Gearbox

407

A tapered friction clutch, not represented on this ﬁgure allows vehicle start-up and
separates gearbox from the driveline, during gear shifts (see for reference Fig. 8.12).
We can notice three new mechanisms not yet introduced, as reverse gear, differ-
ential and friction clutch. Their origin is surely older as this car. The reverse gear was
introduced by Selden in 1879, the differential by Pecquer in 1827 and the tapered
friction clutch by Marcus in 1885.

During these years these three mechanisms are integrated in a transmission suit-

able for automotive application.

Let us look at the shifting mechanism now. It is rather sophisticated and is made
by a shiftable cylindrical rod, mounted inside a cavity in the driven shaft. This rod
shows some annular narrowing, that in certain positions allows two ratchets to engage
with driven wheels; the detail of the reverse gears ratchets can be seen on the cross
section on the left.

When one of the grooves is facing a couple of ratchets, two leaf springs provide
for their engagement with the ratchet gear; when the rod is shifted, ratchets retract
leaving the wheel again idle. Grooves position is congruent with a sequential shift
stick, where the positions of reverse, ﬁrst, second and third are following each other.
This kind of gearbox architecture (constant mesh gears) is applied to many cars
of that time, but will be soon abandoned because of its complication and consequent
fragility: the next scheme is that of sliding gear trains (train balladeurs, in french).
Also this invention is older and born outside of the automotive world; its priority can
be assigned to Grifﬁth in 1821.

It is not the ﬁrst time that a better performing architecture (constant mesh) is aban-
doned in favour of a less evolute one (sliding trains), because some component (dog
clutch, synchronizer) has not been developed yet. Sliding trains will be soon aban-
doned again, in favor of constant mesh, as soon as the technological improvements
will make it possible.

This innovation can be exempliﬁed by the FIAT 60 HP car of 1904, whose gearbox

is shown on Fig. 8.5.

The gearbox is still single stage type and presents four speeds and a reverse speed;
tooth wheels, grouped in two trains, from the ﬁrst to the fourth, can slide on the upper
driving shaft. The engine (not shown) is on the left, while on the right we can see
bevel gears moving the pinion of the chain transmission through the differential.

The two trains integrate respectively ﬁrst and second speed wheels and third with
fourth; these trains are mounted on a square section shaft that makes them always
turning, being free to shift along the shaft.

Trains sliding is made by suitable sleeves that bring each wheel at a time to
engage with their counterpart; gears are meshing only when their correspondent
gear is selected.

Reverse speed is again made with train of idler gears only, not represented on this

ﬁgure, meshing with the ﬁrst speed gears, when their train is in idle position.

Sleeves are moved by forks ﬁxed to sliding rods, partially visible under gearbox
shafts; there are two rods for moving the ﬁrst and second train and the third and
fourth train, while an additional rod is dedicated to reverse speed.

408

8 Historical Evolution

Fig. 8.5 Sliding trains gearbox with four speeds of the FIAT 60 HP of 1904. The two gear trains
are made by the driving wheels of the ﬁrst and second speed and by those of third and fourth speed

This kind of lay-out has caused the selection and shift control sticks, where gear
shifting is no more sequential, but is characterized by two separated motions: one
across the car, to select the train to be engaged, the second along the car, to engage
the speciﬁc gear. This layout will consolidate in the praxis, arriving unchanged to
our contemporary cars.

Sliding train gearboxes requested a particular skill to the driver, who had to try
synchronizing wheels, by means of the engine during the idle time, before of engaging
next gear (double clutching or débrayage double, in french); an imperfect maneuver
was indicated by scratching of the gears in contact at an inappropriate speed.

Some manufacturers improved this architecture, coming back, in reality to the
Watt’s idea of constant mesh gears; an industrial vehicle gearbox of the end of the
’910s is represented, to show this new lay-out, on Fig. 8.6.

In this gearbox three speeds are available and a reverse speed; it is connected to the
engine on the right of the ﬁgure, while the output ﬂange is on the left. The ﬂywheel
on the output shaft is not part of the engine, but is the drum of the transmission brake.
Input and output shafts are now coaxial; this lay-out is appropriate to the appli-

cation of a universal joint transmission, starting to be applied in these years.

8.1 Manual Gearbox

409

Fig. 8.6 Dog clutch truck gearbox of a vehicle made in the ’910s. Sliding trains are now reduced
to small front tooth gears working as clutches

410

8 Historical Evolution

Tooth wheels are in constant mesh and have at their ﬂanks a dog clutch; sliding

trains are now reduced to the pairs of dog clutches.

The scratch problem isn’t solved, but possible damages are localized on an auxil-
iary component, the clutch, that can be sacriﬁced, with smaller impact on the opera-
tion of the gearbox. Dog clutches teeth can also be rounded, making shifting easier,
without drawbacks on wheels dimension.

We can observe that input and output shafts are made coaxial, being the upper
shaft made by two parts, free to have different rotation angles. The left sliding train
can alternatively engage the two parts directly or move a third shaft (countershaft),
below on the same ﬁgure.

Only with this dog clutch engaged is possible to obtain ﬁrst and the second speeds,
with the second train on the ﬁgure; with the last train is possible to engage the reverse
speed connecting the countershaft to the output shaft two a couple of idlers (in practice
a second countershaft), partially visible on the right of the ﬁgure.

Sliding train motions are operated by front cams, that allow in this case a sequential

A similar architecture, but for control, is still present on front engine, rear wheel

control.

driven vehicles.

We shouldn’t fall in the mistake of thinking that at this time these technical solu-
tions were consolidated; as often occurs at the dawn of a new technology, deviations
from what, for us, is the main evolution path were many; we can see that, after the
engine, the gearbox was the preferred subject of innovation of the ﬁrst automotive
engineers.

A comprehensive classiﬁcation of all tried solution is well outside of the scope of
this chapter, even limiting to manual transmissions; we will consider only some of
the more original solution, in our perception.

Frazer Nash built in England, between 1924 and 1938 different cars, all with sport
performance, but with affordable price, in their category. Characteristic of these cars
was the essentiality of the driveline, as can be seen on Fig. 8.7.

The gearbox is made by chain transmissions, three for forward speeds, one for
reverse speed. Driving chain wheels (at right on the drawing) are moved by a bevel
gear box, connected to the engine; this bevel gear box doesn’t include any differential
gear.

On the right half shaft of this intermediate shaft are ﬁxed the sprockets for ﬁrst

speed and reverse; on the left half shaft there are the second and third speed.

We can notice the idler reverse system with chain and gears. Driven wheels are
directly mounted on the rear one piece shaft; driven wheels can be moved along their
shaft for chain alignment.

The lack of the differential made the car difﬁcult to drive, but very manageable

for an expert driver on unpaved roads, very diffused at those times.

Chain transmission was also used for compensating suspension motion.
Engagements were made by simple but sensitive dog clutches. Fans of this cars ex-
tolled the very easy road holding, the excellent gearbox maneuverability and easiness
of substituting broken parts in the transmission.

8.1 Manual Gearbox

411

Fig. 8.7 Frazer Nash gearbox of 1924, made by chain transmissions only; three speeds and a reverse
are available. The driven shaft can be adjusted to obtain a good alignments and to compensate for
chains wear

The entire mechanisms were lubricated by grease at the open air. We can also
notice the rocker arm, on the bevel gear box, with particular slots, that match the
engagement forks; this mechanism avoided the contemporary engagement of two
speeds, also considering the effect of centrifugal forces and vibrations.

A car with different technical details, also original and uncommon, is the Sizair
Naudin of 1907, also known for featuring one of the ﬁrst independent suspensions.
Also in this case the design goal should have been to contain gearbox cost, or at

least tooth wheels number, at that time very expensive.

This gearbox cut on Fig. 8.8 can be assimilated to a sliding train gearbox. Driven
wheels are reduced to only one, with front teeth R. The only sliding train, made by
wheels P1, P2 and P3 is installed on a bearing swinging around the lower shaft in
the drawing; the bearing swinging motion is necessary to mesh driving wheel in use
with the front teeth wheel, at different distances, depending on the driving wheel
diameter.

The swinging motion of the driving shaft is compensated by a universal joints
transmission between engine and gearbox. The cam C at the bottom of the drawing
combines shift and swing motions and bears gearing forces.

Spur wheel should be instead bevel gears, for correct matching; teeth are, never-

theless, approximated with cylindrical teeth, accepting contact errors.

The reverse idler is also present on a dedicated shifting train.
A last example of amazing engineering ingenuity is given by the Turicum of 1904
(probably the only automotive trademark in Switzerland) shown on Fig. 8.9, with a

412

8 Historical Evolution

Fig. 8.8 Sizair Naudin gearbox of 1907. This gearbox can be assimilated to a sliding train one,
with bevel gears. The single sliding train made by wheels P1, P2 and P3 is mounted on a swinging
bearing to mesh driving shaft at different distances with the big output front teeth wheel

picture of the complete chassis; we can see one of the ﬁrst continuously variable
transmission in the history of the automobile.

Also in this case the car has no differential; the motion to the rear axle is transmitted
with two friction wheels C and D, where the ﬁrst is made of solid iron and the second
has a rubber tread on its rim. The wheel D is ﬁxed on the shaft E with a spline and
groove, that allows the wheel to be shifted along the shaft; the shaft E rests on a
swinging bearing G and maintains wheels D and C under pressure with the spring J.
By pulling the lever q is possible to change the contact point between the two
pulleys, between the center of the wheel C (inﬁnite transmission ratio: transmission
idling) and its rim (transmission ratio about 1:1). In the idle position, the friction is
eliminated by unloading the spring J; the possible slip between the two wheel is used
to start the vehicle up.

These proposals were not imitated by other manufacturers and were probably
abandoned by their own inventors. The evolution of manual gearboxes concentrated
on perfecting countershaft or double stage architecture, that diffused unchallenged
on all cars with front engine and rear drive.

An example of the evolution trend is offered by the gearbox of the FIAT Balilla
of 1934 (four speed version, the ﬁrst gearbox of this car in 1933 for a three speed
one) shown on Fig. 8.10.

This gearbox shows two different sections: the rear one, for ﬁrst, second and
reverse speeds, features a sliding train with cylindrical straight teeth and a front one
with helical gears (always meshing) and synchronizers.

8.1 Manual Gearbox

Fig. 8.9 Turicum chassis of
1904; it shows a
continuously variable
transmission based upon two
friction discs C and D, where
the ﬁrst is made of solid iron
and the second has a rubber
thread to improve contact
friction

413

414

8 Historical Evolution

Fig. 8.10 Four speed gearbox of the FIAT Balilla of 1934. The drawing shows a longitudinal cross
section; the rear part of the gearbox has a sliding train for ﬁrst, second and reverse speeds; the front
part features synchromesh gears for the third and fourth speeds

This compromise is justiﬁed by the high cost of synchronizers, to be considered
high technology components at that time. Synchronizers are limited to the more
frequently used speeds, that can beneﬁt also of helical gears, with gearing noise
reduction.

On this subject, we noticed that engineering manuals of this time suggested, as a
good engineering practice, to design the top ratio (in this case the ﬁnal differential
ratio) with values slightly higher then what ideally necessary; this rule was addressed
to limit the number of gearshifts, necessary to maintain the car at cruise speed and
demonstrated the difﬁculty of drivers in changing speed with sliding train gearboxes.
We can therefore think that synchronizer brought beneﬁts not only on shifting

quality, but also on noise and fuel economy.

The gearbox of FIAT 1400 of 1950, shown on Fig. 8.11 adopts, as many cars of
this time, synchronizers on all speeds, but the ﬁrst, again for reasons of economy; the
ﬁrst is included in a sliding train mounted on the sleeve of third and fourth speeds.
The reverse speed is made with an idler, not shown on the picture, meshing with the
ﬁrst wheels, when they are in neutral position.

During the following period of time, synchronizers were improved and made less
expensive also thanks to higher volumes; since the ’970s also economy cars received
synchronizers on all forward speeds.

8.2 Friction Clutches

415

Fig. 8.11 Four speed gearbox of FIAT 1400 of 1950, with full synchronization, but the ﬁrst gear.
The reverse speed is made by a sliding idler, not shown on this ﬁgure

8.2 Friction Clutches

An important transmission component, the friction clutch, or, shortly, clutch posed
many problems to designers about operation force and endurance.

On very ﬁrst cars belt transmissions integrated clutch function into the gearbox.
As we have already seen bevel clutches were already known at the beginning of the
automobile era.

We see on Fig. 8.12 an example of bevel clutch of the ﬁrst years of the past century.
The friction surface is covered by a leather lining, riveted on a bevel pulley in
cast iron; although Frood had already invented the famous synthetic material called
Ferodo in 1897 it became widely applied in the ’920s only.

Leather has a friction coefﬁcient not very different of modern friction materials,
but has limited performance, as far as heat wasting capacity and endurance; these
facts implied a large sizing of active surfaces. On the contrary, at those times, was
cheap and easy to be repaired or changed.

The active surface of this application is single and shaped like a cone; this shape
was chosen to limit the disengagement force on the pedal, depending on the cone
diameter and the engine torque. Due the difﬁculty on integrating the leather lining
into their support disc, active surface was usually single, and not double as by modern
clutches.

If we refer again to the previous ﬁgure, we can notice that the engine ﬂywheel
features a short shaft bearing the reaction structure of the load springs working on
friction surfaces.

416

8 Historical Evolution

Fig. 8.12 Bevel clutch with leather linings. Clutch conicity (1:2; lower values could reduce pedal
reaction) is limited by the available friction coefﬁcient to avoid irreversible sticking of working
surfaces, after engagement

Many coil springs (only one is shows on the cross section) push the tapered friction
disc into the ﬂywheel. The leather lining is riveted on this disc; very thin leaf springs
are set between the lining and the disc to make the engagement more progressive.

With this kind of architecture, very different as the contemporary one, the gearbox

input shaft must be able to slide on a square counterpart.

Friction conicity (1:2 on this drawing) is limited by the friction coefﬁcient be-
tween leather and iron, in order to prevent irreversible sticking of the clutch, after
engagement.

8.2 Friction Clutches

417

Fig. 8.13 Clutch with spiral friction spring. The clutch pedal moves the ogive that closes the spring
onto the input shaft, shaping up a friction force; the same force is increasing the band tension. The
resulting friction torque is function of the initial tension through an exponential function of the
winding angle of the spring

The large engine displacement of many cars and the limited dimension of the
ﬂywheel made many clutches too heavy to be operated; for this reason other mech-
anisms were also developed.

The idea was to exploit the mechanical property of wound linings to reduce
working forces, where the friction force is used itself to increase contact pressure as
by leading shoes of drum brakes. This principle was applied by band clutches.

An application of this principle is shown by Fig. 8.13; a coil spring with rectangular
section is installed in a cavity in the ﬂywheel; coils are very close each other. One
end of the spring is directly ﬁxed to the ﬂywheel, through the eye in the lower part
of the ﬁgure; the other end is instead connected by a rocker arm D.

If an ogive is moved closer to the rocker arm, it is possible to twist the spring and

reduce its internal diameter.

The gearbox input shaft C is surrounded by the spring with a little play; when
the ogive is advanced through the clutch pedal the spring closes on the shaft with a
resulting friction torque.

The friction tension along the spring coil, increases the tangential tension toward
the eye, without increasing its reaction on the rocker arm; the resulting friction torque
is an exponential function of the winding angle, that can be increased indeﬁnitely.

418

8 Historical Evolution

Fig. 8.14 Radial shoes clutch. The shoe displacement is caused by a screw mechanism, operated
by the clutch pedal through a crank

With a modest friction coefﬁcient between metals it is possible to transmit the
desired torque with a reasonable force on the pedal; the counterpart is the brutality
of the engagement maneuver, only in part softened by spring elasticity.

A very different conﬁguration of the same principle is given by Fig. 8.14; the

torque is transmitted by two shoes that expand in a drum, like in a drum brake.

The shoe motion is caused by a screw that is moved through a crank and rod
mechanism; the disc shape of the crank is studied to allow a simple play adjustment,
to compensate for lining wear.

Also in this case, facing a difﬁcult problem to be solved, inventors investigated
many different solutions before of consolidating and improving the best one; to
solve these problems also electric and hydrostatic transmissions were investigated
and applied.

The ﬁnal solution was consolidated in the ’930s with the single disc clutch with

synthetic friction linings; one example of this time is shown on Fig. 8.15.

The friction surface is now ﬂat and double; with the same force is possible to
transmit a double torque. The friction disc is mounted within two surfaces (the
ﬂywheel and the pressure disc) that are compressed by a number of coil springs; a
set of levers on pressure disc are used to release the clutch with the axial motion of
a thrust bearing.

This kind of clutch received its last improvement by the application of cup springs;
they were introduced at the end of the ’970s and allowed many advantages as a further
reduction of pedal force and a general simpliﬁcation of this mechanism.

8.3 Automatic Gearboxes

419

Fig. 8.15 Dry single disc clutch with coil pressure springs. A set of release articulated on the
pressure plate is used to disengage the clutch, through the displacement of the throughout bearing

8.3 Automatic Gearboxes

Automatic gearboxes have had their own history that received a crucial contribution
by the American industry.

We don’t want to mean the Europe didn’t contribute to this development; we
will see, in fact, that many fundamental inventions were developed in this continent.
Nevertheless the European market less reach and more fragmented didn’t justify the
mass production of this gearbox until very recently.

The problems to be solved, to develop an automatic gearbox, included a different
mechanism to engage gears and to start the vehicle, easier to be interfaced with
not sophisticated automatic controls, that could be mechanic (exploiting centrifugal
forces) or hydraulic (exploiting the pressure variation of the oil in a rotary pump).

420

8 Historical Evolution

Fig. 8.16 The De Dion and Bouton gearbox can be considered as a precursor of power-shift
gearboxes. By shifting the shaft with the bearing J, is possible to engage one of the two shoe
clutches available on each gear; start-up clutch isn’t necessary

Today this problem appears to have lost its sense, because electronic micropro-
cessors allow an easy automatization of synchronizers and friction clutches, in use
on manual gearboxes; many existing vehicles already testify this statement.

The ﬁrst step was the development of gearboxes where speed shifts were possible

without danger for tooth wheels and of parts to be synchronized.

From this point of view we con consider a precursor the manual gearbox of de
Dion and Bouton, developed at the beginning of the past century and shown on
Fig. 8.16.

This single stage gearbox has two speeds only; we can see on the left upper side
the input shaft and on the lower right the output shaft which moves through a bevel
gear the pinions of the chain drive.

The two gear are always meshing, with the driven wheels idling on the output shaft;
the wheel engagement is made by shoe clutches, similar to that already commented
on Fig. 8.14; they are controlled by the screws moving the gears t, v, u and x.

By shifting the shaft with the thrust bearing J is possible to engage one clutch and

to disengage the other.

By this transmission start up clutch isn’t used during gear shifts.
Even if it was developed for manual gearboxes, this kind of clutch is surely a
relevant precursor of the powershift gearbox with band brakes and multi disc clutches.
A second gearbox of historical relevance is that of the Ford Model T of 1908, the

ﬁrst car that has been produced in millions.

8.3 Automatic Gearboxes

421

Fig. 8.17 Epicycloidal gears gearbox of Ford model T of 1908. One reverse, one reduced forward
speed and a direct drive are available

Figure 8.17 shows a section of this gearbox; it is made with epicycloidal gears,

instead of gears with ﬁxed rotation axis.

These gears were not applied by Ford for the ﬁrst time, because already known in
other applications. The epicycloidal gearbox should have been invented by Bodmer
in 1834, although there is evidence that these mechanisms were already known to
the old Greeks in applications for astronomical computations.

On this ﬁgure we see the three satellites v, r1 and r2 (the unusual position for
the subscript, not to be confused with an exponent, is brought from an original
ﬁgure), rotating on a single carrier, ﬁxed to the engine ﬂywheel. They mesh with the
corresponding sun gears s, s1 and s2.

If we imagine to keep the sun s stopped, by rotating the ﬂywheel and the carrier
we obtain a reduced output speed, in the opposite direction, at the sun gear s2, ﬁxed
to the output shaft.

422

8 Historical Evolution

Vice versa, by keeping the sun s1 stopped, we can obtain a reduced speed in the
same direction, again at the sun s2; on the ﬁgure a note reports the transmission ratios
that were obtained, including the differential transmission ratio.

If the multi discs clutch h1 is engaged, by shifting the sleeve h3, it is possible to
put the gearbox in direct drive, by ﬁxing the hub h, rotating with the crankshaft, with
the output shaft.

To obtain the different states of the gearbox, sun gears are rotating with the drums
c, c1 and c2, that can be gradually stopped with their band brakes; band brakes control
is made by front cams, moved by pedals on the car dash board; the lower part of
these pedals is shown on the ﬁgure with letters f, f 1 and f 2.

Pedals have a spring system that make them stable either in released and in de-

pressed position; each pedal raises if another one is depressed.

When engine and car are stopped, the pedal f must be depressed and the clutch h

engaged; in this way the vehicle is in park condition.

By releasing the clutch h, through a lever, the engine is disengaged and can be

cranked, the car is still stopped.

By depressing one of the pedals f 1 or f 2, the pedal f is raised, the car is left free to
move and it will be started-up in low gear forwards or backwards; speed inversions
can be made also by moving vehicle and start-up on slopes is made easier.

As soon as the suitable speed is reached, by engaging the clutch h, the pedal f 1

will be released, obtaining direct drive.

The gearbox is controlled by driver muscles, but clutches management is made

automatically during gear shifts.

From this situation to a fully automatic gearbox the way was long, but these

achievements made the ﬁnal result closer.

The conﬁguration of this gearbox allows to understand why epicycloidal gears
were preferred, to the conventional ones, for the new automatic transmissions: for
the easiness of integration of brakes and clutches.

A further step was made by Wilson, in England, in 1928, by proposing a gearbox
made by two different epicycloidal gear trains in series, where the carrier of the ﬁrst
gear was connected to the ring of the next gear. With two gears is possible to obtain
three speeds forward, one of them being a direct drive and a reverse speed.

The three speeds were obtained by braking drums with bands, as by Ford gearbox;
a schematic example of the Wilson gear train is shown on Fig. 8.20, in the chapter
dedicated to automatic transmissions.

These gearboxes, similar in use to the Model T ones, were semi automatic with
manual preselection; according to this concept, a small lever nearby the steering
wheel was used to select in advance the next gear to be used. At this time no gearshift
was started, but the brakes mechanisms were arranged for the gearshift to be made;
this occurred as soon as the driver depressed a pedal for this purpose, set in the
position normally used for the clutch pedal.

The driver was supported, in this way, on executing a coordinate maneuver of the
gear stick and of the clutch; the energy for this function was still produced by drivers
muscles through a pedal.

8.3 Automatic Gearboxes

423

Fig. 8.18 Semiautomatic gearbox produced by Cotal from 1934. The different elements of epicy-
cloidal gears are braked by electromagnets; the reverse is engaged manually

A semiautomatic gearbox particularly advanced has been produced by Cotal since

1934, in France; Fig. 8.18 shows a cross section of this gearbox.

This gearbox includes three epicycloidal gears; the engine is on the left, the output

shaft on the right.

Some toroidal electromagnets can stop some elements of the gear train; particu-
larly, the ﬁrst puts the corresponding gear set in direct drive, by ﬁxing together sun
and ring gears; the second obtains a reduced speed. At right, the third electromagnet
obtains a faster speed, while the last, again, a direct drive.

By energizing electromagnets in combination, two reduced speeds, a direct drive

and an overdrive can be obtained.

A small switch with ﬁve positions, near steering wheel, allowed to obtain the
four ratios automatically, without care of clutches, whose function was controlled by
electromagnets timing and inertia of parts accelerated or slowed down, during shifts;
the ﬁfth position was for the idle gear, with all electromagnet circuits open.

8 Historical Evolution

424

size.

The ﬁrst epicycloidal gear on the right is operated, instead, manually, when the
car is stopped and the transmission in idle position; a control lever moves the carrier
back and for, which can engage with the ring gear, obtaining a forward speed or
can be stopped, obtaining a reverse gear. Vehicle motion can be obtained, after this
manual shift, with the ﬁrst gear, controlled by its electromagnet.

The most relevant inconveniences of this gearbox were heavy weight and large

Semiautomatic Wilson and Cotal gearboxes were mainly used by European man-
ufacturers specializing on luxury cars; the second world war crisis made many of
these manufacturers disappear and these transmissions with them.

The ﬁnal step towards modern automatic gearboxes was made by exploiting hy-

draulic torque converters.

The torque converter has been introduced by the German naval industry, after the

invention of Föttinger in 1905, well before its application on cars.

He patented a torque transmission system by means of a centrifugal pump and a
turbine, in the same hydraulic circuit. With this device, the torque transmission is
obtained by the momentum variation of the ﬂow through the rotating blades and is
possible also when the pump (the engine) is rotating and the turbine (the vehicle) is
stopped.

The idea was developed further designing an integrated device of reduced dimen-

sions almost interchangeable with the conventional friction clutch.

In 1910 a patent about a hydraulic clutch was ﬁled, which was simpliﬁed by the

elimination of the reactor element.

Again in Germany, in 1928, the research consortium called Trilok developed the
homonymous torque converter, able to obtain, with a single machine, the performance
of the torque converter and of the hydraulic clutch, by mounting the reactor element
with a freewheel.

The ﬁrst automatic gearbox developed for a car is due to GM; called Hydramatic
has been produced since 1939; a cross section of this gearbox is shown on Fig. 8.19.
We can see, on this ﬁgure, starting from the engine side on the left, the hydraulic
clutch, followed by three epicycloidal gear trains, able to obtain three forward speeds
and a reverse one; engagements and disengagements are obtained by two band braked
(37 and 16) and two multi disc wet clutches (7 and 17).

Brakes and clutches are operated by oil pressure, generated by the gear pump 33,
on the front side of the gearbox and modulated by servo valves and by a manual
control on the steering wheel.

Gear shift automatization is based upon the comparison of oil pressure generated
by this ﬁrst pump (depending on engine speed) with a pressure generated by a second
pump driven by the transmission output shaft (depending on vehicle speed). The
difference between these two pressures is used to move gear shift servo valve; this
valve is also sensitive to the accelerator pedal position, by a spring loaded mechanical
link.

This system worked quite well on plain roads, upshifting speeds at higher vehi-
cle speeds with higher accelerator compression; on slopes or on bending roads the
automatic control had to be corrected by the manual selector.

8.3 Automatic Gearboxes

425

Fig. 8.19 The ﬁrst automobile automatic gearbox, produced since 1939, is the Hydramatic by
GM. We can see, starting from the engine side on the left, the hydraulic clutch, followed by three
epicycloidal gear trains, able to obtain three forward and a reverse speeds

426

8 Historical Evolution

We can notice that the hydraulic clutch is always crossed by the useful power; it

was used for start-ups and to dampen driveline torque vibrations.

The most important part of these gearboxes were absorbed by war production; in
1946 only it started its application on commercial cars receiving public appreciation.
The Dynaﬂow gearbox, again by GM, has been produced since 1948 and intro-
duced many improvements with regard to the previous one (Fig. 8.20). The epicy-
cloidal Wilson gear train, quite simpler, allowed also obtaining three forward and a
reverse speeds, with two band brakes and multi disc clutch, used in combination.

The most relevant step forward is the introduction of a reﬁned torque converter,
featuring a two stage reactor on freewheels; with this device it was possible to start-up
the car with a torque transmission ratio greater than two (instead of one, by deﬁnition
on the hydraulic clutch), obtaining in the mean time the torque converter working as
a clutch, with better efﬁciency, when input and output torques on the converter were
equal.

This scheme is still present on automatic gearboxes, even if the need for a higher
number of transmission ratios has justiﬁed the application of additional epicycloidal
gear trains.

It is also interesting to remember the automatic gearbox designed in 1949 by the

Dodge Division of Chrysler, with very original features.

Figure 8.21 shows the clutch of this gearbox; it includes a hydraulic clutch and a
pedal friction clutch in series. Some gear shifts need always pedal clutch, but they
are seldom, thanks to a particular automatization device.

The twin friction and hydraulic clutches allow transmission vibration dampening
and a very smooth start-up, even if the pedal is released without particular skill; in
addition the car can be kept stopped on a slope, simply working on the accelerator
pedal and the next start-up is impressively easier.

Similar twin clutches were also applied in combination with conventional manual

gearboxes on some European cars, as the Fiat 1900.

The gearbox is explained on the next Fig. 8.22; it shouldn’t be confused with a

simple counter shaft gearbox.

The main difference consists in the constant mesh wheel mounted with freewheel
that allows torque to be transmitted to the countershaft, but not vice versa and on
a disengagement sleeve of this freewheel on the countershaft; it is in disengaged
position on the ﬁrst ﬁgure on the left. The whole set of ﬁgures represents the different
gearbox states.

The gearbox control features a manual lever working on the sleeve, on the right
of the output shaft, through a suitable leverage; if this sleeve is set to the left, ﬁrst
and second speeds can be obtained; if it is set to the right, third and fourth speeds
can be obtained.

This maneuver should be made by disengaging the friction clutch; but transmission
ratios and engine displacement were such as to justify low speeds on slopes or in urban
driving, while remaining gears were recommended on suburban driving, including
related start-ups.

Upshifts from ﬁrst or third gears and downshifts from fourth or second gears were
made automatically, by a tachometer device shifting the freewheel sleeve. Notice that

8.3 Automatic Gearboxes

427

Fig. 8.20 The Dynaﬂow gearbox, again by GM, was produced since 1948 and can be considered
as an improvement of the previous one. The Wilson epicycloidal gear train allows three forward
and a reverse speeds

428

8 Historical Evolution

Fig. 8.21 Hydraulic clutch of the Gyromatic semiautomatic gearbox, produced since 1949 by the
Dodge Division of Chrysler; we can see also a conventional friction clutch with pedal control

when the gearbox is in low gears, the third speed gears act as a different constant
mesh gear.

These speed shifts didn’t need clutch disengagement, because of the properties
of the freewheel: the ﬁgures represent the positions in ﬁrst and second speed, on the
upper row and of third and fourth speeds on the lower raw; the ﬁrst ﬁgure at left
represent the idle position.

Dotted lines represent the power ﬂow at the different speeds; the reverse speed
was obtained by shifting an idler to engage the smallest wheel on the countershaft,
with the largest on the output shaft.

A particular contribution of Europe to automatic gearboxes development was
brought by DAF Daffodil, with the Variomatic transmission, introduced in 1950.
This transmission was probably the ﬁrst reliable application of the continuously
variable transmission to a car.

8.3 Automatic Gearboxes

429

Fig. 8.22 Scheme of Chrysler’s Gyromatic gearbox. The gearbox has a manual control to select a
low (ﬁrst and second speeds) and a high (third and fourth speeds) speed range. Speed shifts from
ﬁrst to second and from third to fourth and back is fully automatic

430

8 Historical Evolution

Fig. 8.23 Automatic Variomatic transmission of the DAF Daffodil of 1950. It is made by expandable
pulleys and rubber belt, reinforced by cords

This transmission suitable for front engine, rear drive cars is shown on Fig. 8.23;
the engine drove through a transmission shaft and a differential two expandable steel
pulleys; these pulleys drove other similar ones connected to the driving wheels.

Driven pulleys sides were compressed by coil springs that guaranteed the correct
friction with a rubber belt; driving pulleys sides were, instead, compressed by cen-
trifugal masses and by engine manifold pressure. By this device speed ratio variation
took into account engine speed and required torque.

A centrifugal friction clutch made car start-up completely automatic.
This transmission didn’t receive other application because of its strong impact on

vehicle architecture.

The concept was completely reworked by Van Doorne (the DAF holding Com-
pany), introducing a complete redesign. This study had as objective the development
of a steel belt variable transmission of reduced dimensions, suitable to be inter-
changeable with conventional manual gearboxes. An experimental application was
made by Fiat and by Ford and followed later by mass production.

This kind of automatic gearbox has now received a number applications on dif-

ferent car brands.

Chapter 9
Manual Gearboxes

9.1 Manual Gearboxes Classiﬁcation

Gearboxes are normally classiﬁed according to the number of gear wheel couples
involved in the motion transmission at a given speed; in case of manual vehicle
transmissions, the number of gear wheel couples to be taken into account is that of
the forward speeds only, without consideration of the ﬁnal ratio, even if integrated
into the gearbox.

Therefore there are:

(cid:129) Single stage gearboxes.
(cid:129) Dual stage or countershaft gearboxes.
(cid:129) Multi stage gearboxes.

Figure 9.1 shows the three conﬁgurations for a four speed gearbox.
It is useful to comment on the rules of this scheme that are adopted generally.
Each wheel is represented with a segment whose length is proportional to the pitch
diameter of the gear; the segment is ended by horizontal strokes, representing the
tooth width. If the segment is interrupted where crossing the shaft, the gear wheel is
idle; vice versa, if the segment is crossing the line of the shaft without interruption,
the wheel is rotating with the shaft. Hubs are represented according to the same rules,
while sleeves are represented with a couple of horizontal strokes. Arrows show the
input and the output shafts.

Single stage transmissions are mainly applied to front wheel driven vehicles,
because in this case it is useful that the input and the output shaft are offset; on the
contrary, in conventional vehicles, it is better that the input and the output shaft are
aligned.

This is why rear wheel driven vehicles adopt usually a double stage transmission.
The multistage conﬁguration is sometime adopted on front wheel driven vehicles
with transversal engine, because the transversal length of the gearbox can be short-
ened; it is used when the number of speeds or the width of gears don’t allow using a
single stage transmission.
Fig. 9.1 Schemes for a four speed gearbox shown in three different conﬁgurations: a single stage,
b double stage and c three stages

It should be noted that on a front wheel driven vehicle with transversal engine,
having decided the value of the front track and the size of the tire, the length of the
gearbox has a direct impact on the maximum steering angle of the wheel.

The positive result on transversal dimension of multi stage gearboxes is paid by

higher mechanical losses, due to the increased number of engaged gear wheels.

It should be noted that on the three stage transmissions, shown on the picture, the
axes of the three shafts don’t lie on the same plane, as the scheme seems to show. In
a lateral view, the traces of the three shafts should be represented as the vertices of
a triangle; this lay-out reduces the transversal dimension of the gearbox. In this case
and in other cases, we will show later on, the drawing is represented by turning the
plane of the input shaft and of the second shaft on the plane of the input shaft and of
the output shaft.

Gear trains used in the reverse speed are classiﬁed separately. The inversion of
the speed is achieved by using an additional gear. As a matter of fact, in a train of
three gears, the output speed has the same direction as the input speed, while the
other trains of two gears only, have an output speed of opposite direction; the added
gear is usually called idler.

The main conﬁgurations are reported on Fig. 9.2.
In the scheme a, an added countershaft shows a sliding idler, who can match two
close gears, not in contact, as, for example, the input gear of the ﬁrst speed and the
output gear of the second speed. It should be noted that, in this scheme, the drawing
doesn’t maintain the real dimension of parts.

The scheme b shows instead two sliding idlers, rotating together; this arrangement
gives additional freedom in obtaining a given transmission ratio. Also in this case
the countershaft is offset from the drawing plane; arrows show the gear wheels that
match, when the reverse speed is engaged.

The scheme c is similar to a, as the slider idler is concerned; it matches an added
speciﬁc gear wheel on the output shaft and a gear wheel cut on the shifting sleeve of
the ﬁrst and second speed, when it is in idle position.

9.1 Manual Gearboxes Classiﬁcation

433

Fig. 9.2 Schemes used for
reverse speed; such schemes
ﬁt every type of gearbox
lay-out

The conﬁguration d shows a dedicated couple of gears, with a ﬁxed idler and a

The following are the advantages and disadvantages of the conﬁgurations shown

shifting sleeve.

on the ﬁgure.

(cid:129) Schemes a, b and c are simpler, but don’t allow the application of synchronizers
(because the couples are not always engaged), nor allow the use of helical gears
(because the wheels must be shifted by sliding).

(cid:129) The scheme d is more complex but can receive a synchronizer and can adopt helical

gears.

(cid:129) Schemes a, b and c don’t increase the gearbox length.

9.2 Mechanical Efﬁciency

The mechanical efﬁciency of an automotive gear wheel transmission shows values
that are rather high, as compared with other mechanism performing the same func-
tion; nevertheless the value of this efﬁciency can’t be neglected calculating dynamic

434

9 Manual Gearboxes

performance and fuel consumption. The continuous effort of limiting fuel consump-
tions justiﬁes the care of transmission designers in reducing the mechanical losses.
The total mechanical losses of a transmission are built up by terms that are depen-

dent and independent of the processed power; the main terms are:

(cid:129) Gearing losses; they are generated by friction between engaging teeth (power
dependent) and by friction of wheels rotating in the air and in the oil (power
independent).

(cid:129) Bearing losses; they are generated by the extension of the contact area of rolling
bodies and by their deformation (partly dependent and partly independent on
power) and by their rotation in the air and in the oil (power independent).

(cid:129) Sealing losses; they are generated by friction between seals and rotating shafts and

(cid:129) Lubrications losses; they are generated by the lubrication pump, if any, and are

are power independent.

power independent.

All these losses depend on rotational speed of parts in contact and, therefore, on

engine speed and selected transmission ratio.

Table 9.1 is reporting the values of mechanical efﬁciency to be adopted in calcu-
lations taking into consideration wide open throttle condition; they consider a couple
of gearing wheels or a complete transmissions with splash lubrication; on the same
table we can see also the efﬁciency for a complete powershift epicycloidal automatic
transmission and for a steel belt continuously variable transmission. For the two last
transmissions the torque converter has to be considered as locked-up.

It looks more correct to make reference to power loss measured as function of
rotational input speed, instead of efﬁciency. Figure 9.3 shows the example of a double
stage transmission, in fourth speed, at maximum power; the different contributions
to the total are shown.

This kind of measurement is made eliminating step by step some of the transmis-

sion components, eliminating, this way, related loss.

In the ﬁrst step all synchronizers rings are removed, leaving synchronizer hubs
only; mechanical losses of non engaged synchronizers are, therefore, measurable.
The loss is due to the relative speed of non engaged lubricated conical surfaces; the

Table 9.1 Mechanical efﬁciency of different transmission mechanisms
Mechanism type

Efﬁciency (%)

Complete manual gearbox with splash lubrication
Complete automatic transmission (ep. gears)
Complete automatic gearbox (steel belt; without press. contr.)
Complete automatic gearbox (steel belt; with press. contr.)
Couple of cyl. gears
Couple of bevel gears

92–97
90–95
70–80
80–86
99.0–99.5
90–93

9.2 Mechanical Efﬁciency

435

Fig. 9.3 Friction loss of a single stage gearbox designed for 300 Nm; on the horizontal axis is the
input speed, on the vertical axis the power loss

value of this loss depends, obviously, on the speed and on the selected transmission
ratio.

In the second step all rotating seals are removed.
In the third step the lubrication oil is removed, and therefore, the main part of the
lubrication losses is eliminated; some oil must remain in order to leave the contact
between teeth unaffected.

By removing the gear wheels not involved in power transmission, their mechanical

losses are now measurable.

this value.

The rest of the loss is due to bearings; the previous removal of parts can affect

A more exhaustive approach consists in measuring the complete efﬁciency map;
the efﬁciency can be represented as the third coordinate of a surface, where the other
two coordinates are input speed and engine torque. Efﬁciency calculations can be
made by comparison of input and of output torque of a really working transmission.
Such a map can show how efﬁciency reaches an almost constant value at a not very
high value of the input torque; it must not be forgot that standard fuel consumption
evaluation cycles involve very modest values of torque and therefore imply values
of the transmission efﬁciency that are always changing.

Figure 9.4 shows a qualitative cross section of the aforesaid map, cut at constant
engine speed. It should be noted that efﬁciency is zero also at input torque values
slightly greater than zero; as a matter of fact, friction implies a certain minimum
value of torque, below of which motion is impossible.

A good approximation to represent mechanical efﬁciency is using the dotted

broken line, as an interpolation of the real curve.

436

9 Manual Gearboxes

Fig. 9.4 Mechanical
efﬁciency map, as function
of the input torque at
constant engine speed; the
dotted line represents a
reasonable approximation of
this curve, to be used on
mathematical models for
performance and fuel
consumption prediction

9.3 Manual Automobile Gearboxes

9.3.1 Adopted Schemes

In manual transmissions the process of changing speed and clutch engaging and
disengaging are made with the contribution of the driver force only.

This kind of gearbox is made with helical gears and each speed has a synchronizer;
some gearbox doesn’t show the synchronizer for the reverse speed, particularly in
economy minicars.

We reported, previously, a ﬁrst classiﬁcation; additional information is the number

of speeds, usually between four and six.

Single step gearboxes are used on transaxles; this condition includes, with some
exception, front wheel driven cars with front engine and rear driven cars with rear
engine; this is true with longitudinal and transversal engine.

In all these situations the ﬁnal drive is included in the gearbox that is therefore

called also transmission.

Countershaft double stage gearboxes are used in conventionally driven cars, where
the engine is mounted longitudinally in the front and the driving axle is the rear one.
If the gearbox is mounted on the rear axle, in order to improve the weight distribution,
the ﬁnal drive could be included in the gearbox.

In multistage transmissions, some gear wheel could be used for different speeds.
The number of gearing wheels could increase in some speed; this normally occurs
in low speeds, because the less frequent use of these speeds reduces the penalty of
worse mechanical efﬁciency on fuel consumption.

Cost and weight increase are justiﬁed by transmission length reduction, necessary
sometimes on transversal engine with big displacement and more than four cylinders.
In all these gearboxes synchronizers are coupled for following neighbouring
speeds (e.g.: ﬁrst with second, third with fourth, etc.) in order to reduce overall
length and to shift the two gears with the same selector rod.

We deﬁne as selection plane of a shift stick (it is almost parallel to the x z coordinate
body reference system plane for shift sticks on transmission tunnel) the plane on

9.3 Manual Automobile Gearboxes

437

Fig. 9.5 Scheme for a ﬁve
speed single stage
transmission, suitable for
front wheel drive with
transversal engine

Fig. 9.6 Scheme of an
on-line double stage gearbox
for a conventional lay-out

which the lever knob must move in order to select two close speed couples. For
instance, for a manual gearbox according to the FIAT scheme, ﬁrst an second, third
and fourth, ﬁfth speed are organized on three different selection planes; the reverse
speed can have a dedicate plane or share it with the ﬁfth speed.

Figure 9.5 shows a typical example of a ﬁve speed single stage gearbox. First

speed wheels are close to a bearing, in order to limit shaft deﬂection.

In this gearbox the total number of tooth wheels pairs is the same as for the double

stage transmission shown on Fig. 9.6.

But, while in the ﬁrst gearbox there are only two gearing wheels for each speed,
in the second there are three gearing wheels for the ﬁrst four speeds and none for the
ﬁfth. This property is given by the presence of the so called constant gear wheels
(the ﬁrst gear pair at the left) that moves the input wheels of the ﬁrst four speeds;
the ﬁfth speed is a direct drive because the two parts of the upper shaft are joined
together.

438

9 Manual Gearboxes

Fig. 9.7 Scheme of a triple
stage ﬁve speeds gearbox,
suitable for front wheel
driven car with transversal
engine

This single stage gearbox shows the ﬁfth speed wheels couple positioned beyond
the bearing, as witness of the upgrading, starting from an existent four speed trans-
mission; in this case the ﬁfth speed has a dedicated selection plane.

The double stage gearbox is organized in a completely different way but shows
also the ﬁrst speed pair of wheels close to the bearing. The direct drive is dedicated to
the highest speed; also in this case the ﬁfth speed shows a dedicated selection plane.
Six speeds double stage gearboxes don’t show conceptual changes in comparison
with the previous examples; synchronizers are organized in such a way as to leave
ﬁrst and second, third and fourth, ﬁfth and sixth speeds on the same selection plane.
As we already noticed, the multistage conﬁguration, shown on Fig. 9.7 allows a
reasonable reduction of the lateral length of the gearbox. In this scheme, ﬁrst and the
second speeds only beneﬁt of the second countershaft; power enters a countershaft
through a constant gear pair of wheels and ﬂows again to the input shaft at a reduced
speed. Third, fourth and ﬁfth speed have a single stage arrangement. Reverse speed
is obtained with a conventional idling wheel.

9.3 Manual Automobile Gearboxes

439

9.3.2 Practical Examples

Four speed gearboxes represented the most diffused solution in Europe till the ‘70s,
with some economy car with only three speeds.

With the installed power increase, with the improvement in aerodynamic perfor-
mance of the bodies and with the increasing attention to the fuel consumption, it was
necessary to increase the last speed, having the ﬁrst speed always on same values; as
a matter of fact car weight continued to increase and engine minimum speed didn’t
also change signiﬁcantly.

To obtain satisfactory performance all manufacturers developed ﬁve speed gear-
boxes; now this solution is standard, but many examples of six speed gearboxes are
available on the market, not only on sport cars.

Figure 9.8 presents an example of six speed double stage transmission with the
ﬁfth in direct drive; also in this case the ﬁrst and the second pair of wheels are close
to the bearing.

This rule is not generally accepted; on one side having the most stressed pairs
of wheels close to the bearing allows a shaft weight containment; on the other side
having the most frequently used pairs of wheels close to the bearing reduces the
noise due to shaft deﬂection.

Synchronizers of fourth and third speed are mounted on the countershaft; this
lay-out reduces the synchronization work, improving the shifting quality at the same
dimension of the synchronizing rings. Synchronizers of ﬁrst and second gear are,
vice versa, on the output shaft, because of their diameter, larger than that of the
corresponding gear; the penalty on the synchronization work is paid by the adoption
of a double ring synchronizer.

Synchronizers on the countershaft cause a further advantage: in idle position the
gears are stopped and don’t produce the rattling noise; this subject will be better
focused later on.

Figure 9.9 introduces an example of a single stage gearbox for a front longitudinal
engine. The input upper shaft must jump over the differential that is set between the
engine and the wheels. The increased length of the shafts has suggested adopting a
hollow section. Because of this length the box is divided in two sections; on the joint
between the two sections of the box additional bearings are provided to reduce the
shaft deﬂection.

The input shaft features a ball bearing close to the engine and three other needle
bearings that take only care of the radial loads. The output shaft has two tapered
roller bearings on the differential side and a roller bearing on the opposite side. This
choice is justiﬁed by the relevant axial thrust coming out of the bevel gears.

First and second speed synchronizers are on the output shaft and feature a double

ring.

Reverse speed gears are immediately after the joint (the idler gear isn’t visible)
and has a synchronized shift. The remaining synchronizers are set in the second
section of the box on the input shaft. The output shaft ends with the bevel pinion,
part of the ﬁnal ratio.

440

9 Manual Gearboxes

Fig. 9.8 Double stage six speed gearbox (GETRAG)

9.3 Manual Automobile Gearboxes

441

Fig. 9.9 Single stage six speed gearbox for longitudinal front engine (Audi)

442

9 Manual Gearboxes

Fig. 9.10 Five speeds transmission for a transversal front engine (FCA)

It should be noted that the gears of the ﬁrst, second and reverse speed are directly

cut on the input speed, in order to reduce the overall dimension.

Most cars show today a front wheel drive with transversal engine; the number of

gearboxes with integral helical ﬁnal ratio is, therefore, dominant.

In these gearboxes geared pairs are mounted from the ﬁrst to the last speed, starting

from the engine side. An example of this architecture is given on Fig. 9.10.

As many other transmission that were born with only four speeds, it shows the
ﬁfth speed segregated outside of the aluminium box and enclosed by a thin steel sheet
cover; this is to limit again the transverse dimension of the powertrain, in the area
where there is potential interference with the left wheel in the completely steered
position.

This solution is questionable as far as the total length is concerned but shows
some advantage in the reduction of the span between the bearings. Every bearing is
ball type; on the side opposite to the engine the external ring of the bearing can move
axially, to compensate for thermal differential displacements.

9.3 Manual Automobile Gearboxes

443

Fig. 9.11 Six speeds transmission for a transversal front engine (FCA)

One of the toothed wheels of the reverse speed is cut on the ﬁrst and second
shifting sleeve. The box is open on both sides; one of them is the rest of one of the
bearings of the ﬁnal ratio.

A big cover closes the boxes and, in the mean time, contains the second bearing
of the ﬁnal ratio and the space to install the clutch mechanism; it is also used to join
the gearbox to the engine.

In this gearbox synchronizers are part on the input shaft and part on the output

shaft.

Figure 9.11 shows the drawing of a more modern six speed gearbox, in which
it was possible to install all the gears in a conventional single stage arrangement,
thanks to the not very high value of the rated torque.

Starting from the engine, we see the gear pairs from the ﬁrst to the sixth; as we
have already said this arrangement is caused be the objective of minimizing the shaft
deﬂection. The synchronizers only of ﬁrst and second speed didn’t ﬁnd place on the
input shaft; they are double ring type as for the ﬁrst speed.

The reverse speed is synchronized and beneﬁts of a countershaft not shown on

this drawing.

444

9 Manual Gearboxes

9.4 Manual Gearboxes for Industrial Vehicles

9.4.1 Adopted Schemes

The gearboxes we are going to examine in this paragraph are suitable for vehicles of
more than 4 t of GVW; lighter vehicles, usually called commercial vehicles, adopt
gearboxes that are derived of automobile production, according to what was said in
the previous paragraph.

Gearboxes used on industrial vehicles feature synchronizers too; they can be
shifted directly, as in a conventional manual transmission, or indirectly with the
assistance of servomechanisms. Non synchronized gearboxes are sometimes used
on long haul trucks, because of their robustness. Assisted shifting mechanisms are
diffused because of the easy power media availability. Automatic or semiautomatic
transmissions are also used; the ﬁrst type especially on busses.

For gearboxes with four up to six speeds, the double stage countershaft architecture

represents a standard; the scheme is the same as we saw before.

The constant gear couple is used for all speeds but for the highest. Also in this

case the lowest speed wheels are close to the bearings.

As shown on schemes of Fig. 9.12, highest speed can be either obtained in direct
drive (scheme b) or with a couple of gears (scheme a); in this last case the direct
drive is used for the speed before the last one: these architectures are called direct
drive and overdrive.

In the ﬁgure, only the last and the ﬁrst before the last speed are represented.
The choice between the two alternatives can be justiﬁed by the different vehicle
mission; almost the same gearbox can be used on different vehicles with different
speeds of more frequent use (for instance a truck and a bus).

Sometime the constant gear pair is set on output shaft, after the different speed

gears; this conﬁguration offers the following advantages:

Fig. 9.12 Alternative
constant gear schemes with
last or ﬁrst before the last
speed in direct drive

9.4 Manual Gearboxes for Industrial Vehicles

445

(cid:129) Reduction of the synchronization work, because of the smaller gear dimension, at

the same torque and total transmission ratio.

(cid:129) Less stress on the input shaft and on the countershaft.

On the contrary, there show the following disadvantages:

(cid:129) Bearings rotate faster.
(cid:129) Constant gear wheels are much more stressed.

This applies for the single range transmissions.
Multiple range transmissions feature, in addition to the main gearbox, other gear-
boxes that multiply the number of speeds of the main gearbox by their speeds number.
With this architecture the total number of gear pairs might be reduced, at a given
number of speeds, and, sometime the use of the gearshift lever can be simpler on a
given mission.

This arrangement is used when more than six speeds are necessary. A multiple
range transmission is therefore made out of a combination of different countershaft
gearboxes, single range gearboxes or epicycloidal gearboxes.

Each added element is called range changer if it is conceived as to be able to use
the main gearbox speed in sequence, in two completely non overlapping series of
vehicle speeds; for example if the main gearbox has four speeds, the ﬁrst speed in
the high range is faster than the fourth speed in the low range.

It is called splitter if it is conceived in order to create speeds that are intermediate
to the main gearbox speeds; in this case, for example the third speed in high range
is faster than the third speed in low range, but slower than the fourth speed in low
range.

We call main gearbox the gearbox with the highest number of speeds; the splitter

and the range changer will be set in series before and after the main gearbox.

Figure 9.13 shows the scheme of a gearbox featuring a splitter and a range changer.
The splitter is made out of a pair of wheels that work as two different constant gears
for the main gearbox. The countershaft can therefore be moved at two different
speeds, according to the position of the splitter unit. Because the main gearbox has
four speeds, this splitter unit can make total of eight speeds, one of them being in
direct drive.

At the output shaft of this assembly, there is a range changer unit made as a two
speeds double stage gearbox with direct drive; this unit multiplies again by two the
total number of obtainable speeds. The range changer is qualiﬁed by the signiﬁcant
difference of the two obtainable speeds.

The range changer can be made with a countershaft gearbox or with an epicycloidal
gearbox with direct drive; the advantage in this case is the possibility of an easier
automatic actuation, by braking some of the element of the epicycloidal gear.

It is also possible to have the range changer before the main gearbox and the

splitter unit after the main gearbox.

A different way of deﬁning functions of range change units, is to say that the
splitter is a gearbox that compresses the gear sequence, because it reduces the gap

446

9 Manual Gearboxes

Fig. 9.13 Scheme of a
sixteen speeds gearbox for
industrial vehicles; it is made
with a four gears main
gearbox, a double speed
splitter and a double speed
range changer with direct
drive

Fig. 9.14 Transmission
ratios obtained with the
scheme of transmission
shown on Fig. 9.15; speed
identiﬁcation show the main
gearbox speed with the
number, the splitter position
with the ﬁrst letter, the range
changer position with the
second letter; L stands for
low, H stands for high

between speeds, while the range changer is a gearbox that expands the gear sequence,
because it increases the total range of the transmission.

Figure 9.14 explains the concept of compression; bars represent the ratios obtained
in all shifting levers positions. Ratios obtained with the splitter unit in L position (ﬁrst
letter in the speed identiﬁcation; L stands for lower ratio) are set in between the ratios
obtained with the splitter unit in H position (H stands for higher ratio, in this case
1:1) and reduce the amplitude of gear steps of the main gearbox.

The same ﬁgure explains also the concept of expansion, showing on the same
graph the ratio obtained with the range changer in H position (second identiﬁcation
letter) and in L position; the gear step between the ﬁrst in low gear and the ﬁrst in
high gear is as big as the range of the main gearbox, and the total transmission range
is widened.

9.4 Manual Gearboxes for Industrial Vehicles

447

The range changer is therefore used seldom, when the mission changes suddenly,
as, for example, when leaving a normal road for a country road to be driven slowly,
or when a strong slope with fully loaded vehicle is afforded. The splitter allows,
instead, improving the dynamic performance of the vehicle, making available the
optimum transmission ratio to obtain the desired power. The splitter is used there-
fore frequently: for example in a fully loaded vehicle all split ratios can be used in
sequence, during full throttle acceleration from standing still.

The range changer and the splitter are usually made as modular units that can be
mounted at both ends of the main gearbox, or changed with simple covers, in order
to satisfy all application needs with limited total production investments.

The generalization of these concepts could suggest building transmission made
of more range changing units arranged in series. They could be conceived as made
only of splitter units with direct drive.

In such a case, with n pairs of tooth wheels it is possible to obtain a total of z

transmission ratio, given by the formula:

z = 2n−1 .

(9.1)

The formula expresses the number of possible states that can be obtained of n − 1
pairs of gears; one unit is subtracted because one pair must be a constant gear to
move the countershaft.

For example with four pairs of gears, four speeds can be obtained in a double stage
gearbox; while in a cascade of splitters eight different speeds could be obtained. It
must not be forgotten, while deﬁning the best architecture, the goal of good shift
manoeuvrability and the implications on mechanical losses.

Figure 9.15 shows the scheme of the sixteen speed transmission with splitter and
range changer we already described. On this picture are represented the spans of
shafts under torque; the dotted line shows where upper input and output shafts are
loaded, while the solid line shows when the lower countershaft is loaded. The two
lines are joined where a pair of wheels is gearing.

A totally different approach is shown by the double countershaft transmission on
Fig. 9.16 (Fuller scheme); the power ﬂow is divided between two countershafts by
two constant gears and exits through a single output shaft. This conﬁguration has
been conceived with the objective to shorten the gearbox, because it is possible, in
this way, to divide the torque on two gear wheels working in parallel. The teeth width
can be reduced by about 40% at the same level of rated torque.

On the other side the transmission is much wider; this choice can represent a

favorable compromise for certain vehicles such the road saddle tractors.

On this scheme, after the main gearbox, there is a three speeds splitter; one splitter
speed id direct drive, one is over drive, the last under drive; the total number of speeds
is therefore twelve.

It can be noticed that the reverse speed is obtained with the same wheels of the
ﬁrst speed and with two small idlers. With this arrangement is possible to use the
splitter also in reverse speed.

448

9 Manual Gearboxes

Fig. 9.15 Power ﬂow scheme in the sixteen speeds of a gearbox; lines are dotted when the torque
ﬂows through the countershaft; they are solid when the torque ﬂows through the upper shafts

9.4.2 Practical Examples

A practical example of a gearbox for a medium duty truck is shown on Fig. 9.17;
in this example a double stage four speeds main gearbox is joined to a two speeds
splitter, offering a total of eight speeds. The splitter unit with his direct drive can
obtain the same transmission ratios of the main gearbox, while with the reduced speed
can obtain transmission ratios that are in between the ratios of the main gearbox.

The section A-A on the lower right side shows a detail of the idler of the reverse

speed; also the reverse speed is doubled by the splitter.

9.4 Manual Gearboxes for Industrial Vehicles

449

Fig. 9.16 Scheme of a Fuller gearbox featuring twelve speeds, made out by a main four speeds
double countershaft gearbox and by a splitter gearbox with three speeds; one of these last is direct
drive; the two countershafts in the main gearbox and in the splitter allow reducing the gear wheel
width and therefore the total length of the gearbox

In the main gearbox the wheels of the ﬁrst and reverse speeds are close to the rear
bearing; the wheels of the following speeds are set in increasing order from the left
to the right. The eighth speed is direct drive.

The synchronizers of the ﬁrst and second speed show a double ring, while the
reverse speed has no synchronization. This gearbox can receive a conventional man-
ual shifting mechanism or a power assisted mechanism that can be fully automatic.
A three elements gearbox with a total of sixteen speeds is shown on Fig. 9.18. A
four speed main gearbox (the same as in the previous example) is joined with a two
speeds splitter and a two speeds range changer. The wheels in the main gearbox are
ordered in increasing speed from the rear bearing.

The sixteenth gear is direct drive. The range changer is made with epicycloidal
gears; when the rear shifting sleeve is moved to the left, the epicycloidal gear is
blocked and acts like a locked joint.

When the rear shifting sleeve is moved to the right the annulus wheel is blocked
with the casing and the carrier speed will be reduced, with the same direction of the
input speed.

The reduced speeds stay in a range that is fully separated of the normal speeds
range; they will be used when a very high torque or a very low speed are needed. The
main gearbox shows ball bearings and tapered roller bearings, while the epicycloidal
gear train, where the radial thrusts are self equilibrated, shows only needle bearings
and a ball bearing.

The main gearbox countershaft is rotating also in idle speed; it shows a spline end
that can be used to move auxiliary equipments such as a hydraulic pump useful to
operate a tilting loading plane.

A practical example of the Fuller scheme is shown on Fig. 9.19; in this example
the gearbox has a total of sixteen speeds and is made of a four speeds main gearbox,
a two speeds splitter and a two speeds range epicycloidal gear changer.

450

9 Manual Gearboxes

Fig. 9.17 Truck gearbox with eight speeds; on the lower side there is the reverse idler (IVECO)

9.4 Manual Gearboxes for Industrial Vehicles

451

Fig. 9.18 Truck gearbox with sixteen speeds including splitter and range changer (IVECO)

452

9 Manual Gearboxes

Fig. 9.19 Fuller gearbox (IVECO)

9.4 Manual Gearboxes for Industrial Vehicles

453

The two reverse speed idlers can be noticed. The splitter shift is synchronized,

while the main gearbox features dog clutches.

The gear shifts are semiautomatic, manually preselected; in this case the gear
shift lever doesn’t move the shifting sleeves mechanically, but prepares an automatic
sequence, where electric valves operate pneumatic actuators. The selection and shift
motions don’t occur when the lever is moved but when the power is cut off, because
the accelerator pedal is released or the clutch pedal is depressed.

Chapter 10
Shifting Mechanisms

10.1 Internal Shifting Mechanisms

Mechanical devices that enables the driver shifting the pair of gearing wheels in such
a way as to obtain the desired transmission ratio, are called shifting mechanisms.
They are called internal if they are contained in the gearbox casings; they are called
external when they mounted partly on the gearbox, partly on the vehicle body and
connect the gearshift lever with the internal shifting mechanisms.

Shifting mechanisms perform a very import function, because they are responsible
for the feeling, the driver receives from the shift stick, and therefore for the easy use
of the gearbox itself. An ideal feeling should be positive and precise.

From an ergonomic standpoint, friction and clearance between moving parts of
the shifting mechanisms can increase the shifting time and make the identiﬁcation
of the engagement positions of the shift stick more difﬁcult. These positions, in fact,
are not shown by any device but are learned by the driver through the feeling coming
from the shift stick.

Internal mechanisms include selector bars and selector forks; these move the

shifting sleeves and the synchronizers as it will be explained in a next chapter.

10.1.1 Plunger Interlocking Device

In order to understand how an internal mechanism works, we will refer to one of the
gearboxes that we have seen in the previous chapter; we won’t consider, at this time
the synchronizer, since its presence doesn’t change the nature of shifting manoeuvre.
As we have seen, shifting sleeves engage, through an internal spline, both with a
hub on the gearbox shaft and with another hub on the idle gear wheel. Idle wheels
are kept in the correct axial position by spacers and diameter transitions on shafts
and are free to rotate; a gear wheel is locked on his shaft by shifting the sleeve on its
hub.
10 Shifting Mechanisms

Each sleeve has three remarkable positions; with reference to the sleeve on the

lower right of Fig. 9.8 for the ﬁrst and second speed:

(cid:129) It is in neutral position, when engaged with no wheel hubs, as shown in the ﬁgure.
(cid:129) If shifted to the left, it locks the second speed gear to the output shaft and applies

(cid:129) If shifted to the right, it locks the ﬁrst speed gear to the output shaft and applies

the second gear ratio.

the ﬁrst gear ratio.

The gearbox has four different sleeves: one for the ﬁrst and second speeds, one
for the third and fourth speeds, one for the ﬁfth speed and the last for the reverse
speed. It should be noticed that in this gearbox the reverse speed is made by shifting
an idler, not shown in the ﬁgure; when the reverse speed is engaged the idler is slit
into mesh with the toothed sleeve of second and ﬁrst (in neutral) and with a speciﬁc
wheel on the input shaft.

A typical mechanism suitable for this task is shown on Fig. 10.1. It is made by
three selector bars (4, 5, 6), each of them with a fork that engages with a groove on
the shifting sleeve; by moving one bar at a time, the desired speed can be shifted.
Each bar is moved by a gate 8, existing on each fork.

Fig. 10.1 Cross section of a transversal single stage gearbox on the internal shifting mechanism;
4, 5 and 6 are the shifting bars and forks moving the sleeves; a section of the sleeve on the output
shaft, a section of the input shaft (upper left) and of the idling shaft of the reverse speed can be also
seen (FCA)

10.1 Internal Shifting Mechanisms

457

A ﬁnger lever 3 on a shaft 2 can either rotate around the shaft center line or shift
along this centre line; when shifted it selects the correct selector bar; when rotated, in
one of the three gates, it shifts the desired speed. The ﬁnger matches with a suitable
low clearance with the gates on the forks.

It should be noted that, in this gearbox, the reverse fork slides on the selector bar
of the ﬁfth speed but features its own gate. Acting on the lever 1 and 7, shifting and
selection motions can be done.

When the gearbox is in neutral, all gates are aligned and the ﬁnger is set in the

gate of the third and fourth fork.

In order to have a proper operation, there should be auxiliary devices suitable for:

(cid:129) Maintaining the mechanisms in the selected position, even if the driver abandons

(cid:129) Avoiding that more than one bar is moved in the same time, with fatal consequence

the shift stick.

for the gearbox integrity.

The ﬁrst function is performed by plungers with spherical ends, matching spherical
grooves on selector bars. Plungers are pushed into their grooves by springs that keep
the bar in one of the three remarkable positions. Figure 10.2 shows the detail of such
grooves (detail 7); the central groove if for the idle position, the other two for shifting
the desired speed.

The second function is performed with plungers that are similar to those previously
explained; they have their center line on the same plane of the bars center line (1
and 3 on Fig. 10.2); these plungers are set in two holes in the box, between the bars
of ﬁrst and second speed and of ﬁfth and reverse speed. The bar of third and fourth

Fig. 10.2 Detail of the plunger and pin interlocking device, applied on the selector bars, in order
to avoid the contemporary shift of two bars; if one bar is moved the plungers 1 and 3, through the
pin 2 keep the remaining bars in idle position (FCA)

458

10 Shifting Mechanisms

Fig. 10.3 Cross section of a transversal gearbox with calliper and ﬁnger interlocking device; the
two prongs of the calliper 2 avoid that the ﬁnger moves contemporarily more than one fork; in fact
if the ﬁnger could match more than one fork, the calliper prongs would block the selection (FCA)

speed contains in a hole, aligned with the others in neutral position, with a needle 2
inside; the length of plungers and needle is designed to allow the motion of a bar at
a time.

A spring system must keep the ﬁnger in the idle position, as we said, in the third
and fourth speed gate; stroke limiters must stop the ﬁnger at both ends of the selection
stroke, in order to avoid sticking.

10.1.2 Calliper Interlocking Device

Clearance between bars and their bearings, shape errors between plunger and their
spherical seat, wear between sliding parts can negatively affect the effectiveness of

10.1 Internal Shifting Mechanisms

459

Fig. 10.4 Cross section of a transversal gearbox; the forks of ﬁrst and second speeds and of third
and fourth speeds can slide on the bar of the fork of the ﬁfth speed (FCA)

this mechanism and, even if the contemporary motion of two bars does never occur,
there can be sticking of parts that can make the selection difﬁcult or unpleasant.

Figure 10.3 shows an improved solution. There are neither plungers nor grooves.
The ﬁnger 3 that moves the bars shows on his view on the right of the drawing three
spherical seats that can match a ball pressed by a spring (only one is shown). The
three corresponding positions ﬁt the neutral position of the three bars.

A U shaped bracket 2, called calliper, with two prongs, matches the cartridge of
the ball; the calliper can slide up and down in the neutral position, but can’t rotate.
The two prongs match the end of the ﬁnger with no clearance.

The calliper allows the motion of one bar at a time, while locking the remaining

bars in neutral position.

neutral position all the mechanism.

there is only one bar.

If the ﬁnger is moved in an intermediate position, the calliper would block in

A possible simpliﬁcation of this mechanism is shown on Fig. 10.4; in this case

As a difference with the previous gearbox, where each fork has his bar, in this
case each fork, made of stamped steel sheet, is sliding on the bar of the ﬁfth gear.
Each fork shows a gate that can match the ﬁnger of the selection mechanism.

These gates are aligned when the forks are in neutral position; devices, not shown
on the drawing, avoid any rotation of forks around the bar, leaving only the sliding

460

10 Shifting Mechanisms

Fig. 10.5 Cross section of a transversal gearbox; the forks of ﬁrst and second speeds and of third
and fourth speeds can slide on the bar of the fork of the ﬁfth speed (FCA)

motion possible. In this case the only bar can slide on its bearings and has the double
function of moving one fork and guiding the remaining two.

As in the previous gearbox, the calliper shown on Fig. 10.5 moves with the ﬁnger

only horizontally and avoids the contemporary selection of two forks.

In order to produce a positive feeling, the bar of the ﬁnger is sliding on ball

bearings.

The same care is devoted to the positioning ball of the ﬁnger (1 on Fig. 10.4) that

has balls either for its rotation and its translation.

10.2 External Shifting Mechanisms

As we already said, external shifting mechanisms are used to move the internal
shifting mechanism as the driver moves the gear shift lever.

This problem ﬁnds an easy solution when the engine is in the front of the car
in longitudinal position and the traction is applied to the rear axle, because the
mechanism is very close to the natural position of the hand of the driver. Selection
and engagement motions are coherent with those of the shifting bars and forks;
the engagement positions of the gear shifting lever were historically deﬁned by the
simplest solution of the most common architecture.

10.2 External Shifting Mechanisms

461

The solution is quite more complicate when engine and gearbox are mounted
transversely or when the lever is not mounted on the tunnel, but on the dashboard or
on the steering wheel shaft.

(cid:129) To convey the motion of the lever in a different direction; in fact, for example,
in a front wheel driven car with transversal engine, the engagement motion in
the gearbox is transversal, while the corresponding motion of the shift stick is
longitudinal, when the lever is on the tunnel or on the dashboard, or almost vertical,
when the lever is on the steering wheel shaft.

(cid:129) To maintain the engagement position of the shift stick unchanged, with reference
to the neutral, even if the powertrain is moving, because of the vehicle vertical
acceleration or because the torque variation; the problem is particularly important,
because on the front wheel driven cars the powertrain is reacting also to the wheel
traction force.

(cid:129) To guarantee a precise and positive feeling on the lever with a limited shifting

effort.

We now try to deﬁne the attributes given on the previous sentence:

(cid:129) Precision is the capacity to maintain unchanged the engagement positions of the
shift stick, in any working condition or, at least, unchanged with reference to the
neutral position.

(cid:129) Positivity is the capacity to react to the drivers hand in a consistent way; drivers
appreciate limited efforts for the selecting motion and for the ﬁrst part of the
engagement stroke; higher efforts are accepted and expected at the end of the
engagement stroke, but they must quickly vanish, when the gear has been engaged.
(cid:129) Smoothness is the capacity to limit the variation of the reaction force with reference
to an ideal archetype; the reaction force must be not only small but must also show
small variation in different manoeuvres; the opposite of smooth is a shift stick
sticking and slipping.

Stick and slip occurs when two elastic parts are in contact and between them is
present a relevant friction: an example is a rubber eraser on a drawing paper. The
resulting motion between the two elements is characterized by a series of small
displacements, with an initial part due to elastic deformation and a following one
with real slip, that interrupts when adhesion is again reestablished.

10.2.1 Bar Mechanisms

A bar mechanism is a mechanical system made of bars articulated by means of
spherical heads. Some bars in the longitudinal direction replicate the motion of the
lever in a position close to the engine; other bars in the transversal direction connect
the end of these bars with the internal shifting mechanism.

462

10 Shifting Mechanisms

The widest motions of the powertrain (rotations caused by the reaction torque and
vertical oscillations due to the road uneven surface) are contained in the x z plane of
the vehicle reference system; these motions won’t push the transversal bars.

Figure 10.6 shows an application example to be matched to a single bar calliper

and ﬁnger interlocking device gearbox.

The shift stick is connected to the bar 1 for the selection motion, with a pivot with
transversal axis; the selection motion will rotate the bar around its axis and will leave
the lever free to perform the engagement motion. Bar 1 is mounted longitudinally.

A second bar 2 is linked to the shift stick in a different point, again with a pivot with

transversal axis; the engagement motion of the lever shifts this bar longitudinally.

The two motions are decoupled; the end of the bar 1 shows a ﬁnger that moves

transversely a second bar 3.

A rocker arm 4 converts the longitudinal motion into transversal motion of the

bar 5. Bars 3 and 5 move the internal shifting mechanism in the gearbox.

All articulated heads of bars 1 and 2 and of the rocker arm 4 are mounted on the

plates A and B, ﬁxed on the car body.

If bars 3 and 5 have a sufﬁcient length, all powertrain motions contained on the
plane x z will move the lever in a negligible way. The powertrain motion on the yz
plane is usually very small, because the engine suspension in this direction is very
stiff, since there are no vibrations to be ﬁltered.

The behavior of this mechanism can be adequate to his mission if clearance on

pivots is limited and the lubrication of bearings is acceptable.

This target is sometime difﬁcult to be reached because parts are exposed to dust
and splashed water. In addition to that the sealing on the plate A, that insulate the
passenger compartment from dust and noise, where bars are crossing the ﬁrewall,
can introduce stick and slip on their motion. These mechanisms are progressively
abandoned in favour of the cable mechanism.

10.2.2 Cable Mechanism

Figure 10.7 shows a cable mechanism. In this example the shift stick is mounted on
a spherical joint, made on the plastic element 3; two different cable ends are present:
1 for the selection motion, 2 for the engagement motion.

The end 2 is ﬁxed to the lever and copies the engagement longitudinal motion; the
end 1 through a rocker arm articulated in 5 moves again longitudinally, but copies
the transversal selection motion.

It should be noticed that the lever knob has a sliding collar 6 that in his natural
position, imposed by a spring, avoids the selection of the reverse speed, because of
the interference with the nose 7; reverse speed can be selected only if the collar is
voluntarily pulled up.

Internal shifting mechanism is the same as in the previous paragraph. The two
basic motions of the lever are transmitted to the internal shifting mechanism by two
ﬂexible cables (detail A).

10.2 External Shifting Mechanisms

463

Fig. 10.6 View of a bar external shifting mechanism; bars 3 and 5 are not affected by the suspension
motions of the powertrain; therefore the suspension motion don’t affect bars 1 and 2 and the
engagement position of the shift stick (FCA)

464

10 Shifting Mechanisms

Fig. 10.7 Detail of a shift stick with cable mechanism; detail A shows the complete lever, while
detail B shows the cable itself (FCA)

10.2 External Shifting Mechanisms

465

A ﬂexible cable (detail B) is made with a multilayer steel wire sliding inside a
sheath. The wires are wound on a cylindrical helix and, thanks to the good lubrication
granted by the sheath protection are very resistant but very ﬂexible too.

Cable shows a mechanical resistance higher than that of a wire of the same cross
section, but his rigidity is only multiple as that of a single wire. The sheath is made
with a spirally wound ﬂexible sleeve, inserted in a plastic tube completely sealed
from the outside.

The sheath is comparable to a structure which ﬂexible in bending but very stiff in
compression; it must be installed with bending radii not smaller than about hundred
times the cross section diameter and with lengths a little bit larger than what necessary,
in order to compensate for the powertrain motion.

If this last can happen without changing the sheath length the motion of the
internal shifting mechanism will replicate the shift stick knob motion very accurately.
Smoothness is conditioned by friction between cable and sheath.

Precision and positivity are also affected by mountings stiffness at the sheath ends;

the stiffness of these mountings is conditioned by powertrain vibrations.

In fact, stiff mountings could be very efﬁcient in transmitting noise and vibration
to the drivers hand and to the passenger compartment; but it is very important that
brackets sustaining the cable ends are very stiff, to not affect negatively the trade-off
between manoeuvrability and comfort.

Mechanical efﬁciency is affected by contacts between cable and sheath; contacts
are caused by bending diameter and length. Lubrication conditions and local contacts
at the cable ends may also inﬂuence mechanical efﬁciency.

Chapter 11
Start Up Devices

11.1 Friction Clutch

11.1.1 Clutch Functions

In clutches friction is applied to transmit the torque between an input and an output
shaft. It is built with three discs; two of them are connected to the engine crankshaft
and one, between the other two, is connected to the gearbox input shaft. These discs
are respectively named driving plates and driven plate.

Driving plates can change their distance and their load applied to the driven plate,
through a suitable mechanism; through this mechanism the plate can be disengaged
or engaged with a variable torque.

A spring system, as a matter of fact, provides the pressure force between driving
plates and driven plate, in such a way as friction forces can be established between
the discs; the intensity of the thrust determines the value of the transmitted or trans-
mittable torque.

The distinction between transmittable and transmitted torque refers to two dif-

ferent conditions:
• Clutch completely engaged, without relative motion between the discs.
• Clutch partially engaged with relative angular speed between the driving and the

driven discs.

In the ﬁrst case the transmitted torque is equal to the engine torque and can be at
maxim equal to the friction torque between the discs; in the second case the torque
is determined by the spring load and is equal to the friction sliding torque between
the discs.

The function of the clutch is the following:

• To transmit the torque from the engine crankshaft to the gearbox input shaft, when
there is a difference of speed between the two parts, in particular when vehicle is
stalling or moving back.

• To connect positively the two shafts, once they are synchronized, in such a way as

to transmit all the engine torque.

• To separate engine and transmission, when transmission speed must be changed

or the car stopped, without stopping the engine.

In addition to these functions, these functions have been added, in recent times:
• To absorb torque pulses caused by the engine polar inertia, in case of misuse of

the clutch (main torsion damper).

• To control the driveline torsional stiffness, in such a way as to avoid vibration
and noise when harmonic frequencies of the engine torque match transmission
vibration modes (secondary torsion damper).

The springs of the clutch, formerly of helical type, are now diaphragm type,

because of the advantages they offer:
• Reduction of powertrain length, at the same level of torque.
• Reduction of parts number.
• Easy reduction of weight unbalance, because of geometrical simplicity.
• Simpliﬁcation of the internal engagement mechanism.
• Wear doesn’t affect maximum transmittable torque.
• Reduction of disengagement load on the clutch pedal.
• Diaphragm springs are insensitive to centrifugal forces; on the contrary, helical
springs with cwnter line parallel to rotation axis are loosing load because of the
centrifugal acceleration deﬂection.

Figure 11.1 shows the cut-out view of a diaphragm spring clutch; the engine shaft
1 is ﬂanged to the ﬂywheel 2 which presents one of the active surfaces of the driving
plate. Cover 3 is also ﬂanged to the ﬂywheel and puts in rotation the second driving
plate, pushed by the diaphragm spring. On the driven plate 4 are mounted friction
linings; the driven plate has a spline on the gearbox input shaft 5.

The thrust bearing 6 can be axially moved and reduce the reaction thrust of the
spring, until the driven plate is disengaged. The bearing can slide on the tube 7 and is
moved by the fork 8. The assembly of the moving driving plate, also called pressure
plate, of the cover and the related elements utilized for the disengagement are called
internal disengagement mechanism.

11.1.2 Disengagement Mechanism

Figure 11.2 reports a schematic cross section of a double mass ﬂywheel clutch that
will be explained later on. If we neglect for this time the increased complexity of the
driving plate, we can consider the clutch as composed by two main parts: one part is
the working surface machined on the engine ﬂywheel and a second working surface
facing the ﬁrst one, rotating with the ﬁrst, but free to move axially.

The picture represents on the left the engaged clutch, on the right the disengaged
clutch. Some important details can be observed: the gearbox input shaft is centred

11.1 Friction Clutch

469

Fig. 11.1 Cut-out view of a diaphragm spring clutch (Valeo) 1: engine shaft. 2: engine ﬂywheel
and driving plate. 3: cover and internal engagement mechanism. 4: driven plate. 5: gearbox input
shaft. 6: thrust bearing. 7: thrust bearing guide. 8: disengagement fork

Fig. 11.2 Cross section of a double mass ﬂywheel clutch, represented at left in engaged condition,
at right in disengaged condition (Valeo)

470

11 Start Up Devices

Fig. 11.3 Cut-out view of a clutch internal disengagement mechanism (Valeo). 1: cover. 2:
diaphragm spring. 3: fulcrum of the spring. 4: ring retainer of the spring. 5: pressure plate. 6:
pressure plate strap

and aligned with the engine crankshaft. The two driving plates should be connected
by a device (not shown on this picture) that should be able to transmit the torque
but that should leave the axial motion free; the driven plate is mounted with a spline
shaft on the gearbox input shaft, because it should adapt its axial position. By moving
axially the thrust bearing, the spring diaphragm can be deﬂected until the force on
the pressure plate is brought to zero.

The second element of the driving plate, the pressure plate, shown on the Fig. 11.3
with the number 5, is made by a moving disc connected to the stamped steel cover
by means that can transmit the necessary torque, but can leave the disc free to be
moved axially.

This goal can be achieved using three ﬂexible straps 6 (3 at 120◦) that are riveted

to the cover and to the pressure plate.

The diaphragm spring 2 is mounted between the pressure plate and the cover and
is retained by the ring 4 in the fulcrum 3. All the above elements are part of the
internal disengagement mechanism.

The diaphragm spring is represented on Fig. 11.4; it is made by a tapered steel disc
with a number of radial cuts to increase its ﬂexibility; each cut ends with a circular
ﬁllet that reduces the local stress and is also used as a centring reference.

The spring rests on its larger circumference on the pressure plate and is pressed
by the cover through a fulcrum circular area. The spring conical deﬂection provides
the necessary pressure force.

On the same ﬁgure is shown the elastic characteristic of the spring. The aspect
ratio h/t between the height of the conical reference surface and the thickness of
the diaphragm is used as a parameter of the pressure force-elongation diagram; the
diagram isn’t linear but shows an “S” shape with a maximum and a minimum. It is
possible to use this feature to avoid the force reduction on the pressure plate, due to
the driven plate wear, which is typical on the coil springs.

11.1 Friction Clutch

471

Fig. 11.4 Diaphragm spring. On the lower right graph is shown the elastic characteristic of springs
of different aspect ratio, between the thickness t and the height h

In fact, let us compare the diagrams shown on Fig. 11.5 for a simple coil spring set
and a diaphragm spring. The friction linings wear decrease the driven plate thickness,
during its useful life.

In case of coil spring, if we assume that the thickness of the new plate is 8 mm and
the maximum design wear is 2 mm, it is possible to see that, starting from the new
clutch design point, the force on the pressure plate is reduced by spring deformation
loss.

At a certain life time pressure can be as much reduced as to cause clutch slippage
and driven plate wear-out. On an equally speciﬁed diaphragm spring, it is possible to
maintain the same pressure also at the end of the lining useful life, with no slippage
danger. There is a second advantage too; if we assume that the disengagement stroke
is also equal to 2 mm, the force on the mechanism is increased by about 1 kN with
the coil spring, while it will be reduced by almost the same value with the diaphragm
spring.

It should be noticed that as the driven plate wear increases, the spring inner
circumference will become closer to the thrust bearing; this last must therefore be
retracted, in such a way as the bearing is never put in motion at released pedal.

The fulcrum between spring and pressure plate can be made according to different
solutions, shown on Fig. 11.6 for a pushed spring (ﬁrst two ﬁgures) and for a pulled
spring (third ﬁgure) version; push an pull refer to the thrust bearing motion during
the disengagement stroke.

472

11 Start Up Devices

Fig. 11.5 Qualitative diagram of the pressure plate force, as a function of the driven plate thickness
reduction, caused by wear

Fig. 11.6 Internal disengagement mechanisms with pulled disc (the ﬁrst two at left) and pushed
disc

In the ﬁrst case the fulcrum circumference is internal to the sitting surface of
the spring on the disc. The internal leaves of the spring must be pushed against the
ﬂywheel to disengage the clutch; the fulcrum can be made with brackets bent on the
cover and a ring spacer (second ﬁgure) or with riveted pins inserted on the ﬁllets of
the spring (ﬁrst ﬁgure).

In the second case the fulcrum circumference is external to the sitting surface and
the leaves of the spring must be pulled away of the ﬂywheel, in order to disengage
the clutch. The advantage of this second arrangement consists of a better use of the

11.1 Friction Clutch

473

available space inside the cover; in fact, at a given outside diameter of the ﬂywheel,
the steel cover is less stressed by bending, because the offset between the ﬂange and
the sitting circumference is reduced.

This advantage is paid buy a higher cost of the thrust bearing and makes this

solution suitable with high torque engines of reduced displacement.

11.1.3 Driven Plate

Figure 11.7 shows a drawing of a driven plate. His design is quite complex, especially
near the hub where there are the torsional dampers.

The plate is built with several steel discs. The ﬁrst, marked with number 1, is
the real hub and is mounted on a spline that ﬁts the gearbox input shaft. Two other
elements marked with 2 and 3 are made with two steel discs riveted with spacers;
the element 4 that supports the friction linings is also riveted to the disc 3.

The disc 4 has a particular shape (look also at the detail on the lower right). This
disc shows a number of separate sectors: the friction linings are riveted on them;
the sectors are bent off the main disc plane and the rivets are set on parallel planes.
With this arrangement friction linings are spaced and the two friction surfaces can
displace elastically along the axial direction.

Fig. 11.7 Driven plate (Valeo). The cross section shows the main and the auxiliary torsion dampers.
The detail on the right shows how friction liners are mounted on the disc, in order to make the
engagement progressive

474

11 Start Up Devices

Fig. 11.8 Magniﬁcation of the driven plate hub (Valeo). The diagram on the right shows the angular
displacement of the hub, as a function of the torque

The result of that is that the pressure force is limited by the disc elasticity and the
clutch engagement is more progressive. In addition to that, since the thermal gradient
on the pressure plate can cause a conical deformation, linings can better match this
shape, maintaining a distributed contact on driving discs surface.

The assembly of discs 2, 3, 4 is free to rotate of a certain angle, with reference to

the hub 1.

The three elements 1, 2 and 3 show four rectangular windows, where four coil
spring are press ﬁtted. If the torque acting on the disc is lesser than the total precom-
pression moment of the springs, the disc acts as a rigid body; if the torque is higher,
disc and hub can show a certain angular deﬂection.

Between the rotating elements, there are also two friction discs 5 and 6, pressed
through a diaphragm spring; when the hub is moving it is possible to waste part of
the elastic deformation work of the springs and damp the torsional vibrations. This
assembly is the main torsion damper.

In the following Fig. 11.8 a magniﬁcation of the hub 1 is shown. We can see that
it present the secondary torsion damper, similar to the previous one; the stiffness of
this second damper is much lower.

Only the hub 3 is ﬁxed on the input shaft, while the hub 1 can show signiﬁcant

angular displacements, limited by a number of teeth.

On the same picture is shown a possible elastic characteristic of the hub assem-
bly; there is a central part of the diagram very ﬂexible (secondary torsion damper),
continuing in two stiffer ends (main torsion damper). The two ends of the diagram

11.1 Friction Clutch

475

Fig. 11.9 Cross section and exploded view of a double mass clutch and ﬂywheel. The torsional
damper is now included in the driving plate; the driven plate is very much simpliﬁed (Valeo)

can be asymmetric if coil springs in the rectangular windows are double (one inside
the other, of different length).

The stiffer damper is ﬁnalized to the idle rattle noise, while the softer one is

ﬁnalized to the rattling noise at low speed operation.

In some clutch these functions are not present on the disc, that is very simple, but
are ﬁtted on the driving plate, on the engine side; an exploded view of this plate is
shown on Fig. 11.9. The ﬂywheel and the driving plate are made with two masses
free to rotate independently on a ball bearing. Two long coil springs lowers the value
of the natural frequency of one of the masses; a damping device is also present.

The result that can be obtained with a suitable tuning is that the lowest natural
frequencies of the transmission, usually between 800 and 2000 rpm, can be shifted
below the engine idle speed and over the maximum speed where the transmission
noise can’t be detected by human ears; the results are particularly interesting in high
displacement engines.

The total inertia of the system is the same as that of the reference ﬂywheel;

therefore there are no effects on the engine torque ﬂuctuation.

11.1.4 Thrust Bearing

The thrust bearing, as we have seen, slides on a tube ﬂanged to the gearbox housing,
coaxial to the input shaft; this tube integrates usually the gearbox oil seal cover; see
part 7 on Fig. 11.1.

476

11 Start Up Devices

Fig. 11.10 Conventional thrust bearing (on the left) and bearing with integrated hydraulic actuator
(Valeo)

The thrust bearing is moved by a ﬁnger lever on the gearbox housing and is moved
by the clutch pedal through an external mechanism. The bearing on the left side of
Fig. 11.10 has a very simple shape and acts on the leaves of the diaphragm springs
directly.

The external disengagement mechanism can by made with a cable or a hydraulic

actuator.

The cable mechanism is similar to what we explained for the external shifting
mechanisms of the gearbox. As we have said, the cable assembly must be installed
with no sharp bends that negatively affect mechanical efﬁciency; a poor mechanical
efﬁciency can increase the disengagement pedal force and can introduce a hysteretic
behavior that can make pedal return disagreeable or difﬁcult.

The progressive friction linings wear on driven plate must be compensated with
a corresponding adjustment of the thrust bearing position; this adjustment shifts
the useful stroke of the pedal closer to the driver, with possible negative effects
on disengagement ergonomics. To avoid this inconvenience and to have the stroke
always correctly positioned, an adjustment nut must be provided on one of the rests
of the cable sheath.

Hydraulic circuits are progressively substituting cable mechanisms. A hydraulic
cylinder is linked to the pedal and operates through a pipe a hydraulic actuator, acting

11.1 Friction Clutch

477

Fig. 11.11 Self adjusting mechanisms compensating for the effects of wear on the driven plate
thickness (Valeo)

on the disengagement fork of the thrust bearing; sometimes is possible to integrate
this actuator on the clutch housing in such a way as to directly push on the thrust
bearing, with a simpliﬁcation of the mechanism, as it is shown on Fig. 11.10.

The hydraulic mechanism has the advantage of a better mechanical efﬁciency
almost independent on the piping lay-out; with a simple check valve between the
oil reservoir and the operating piston on the pedal side, it is possible to obtain an
automatic adjustment of the pedal stroke position easily.

Driven plate wear, also in case of pedal stroke adjustment, has the inconvenience
of increasing pedal actuation force, because of the elastic characteristics of the
diaphragm spring that was shown on Fig. 11.5; in addition to that, the inner space
left inside the clutch cover must take into account the adjustment of bearing stroke
caused by wear.

A deﬁnitive solution to all these problems is presented by the self adjusting internal
mechanism shown on Fig. 11.11. In this mechanism the diaphragm spring pushes the
pressure plate through a spacer 1, made of two steel sheet discs connected with
ﬂexible straps; the contact surface with the pressure plate is a helical ramp, so that
by rotating the spacer the driven plate thickness decrease can be compensated.

The spacer is turned by means of teeth 2 that match with the worm gear that is
magniﬁed on the right side of the picture; if, during a clutch engagement the driven
plate has decreased its thickness, the leaf spring 3 contacts the diaphragm spring and
rotates the worm gear until the contact between the two springs is lost, because the
worn thickness has been compensated.

478

11 Start Up Devices

With this device it is possible to keep mechanical clutch characteristics at the

design value and to reduce the axial length of the clutch cover.

Driven plate bending vibrations are caused by engine crankshaft. During high
engine speed disengagement manoeuvres, they can cause disagreeable noise and
pedal vibrations; both are transmitted through the disengagement mechanism.

This fact justiﬁes the application of rubber elastic bearings on sheath ends or of

a hydraulic capacity on the oil circuit.

In case of severe vibration problems, in example on high speed sport engines, when
the noise is propagating through other ways, the crown of the ﬂywheel is mounted
on its hub with a ﬂexible plate that compensates for crankshaft end ﬂuttering.

11.1.5 Design Criteria

While designing a clutch many points of attention must be taken into account:
• The disengagement force on the pedal shouldn’t be too high.
• The friction coefﬁcient must be as constant as possible in the different operating

conditions.

• The wear of the working surfaces must be sufﬁciently slow.
• The heat produced during engagement manoeuvres must be taken away.
• The clutch must operate correctly also with reasonable wear.

The friction coefﬁcient between discs and friction linings is ranging between 0.27

and 0.30 at acceptable temperatures.

Taking into account this value the diaphragm spring can be designed in such a
way as maximum engine torque can be transmitted with a safety margin of about
15%, with new and completely worn linings.

It is possible to calculate pedal force with new and worn linings from spring
characteristic; transmission mechanical efﬁciency must be also taken into account.
Typical values for a good cable mechanism range between 0.65 and 0.70; for a
hydraulic mechanism with piston and disengagement fork and ﬁnger the value can
reach 0.80. For an integrated hydraulic actuator the efﬁciency can be 0.90.

Friction is therefore not negligible in the calculation of the maximum disengage-
ment thrust (must be kept below 300 N); this value can’t be reduced by working on
the transmission ratio between pedal and bearing only, because the pedal stroke must
be kept under 150–200 mm; the elastic deformation of the mechanical chain between
pedal and thrust bearing must be also taken into account.

A useful design parameter is the mechanical energy wasted at start up; it can
be referred to the clutch useful friction surface and compared with similar values
obtained in successful cases; the same can be said for the temperature at the end of
a start up manoeuvres at maximum slope.

11.2 Start-up Devices for Automatic Gearboxes

479

11.2 Start-up Devices for Automatic Gearboxes

Gearbox automation requires using devices that can start up the vehicle smoothly,
without the help of the driver feeling; for this reason, devices different from the
clutch were developed, utilizing intermediate non mechanic energy, such as electric
or hydraulic one.

Today this issue is not so important, because it has also proven possible to automate
a conventional friction clutch, designed for pedal actuation, by using an electronically
controlled electro hydraulic actuator, with satisfactory results.

The hydraulic torque converter and the electromagnetic powder clutch, this sec-
ond on very few applications, are used with automatic gearboxes, for their intrinsic
comfort characteristics; they can only be matched with gearboxes where speeds can
be changed without torque interruption; as a matter of fact, the very high rotating
masses of these devices will cause a conventional synchronizer to work with a very
long engagement time.

The powder electromagnetic clutch is made with two ferromagnetic coaxial rings
that build the poles and the anchor of a magnetic circuit; the magnetic ﬁeld can be
set up by an electric coil on the outside ring, fed with sliding contacts.

The air gap is few millimeters thick; in the air gap a quantity of iron powder with
suitable granular dimension is inserted. The magnetic ﬁeld which builds up when the
current is switched on is causing the iron grains to align along the radial ﬁeld lines,
between the two poles; grains exchange friction forces each other and with the polar
surface. Friction brings the two poles to block while exchanging a torque depending
on the current intensity.

The electromagnetic clutch is easy to be controlled; on the other side the long
response time and the high inertia aren’t suitable to a synchromesh gearbox. The use
of this clutch is only justiﬁed by the reduced cost in comparison with hydrodynamic
clutches and torque converters.

The torque converter is a particular hydraulic machine that allows connecting
two shafts with a continuously variable transmission ratio. Opposite to gearboxes,
the input and the output torque values of the torque converter are not bound by
the energy conservation low, but by more complex relationships depending on the
transmission ratio.

If we name with (cid:2) the angular speed, with M the torque and with P the power
and we associate subscripts 1 and 2 to these magnitudes on torque converter input
and output shafts, we deﬁne:
• speed transmission ratio:

Sometimes 1 − ν or slip is used, in place of the speed transmission ratio;

• torque transmission ratio:

ν =

(cid:2)2
(cid:2)1

.

μ = M2
M1

.

11 Start Up Devices

480

• transmission efﬁciency:

Because, by deﬁnition:

as a consequence:

η = P2
P1

.

P1 = M1(cid:2)1 and P2 = M2(cid:2)2 ,

η = νμ.

(11.1)

Therefore, also neglecting mechanical friction, mechanical efﬁciency can be less
then one in a torque converter; transmission ratios are governed directly by the
internal geometry of the machine and cannot be changed easily by means of external
devices.

In order to understand the converter operation could be useful to think about a
transmission made by a hydraulic pump and a hydraulic turbine connected one to
the other with suitable piping.

The pump is rotating with the engine and moves a certain ﬂow of oil from a suction
pipe to an outlet pipe; pipes are also connected to a turbine which is mechanically
linked to the gearbox input shaft.

A transmission like this has been used on ships to connect engine and propellers.
As a difference with a mechanical transmission, there is no positive link between
the two shafts, but the transmission ratio is determined by the inertia of the oil ﬂow
in the piping and in the hydraulic machines.

It is therefore possible to have the engine running when the transmission shaft is
for any reason stalling; as a matter of fact turbine blades cannot stop the oil and can,
in the mean time, receive a torque from the ﬂow.

Such a kind of transmission shows the following advantages:

• The transmission ratio can be continuously changed as a function of the torque

ratio.

• There are no wearing parts.
• There is a high damping capacity of torsional vibrations.
• There is no danger of stalling the engine as a consequence of a too high torque

insisting on the gearbox input shaft.

On the contrary we can think about the following disadvantages:

• Low transmission efﬁciency in all conditions.
• Increased transmission complexity.

As we have already commented, the converter cannot be easily cut off of the drive-
line and has a signiﬁcant polar inertia; this makes the application of conventional syn-
chronizers impossible: it is therefore necessary to use powershift gearboxes, where
shifting speed can occur in longer times, because there is no torque interruption.

11.2 Start-up Devices for Automatic Gearboxes

481

Fig. 11.12 Hydrodynamic clutch scheme; P is the centrifugal pump and T the turbine. The arrows
show the direction of ﬂow when the pump speed is greater then the turbine speed

The kind of lay-out we have imagined could be too bulky for vehicle application;
H. Föttinger had the idea to integrate the pump and the turbine in a single compact
machine, avoiding connecting pipes.

This result was obtained by applying turbine and pump wheels of similar radial
dimension. In this case the wheels can face each other creating the hydraulic circuit
without additional elements.

Figure 11.12 shows a scheme of this lay-out; the pump is made with a radial bladed
wheel P, where the disc supporting blades shows a cavity, where the turbine T can
be installed.

The pump is connected to the engine crankshaft. The volume where the oil ﬂows
is limited by the rotating discs, by blades and by the closure surface C, which can
also be avoided.

Turbine and pump are almost identical; the two wheels must be positioned with
the same center line and a rotating seal must be provided, to keep the oil inside. The
proposed scheme doesn’t show any stationary wheel suitable to receive a reaction
torque. Input and output torque must in this case be equal; this particular machine is
called hydraulic clutch and acts like a friction clutch.

This machine cannot transmit any torque if there is no speed difference between
pump and turbine; in fact, the oil ﬂow rate determines the transmitted torque and
it becomes zero when speeds are equal. If wheels had a different geometry, the
transmitted torque would be zero when the ﬂow rate would stop.

Figure 11.13 shows instead the scheme of a torque converter; as a difference with
the previous one that includes only the pump P and the turbine T, there is a third
stator bladed wheel S, call also reactor wheel, connected to a standing element, like
the gearbox housing.

482

11 Start Up Devices

Fig. 11.13 A torque converter scheme is represented on the left. A picture of the elements of a
torque converter is shown on the right

In this case the torque on the pump and on the turbine might be different, because

the reacting element can equal the algebraic difference of torque.

If, as it occurs more frequently, the output torque is greater than the input torque,
the reaction torque must have the same direction of the input torque. On the opposite,
if the input torque should be less than the output torque, the reaction torque should
have an opposite direction as the input torque.

If the stator is connected to the gearbox housing with a freewheel that can only
withstand a torque with the same direction as the input torque, the machine could
multiply the input torque or behave like a hydraulic clutch, when the output torque
equals or is greater than the input torque.

The picture at the right of the scheme shows a disassembled torque converter

completely made with stamped steel sheet parts.

11.2.1 Hydraulic Clutches and Torque Converters

In order to understand the operation of a rotating bladed wheel, we consider a wheel
with a single, almost radial, channel whose walls show angles β1 and β2 at the outer
intake radius and at the inner exhaust radius, as shown on Fig. 11.14.

We call r1 and r2 the outer and the inner radii of this wheel.
The wheel is struck by a mass ﬂow rate Q, coming out of a nozzle that is inclined
of the angle α1 with respect to the tangent to the outside diameter of the wheel.
We call c1 the output velocity of the oil from the nozzle; for sake of simplicity we
suppose the speed to be constant at any point of the cross section of the ﬂow.

11.2 Start-up Devices for Automatic Gearboxes

483

Fig. 11.14 Speed triangles on a bladed wheel invested by a nozzle with an output speed c1 inclined
of an angle α1

The torque insisting on the bladed wheel will be given by the difference between
the mass ﬂow momentum at the intake and the exhaust of the channel on the wheel.
The two speed triangles at the input and output cross section of the ﬂow allow us to
calculate the absolute speed of the ﬂow when leaving the wheel.

Particularly the input speed c1 can be considered as the vectorial sum of the oil
speed relative to the channel and of the speed of the oil considered as part of the
channel; the ﬁrst speed is w1, whose direction is parallel to the walls of the channel
at the intake cross section of the channel, the second speed is the peripheral speed of
the wheel at the radius r1 that we call u1.

The absolute speed at the exhaust cross section c2 can be calculated starting from
the speeds u2 and w2 at the exit of the channel; it can be noticed that the ﬁrst is
deﬁned by the radius r2 and the second from the continuity of the mass ﬂow in the
channel: its direction is again tangent to the walls of the channel and its module will
be equal to the module of w1 multiplied by the ratio of the areas of the two cross
sections.

The momentum at the intake of the wheel is:

Qc1 cos α1r1,

while the momentum at the exit of the wheel is:

484

11 Start Up Devices

Fig. 11.15 Speed triangles in a hydraulic clutch

Qc2 cos α2r2.

The torque on the wheel will be therefore:

M = Q(c1 cos α1r1 − c2 cos α2r2).

(11.2)

It is sufﬁcient to know the intake and exhaust angles of the blades and the related
radii to determine the torque on the wheel with the approximations that we have
introduced. The case of the hydrodynamic clutch and of the torque converter is
complicated by the fact that the intake absolute speed is unknown, because it is
bound to speed of the preceding wheel.

Let us consider for instance the case of the hydrodynamic clutch that is introduced
on Fig. 11.15. P is again the pump, while T is the turbine; the blades are perfectly
radial.

We assume that the oil is incompressible and the current line are perpendicular
to the separation plane between the two wheels and, therefore, parallel to the wheels
axis. The ﬂuid is moving according to organized vortices with their axis perpendicular
to the axis of the wheels.

11.2 Start-up Devices for Automatic Gearboxes

485

If we consider the separation plane between the two wheels, we could draw on
it a circumference (dots and lines on the ﬁgure) separating two constant ﬂows of
opposite direction.

The cross section between the blades that are inside and outside of this circum-

ference will have the same area, because the oil is incompressible.

If the speed is constant on the cross section we can calculate the speed on the
centres 1 and 2 for the pump and 3 and 4 for the turbine; the calculation can be
repeated with same results for all the other blades.

In a generic operation point the speeds (cid:2)2 and (cid:2)1 of the turbine and of the pump
won’t be equal; more likely, because the pump is the moving element his speed will
be greater than that of the turbine. On the facing points 1 and 4 at the intake of the
pump, the speed c1 will be determined by the two components:

w1 e u1 = (cid:2)1r1.

Pay attention not to confuse the subscripts of the angular speeds bound to turbine

and pump, with those of oil speeds that are bound to the passage sections.

In the same way the speed triangle at the facing turbine section can be built; it is
shown on the ﬁgure and takes in to account that the two components w1 and w4 are
equal because the cross sections are equal.

The vectorial difference:

c1 − c4 = u1 − u4

(11.3)

represents a part of the linear momentum of the pump that can’t be utilized by the
turbine, because of the difference of rotational speed of the two wheels.

In the same way we can proceed on sections 2 and 3, if we remember again that

the components w are equal to those of the sections 1 and 4.

At the intake of the pump, on section 1, there is an energetic loss due the fact that
the ﬂuid is given by the turbine at a peripheral speed lower than that of the pump
and this last must provide for a theoretically sudden acceleration; this type of loss is
called impact loss. In the same way at the intake of the turbine, on section 3, there
is a sudden deceleration of the ﬂow, due to the same cause; if we take in mind the
impact losses the speed triangles of the two wheels will be the same on points 1, 4
and 3, 2.

The torque on the wheels will be:

M1 = M2 = Q (u2r2 − u4r1) = Qu2r2

= Qu2r2

1 −

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

,

ω2r1r1
ω1r2r2

(cid:3)

(cid:2)
1 − u4r1
u2r2

(cid:4)

(cid:2)

(cid:5)

(cid:3)
2

.

r1
r2

M1 = M2 = Qu2r2

1 − ν

(11.4)

If we calculate the power from this last equation, we obtain again the Eq. 11.1,

or:

where μ = 1:

486

11 Start Up Devices

Fig. 11.16 Speed triangles in a torque converter

η = P2
P1

= ν.

The above formulas don’t take into account friction losses in the oil and windage
losses on wheels. These last are negligible until the transmitted torque is high. Friction
losses in the oil, said hydraulic losses can be imagined as a function of the square of
the ﬂow speed w, according to the formula:

Pa = k Qw2,

(11.5)

where k is a constant depending upon the nature of the surface of the blades.

In the case where wheels have the same rotation speed, pressures values they gen-
erate on the ﬂuid at the outside boundary between the wheels are equal an opposite.
In this case there won’t be any oil circulation and the ﬂow rate must go to zero; as a
consequence the processed torque and power are also zero.

In the same way the case of a torque converter could be treated.
On Fig. 11.16 the scheme of a torque converter is drawn; on the schematic cross
section on the right of the ﬁgure the dotted lined represents the center line of the
channel between to next blades, joining the centres of the different cross sections.

These centres are determined by discs and blades of the pump P, the stator S and
the turbine T and by the internal walls that are now present; the position of these
walls is such as to obtain a circulation speed w almost constant.

We imagine drawing on the rotation surface, generated by this line around the
converter axis, traces of blades and developing this surface on a plane. We can come
to the scheme on the centre of the ﬁgure relative to the blades.

On the right side of the same ﬁgure there are the speed triangles that can be built

in the same way they were built for the hydrodynamic clutch.

11.2 Start-up Devices for Automatic Gearboxes

487

The sections 1, 2, 3 are relative to the transition points between stator and pump,
pump and turbine, turbine and stator. To the speed w is given a second subscript,
according to the converter element they are referring to.

On the transition point between an element and the following one, speeds c are
conserved, speeds u are calculated from the radius r of the centre of the section they
refer to, speeds w are tangent to the blade walls.

Because the module of w is determined by the continuity equation of the mass ﬂow,
only in one condition that is shown on the ﬁgure there will be no impact losses. This
condition is called design point. At these conditions the efﬁciency will be maximum
and determined only by hydraulic losses. At conditions different as the design point,
the geometry of blades will cause also impact losses.

It is usual for torque converters and hydrodynamic clutches to use the principles

of similarity.

The reference geometric dimension is a diameter, usually the outer diameter of
the largest wheel D; if ρ is the mass density of the ﬂuid we can deﬁne a performance
coefﬁcient λ deﬁned by the formula:

M1 = λρω2

1 D5.

(11.6)

Two machines are similar if their linear dimensions are in scale and blade angles
are equal; if two machines are similar, the torque absorbed by the pump will be
deﬁned by the same performance coefﬁcient λ.

The non dimensional entities such as η and μ in similar machines will be also

equal at the same value of ν.

11.2.2 Characteristic Curves

Figure 11.17 represents in a qualitative way the characteristic curves of a hydro-
dynamic clutch; these characteristics include the performance coefﬁcient λ and the
efﬁciency η. It should be observed that the performance coefﬁcient is multiplied by
10,000.

λ is decreasing with the speed transmission ratio, because the processed torque
is depending upon the ﬂow, determined by the speed difference of the wheels; when
the wheel are synchronous, ν = 1 and the torque is zero. The efﬁciency should be
always equal to the speed transmission ratio but at ν = 1. At this point it goes also
to zero.

This fact is justiﬁed if we take into account windage losses and rotating seal
friction; since the processed power at synchronous speed is zero, even small losses
will cause the efﬁciency to go to zero too.

In a hydraulic clutch, the torque transmission ratio is equal to 1, by deﬁnition.
Figure 11.18 represents instead the characteristic curves of a torque converter;
characteristics include in this case λ, η and μ, the torque transmission ratio. It should
be observed that, also in this case, λ is multiplied by 10,000.

488

11 Start Up Devices

Fig. 11.17 Characteristic
curves of a hydraulic clutch
representing λ and η as
function of ν. λ is multiplied
by 10,000

Fig. 11.18 Characteristic
curves of a torque converter
representing λ, η and ν as a
function of ν. λ is multiplied
by 10,000

Since there is a reaction element, torque transmission ratio isn’t constant; the
torque absorbed by the pump doesn’t change very much as the speed transmission
ratio increases, because of the reactor wheel.

Torque transmission ratio starts from a value of about 3–4 when the speed trans-
mission ratio is zero, when the output shaft is stalling and goes to zero when the
input and output shaft are synchronous; as a consequence, the efﬁciency that is the
product of the two transmission ratio will be zero as ν = 0 and ν = 1.
On the same ﬁgure some typical operation conditions are shown:

• S, stands for stall, is the condition where the turbine is still and the pump is rotating.
• L, stands for lock-up, is the condition where the torque on the pump and the torque

on the turbine are equal, so torque transmission ratio is one.

• F, stands for free ﬂow point, is the condition where torque on the turbine is zero.

All curves can be justiﬁed by the construction of the speed triangles and by the

principles of similarity.

The Trilok torque converter, named after the American research consortium that
was in charge of its development, provides for a reactor wheel mounted on a free
wheel that can react to torques only, who have the same direction as the input engine
torque. With this provision, at the lock-up condition the reactor wheel is free; in fact,
from this point on, the turbine should receive a torque lesser as the pump and, as a

11.2 Start-up Devices for Automatic Gearboxes

489

Fig. 11.19 Characteristic
curves of a Trilok torque
converter representing (cid:2) λ,
μ and η as a function of ν. λ
is multiplied by 10,000

consequence, the reactor wheel should withstand with a torque opposite to the engine
torque.

If the reactor is free wheeling, the torque converter will behave as a hydrodynamic
clutch; therefore the efﬁciency, as it is shown on Fig. 11.19, will become linear at the
point L, with a steep decrease to zero at the point F. From the point L on, also torque
transmission ratio will remain constant, instead of going to zero.

As a ﬁrst approximation, Trilok torque converters show, at any operation con-
dition, the best efﬁciency value between the hydrodynamic clutch and the torque
converter.

11.2.3 Torque Converter Performance on a Vehicle

Matching a torque converter to an engine and to a vehicle implies the performance
calculation of a system including engine, torque converter and vehicle; it can be made
taking into consideration a diagram where engine torque curve and pump torque curve
are represented. Because pump and engine are rotating together, the engine speed is
also representing the pump speed.

Once the torque converter diameter is chosen, λ has been deﬁned; the torque

absorbed by the pump is a parabola.

We can start drawing diagrams represented on Fig. 11.20. They represent the
torque absorbed by the pump at different values of the speed transmission ratio, the
engine output torque at wide open throttle Mmax and a torque curve Mr eg at partially
open throttle.

As a value for the speed transmission ratio is assumed, for the equilibrium of the
pump and engine system, engine speed will be forced at the value at the intersection
point of the engine torque and of the pump torque diagrams.

490

11 Start Up Devices

Fig. 11.20 Matching curves to the engine of a torque converter at different values of the speed
transmission ratio ν. It must be noticed that the operation speed is determined by the engine torque
and by the speed transmission ratio only

In order to change the matching point, engine torque must be changed.
Let us remember that the fact that engine can deliver the maximum torque at stall

is bound to the choice of the pump diameter.

From torque converter characteristic curves, gearbox input torque (torque con-

verter output torque) M2 can be calculated as the engine torque M1 is known.

The gearbox input speed (cid:2)2 will be given by the product of the engine speed (cid:2)1
by the speed transmission ratio ν; the gearbox input torque M2 will be instead given
by the product of the engine torque M1 by the torque transmission ratio μ.

The calculation can be done starting from the diagrams of Figs. 11.19 and 11.20,
for the wide open throttle engine torque; the procedure can be repeated for any values
of regulated engine torque.

The characteristic of the engine transmission system is shown on Fig. 11.21; it
can be observed how the very small part of the engine torque curve is expanded to
the gearbox input torque curve.

Two other cases are shown on the same diagram:

• the case of an ideal continuously variable transmission with mechanical efﬁciency

equal to one and

• the case of a slipping clutch with a safety margin of 15%.

The converter performance lays between the two reference curves, closer to the

ideal continuously variable transmission.

The traction curve of the vehicle T can now be drawn, as a function of the vehicle
speed V , multiplying M2 and (cid:2)2 by the different values of the gearbox transmission
ratios, utilizing the well known formulae:

V = (cid:2)2 Rr /τi , with i = 1, n,

11.2 Start-up Devices for Automatic Gearboxes

491

Fig. 11.21 Calculation of
the gearbox input torque M2
starting from the engine
torque M1. The values of the
speed transmission ratio of
the different curves are
shown. The values of M2 are
also reported for an ideal
continuously variable
transmission and for a
slipping friction clutch

T = M2τi ηt /Rr , with i = 1, n ,

where τi is the total transmission ratio of each speed of a gearbox with n speeds, Rr
is the wheel rolling radius, ηt is the transmission mechanical efﬁciency, not including
torque converter.

The time integration of the available power, according to the already known meth-
ods, can be made in order to calculate the performance of the vehicle with a torque
converter.

By the repetition of this procedure for a number of values of partially open throttle
torque, also the fuel consumption map of the engine and torque converter system can
be calculated; for each value of the engine torque, the associated value of the fuel
consumption can be divided by the corresponding value of the torque converter
efﬁciency.

The use of this new fuel consumption map can lead us to calculate the consumption

of the vehicle when the torque converter is working.

Sizing the torque converter in such a way as the engine converter system can
stall at engine maximum torque doesn’t always show as the best design praxis. It
is convenient to look also for different sizing criteria, with torque converters with
higher and lower diameters.

The ﬁrst will force the engine to work at lower speeds, the second at higher speeds.
The consequent change of the stall torque will also cause the traction curve to
change at wide and partially open throttle. The start-up transients will show differ-
ent duration and also different consumption. A trade-off between performance and
consumption can be studied.

We can say that the contribution of a torque converter can be compared with that
of an added range changer gearbox with variable efﬁciency and transmission ratio.
The poor efﬁciency of the torque converter has suggested using a lock-up clutch.
This last is done with a multi disc oil clutch whose closure is controlled by the
gearbox control system; when this clutch is closed the torque converter behaves as a
rigid joint.

492

11 Start Up Devices

The closure of the clutch is made when the pump and the turbine speeds are
very close; in these conditions the torque converter doesn’t contribute much to the
performance and is harmful for the efﬁciency.

It must not be forgot that by closing the lock-up clutch, also the mechanical
damping function of the engine is lost; therefore a spring damper is necessary and
sometime can be convenient to allow a controlled slip on the clutch, in order to avoid
torsional vibrations.

The closure of the lock-up clutch must be therefore always gradual. In some
automatic transmission of old generation this function is inhibited on lower gears; in
modern transmission the clutch is also modulated in order to avoid vibration without
jeopardizing the advantage on fuel consumption.

Chapter 12
Synchromesh Unit

12.1 Description

Synchronizers function is to enable changing of meshing gears couple, on a moving
vehicle without negative consequences on mechanical integrity and on interior noise.

During synchronization the clutch must be disengaged.

12.1.1 Sincronizzatore Semplice

The most widely diffused synchronizer is the Borg Warner one, named after the
manufacturer that developed it. Figure 12.1 shows a cross section of this synchronizer,
in its single cone version; there are, as usual, two synchronizers, for two neighboring
gears on the same shaft.

Gears are idle and are mounted on their shaft on needle bearings; they could be
mounted either on the input or on the output shaft and are constantly meshed with
those ﬁxed on the other shaft.

The two idle gears show on their neighboring side the synchronizer hub 3, ﬁxed
to the relative gear. The joint between the hub and the wheel can be made in different
ways: by laser welding, as in the ﬁgure, by spline shaft or teeth can be directly cut
or stamped on the side of the gear.

In this last case, there must be a sufﬁcient difference in radial dimensions between

the gearing teeth of the wheel and the selector teeth of the synchronizer hub.

The different fabrication technologies of the joint between the hub and the wheel
have a direct consequence on the length of the synchronizer assembly and of the
gearbox itself.

The hub 3 shows a crown of teeth on his outside diameter; the synchronizer ring
is free to move axially and matches with the hub through a tapered friction surface.
It can also match with the selector teeth of the sleeve 4, in such a way as to block the
rotation but leave the axial motion free.
Fig. 12.1 Cross section of a single cone Borg Warner synchronizer (FIAT). In the circle on the
upper part of the picture there is a prospective view of the synchronizer body 1. On the left the
positions of teeth of the hub 3, of the ring 2 and the sleeve 4 are sketched, in the different phases of
the synchronization process

The synchronizer ring 2, between the hub and the sleeve, acts as a friction clutch
that can synchronize the elements before the engagement of the teeth; how this can
be correctly made will be discussed on a following paragraph.

12.1.2 Multiple Synchronizers

Single cone synchronizers covered most applications until few years ago; in recent
times the target of shortening shift time without increasing the manual force applied
by the driver has been set. Multiple cone synchronizers have therefore been applied,
particularly on low gears where the synchronization work is higher.

Figure 12.2 shows a double cone synchronizer; this arrangement can be appropri-

ate to the mid gears of a large gearbox or for the lowest gears of a small one.

Let us look the different arrangement of the tapered rings of the synchronizer
hub. The hub is reduced to the teeth crown only but there is a tapered friction ring
connected to the hub in such a way ad to rotate with it with some freedom to move
in other directions.

Friction surfaces are machined on the inside and outside faces of this ring.
The matching tapered surfaces are made with two different elements ﬁxed to the
selector sleeve in a particular way. The outside surface has the same shape as a single

12.1 Description

495

Fig. 12.2 Cross section of a double cone synchronizer (FCA)

496

12 Synchromesh Unit

cone synchronizer, we will explain in detail later on; the inside surface is matched to
the outside one through a spline shaft that avoid rotation but leave certain freedom
along the radial and axial directions.

This freedom is necessary to compensate for the wear and alignment errors of the

friction surfaces.

On the following Fig. 12.3 two triple cone synchronizers are shown; this arrange-

ment is appropriate to ﬁrst and second gears.

Fig. 12.3 Cross section of a triple cone synchronizer (FIAT)

12.1 Description

497

In this case active friction surfaces of the hub are three; the innermost one is made
as that of a single cone synchronizer, while the remaining two are similar to those of
a double cone synchronizer.

Active sleeve surfaces are respectively arranged as a single cone synchronizer
(the outside one) and mounted on a spline with some axial and radial clearance (the
inside one).

The advantage shown by these arrangements is the multiplication of the syn-
chronization torque made by the number of friction active surfaces present on the
synchronizer; this allows the containment of the diameter of the ring, as compared
with a single cone synchronizer of same performance.

It is possible to synchronize gearshifts without using synchronizers. Rotating parts
should be accelerated during downshifts through the engine, after having engaged
the clutch. It should also be possible to slow down rotating parts by means of a brake
installed in the gearbox. This solution could prove of interest for the automation of
manual transmissions by electro hydraulic electronic control systems.

12.1.3 The Gearshift Process

Let us examine the implications of synchronizing a gearbox during a speed shift;
we will refer to a simple two speed single stage gearbox, shown on Fig. 12.4; power
ﬂows through the input shaft e to the output shaft u, trough two alternative gears
couples.

To shift speed, the sleeve must alternatively engage with one of the wheels, in

positions 1 and 2.

When couple 1 is engaged, if we call z1e and z1u teeth numbers on the two meshing

wheels and (cid:2)e and (cid:2)u shaft rotation speeds, we will have:

while the speed of the idle gear of couple 2 will be:

(cid:2)u =

(cid:2)ez1e
z1u

,

(cid:2)e,2 = (cid:2)e

(cid:2)

(cid:3) (cid:2)

(cid:3)

z1e
z1u

z2u
z2e

.

(12.1)

(12.2)

If we shift the sleeve to position two immediately, also after clutch disengagement,
a number of shocks will occur between dog teeth of the two wheels; noise and
structural damages could derive.

Synchronizing parts means bringing speed difference of moving parts to zero,
before positive engagement. Because it is obviously impossible to change the speed
of the u shaft, or the vehicle, without the help of the engine (the clutch is disengaged),
synchronizing means also changing rotation speed of parts bound to shaft e in such a
way as to delete the speed difference of the synchronizer body and the tooth wheel,
before dog clutch engagement.

498

12 Synchromesh Unit

Fig. 12.4 Scheme of the masses to be synchronized during the speed shift of a two speed single
stage gearbox

In our example, shifting from ﬁrst to second speed implies reducing the speed of

e, while during down shifts the same speed must be increased.

This operation needs a certain time delay, during which some energy must be
added or subtracted to the system. In the mean time, taking into account the total
driving resistance, the vehicle speed and the rotation speed of the shaft u will decrease.
In a downhill road the opposite may occur.

Rotating masses, whose speed must be changed, are represented by a ﬂywheel
of inertia Jd ; to its value contribute: driven clutch plate, gearbox input shaft with its
ﬁxed wheels (the constant gear wheels and the complete countershaft with its ﬁxed
wheels, in case of double stage gearboxes).

During a shift from second to ﬁrst, some energy must be introduced in the system,
while in the case of the shift from ﬁrst to second, some energy must be subtracted;
synchronizers perform this function through friction rings between the to masses to
be brought to the same speed.

The necessary energy to this manoeuvre in subtracted or added to the apparent
rotating mass of the vehicle, represented by a ﬂywheel of inertia Jv rotating at the
speed (cid:2)u. A vehicle deceleration or acceleration will therefore supply the synchro-
nization work. Since the inertia Jv is much greater then Jd the vehicle speed variation
will be negligible.

12.1 Description

499

We can therefore summarize functions performed by the synchronizer as follows:

• Adapting speed of parts to be synchronized by an energy transfer from one to the
other. The measure of this function is the synchronization time; it is a signiﬁcant
part of shifting time during which the vehicle is without traction.

• Positively joining of synchronized parts as to transmit the necessary torque; joint

must be stable on time with no danger of gear self disengagement.

• In addition to the above, the following additional functions must be assured:
• Measuring rotating parts speed difference, to identify the suitable moment to

engage the speed.

• Enabling positive engagement only when speeds are equal.

Let’s make again reference to Fig. 12.1 and examine additional details.
A magniﬁcation of the synchronizer body is shown on the upper left of the ﬁgure.
The body 5 shows a spline surface with 6 interruptions at 60◦; these interruptions are
replicated on the synchronizer ring 2.

Ring interruptions match with a deﬁned angular clearance with 3 big teeth on the

inside diameter of the sleeve.

The remaining three interruptions at 120◦ match with 3 push elements 5 that are
free to slide inside the three said elements, that are the sleeve, the body and the ring;
push elements show a radial hole in which a plunger with spherical head is ﬁtted and
is pushed by a coil spring against a seat on the inside of the sleeve.

Let’s assume that the gearbox is in neutral, with both engine and vehicle in motion

and the left wheel must be engaged.

We can identify ﬁve different phases of the shifting manoeuvre of the sleeve,
actuated by the shift stick; for each of these phases a schematic cross section is
drawn, showing a teeth view of sleeve, ring and hub developed on a plane.

1. The sleeve is pushed to the left against the reaction force of coil springs that try
to keep push elements 5 in neutral position. Elements 5 and big teeth push the
ring 2 and bring to contact the two matching tapered friction surfaces of ring and
hub. Since the two parts have different speed, a friction torque will arise against
ring and hub relative speed. The circumferential clearance between big teeth and
ring will allow a small rotation of this last; the clearance is designed in such a
way as the ring teeth stop the axial motion of the sleeve. See the detail a on the
upper right. This phase is called presynchronization because it doesn’t imply a
real energy exchange between moving parts.

2. Friction torque between ring and hub transfers energy from the heaviest part of
the system (the vehicle) to the lightest, in order to slow or to accelerate rotating
parts ﬁxed to the wheel to be shifted. Friction torque measures the relative angular
speed because it will go to zero with relative speed. The same torque provides
stopping sleeve motion until synchronization is completed. This phase is called
synchronization.

3. Before describing next phase, let us consider the shape of dog teeth on hub and
sleeve. They show a tapered end and a counter tapered surface. When ring and
hub are synchronous the friction torque is zero and dog teeth tapered ends rotate

500

12 Synchromesh Unit

the hub of the angular thickness of half tooth, under the pressure exerted by the
shift stick.

4. The sleeve is now free to move across the ring and to match the hub; again
teeth tapered end will rotate the hub if necessary. In this phase the push elements
plungers are completely retracted and do not withstand anymore sleeve motion.
5. Now a positive engagement is made; at the end of this phase the driver will stop
pushing shift stick; the counter tapered shape of dog teeth will retain the sleeve in
the engaged position under the action of the engine torque. The same shape will
exert a certain reaction to the shift stick, when the driver will start to disengage
the gear for the next speed shift.

12.2 Design Criteria

Synchronization torque determines shifting time duration which contributes to vehi-
cle acceleration time.

This torque is proportional to the force applied the shift stick; this last must respect

certain design conditions.

The force on shift stick knob must be kept below 80–120 N on a car, while 180–
250 N can be allowed on an industrial vehicle; synchronization time must be lower
than 0.15–0.25 s on a car, while on an industrial vehicle must be lower then 0.25–0.4 s.
Transmission ratios between shift stick knob and sleeve must be kept below 7–

12:1, to avoid too long shifting strokes.

When calculating the force available at the synchronizer, starting from the lever
force, mechanical efﬁciency of shifting mechanisms must be taken into account;
refer to what was said about the clutch mechanism.

Figure 12.5 reports synchronization times versus shifting force applied to stick
knob, for some manual single stage gearboxes, for shifts from fourth to ﬁfth and vice
versa; the values for up and down shifts are not the same, because the synchronization
works are different. The more effective the design, the shorter the synchronization
time at the same shifting force.

The effort on the knob isn’t the only judgment parameter. The shape of shift force
diagram versus lever stroke is very important too; Fig. 12.6 shows two diagrams of
two different gearboxes.

A good behavior is shown on the upper part of the ﬁgure by a force diagram
generally increasing with the stroke, featuring a ﬁrst peak m1 associated to the syn-
chronization phase and a second peak m2 at the end of the engaging phase.

With this lever mechanical response, drivers can perceive through a force increase
the beginning of the synchronization phase; the end of this phase is announced by a
sudden decrease of the reaction force. Drivers understand when shift stick must be
kept in place and when shifting manoeuvre can be completed quickly.

A second positive feature of the ﬁrst diagram is the good statistic consistency
between the results of different manoeuvres; this consistency allows the driver to get
quickly trained to the gearbox use.

12.2 Design Criteria

501

Fig. 12.5 Diagrams representing synchronization time (on the vertical axis) versus knob shifting
force (on the horizontal axis), for different single stage gearboxes and for shifts from fourth to ﬁfth
and vice versa

A bad behavior is shown on the lower part of the ﬁgure, where the phenomenon

of the double shock is also shown.

The double shock is measured by a third peak m3; this occurs when the ring must
turn at the synchronization phase end and must align his teeth with those of the
sleeve.

This phenomenon may be due to a too high friction coefﬁcient between the tapered
ends of teeth of ring and sleeve or of sleeve and hub. An unsuitable opening angle of
the tapered end or a different opening angle on different teeth can be the root cause
of this inconvenience. The opening angle difference between teeth can also cause
different behavior in different manoeuvres.

502

12 Synchromesh Unit

Fig. 12.6 Diagrams representing shift stick knob force (vertical axis) versus lever stroke (horizontal
axis) on a single stage gearbox with good and poor behavior (good on the upper side, poor on the
lower side): on the second diagram the double shock phenomenon is announced by the third peak m3

The double shock can lead drivers to wrong manoeuvres characterized by an
incomplete shift. The poor statistical consistency of the shifting force is particularly
disagreeable because makes the gearbox behavior unpredictable.

Reconsider what was said about gearbox shifting quality at the end of chapter

about shifting mechanisms.

12.2.1 Geometric Criteria

Ring and hub are represented with a simpliﬁed drawing on Fig. 12.7. Mean diameter
d and opening angle α of the tapered surface are shown.

12.2 Design Criteria

503

Fig. 12.7 Scheme of the force F acting on the synchronizer ring and of the pressure p between
conical surfaces

Ring and hub must only contact on their conical surfaces; it is necessary to provide
an axial clearance between parts to compensate for the allowed surface wear during
gearbox design life time.

Any force F applied to the sleeve originates a normal pressure p on contacting
surfaces; according to wear theory, this pressure is constant and if we call b the
conical surface width, it will be:

If we call with f the friction coefﬁcient between surfaces and with Ms synchro-

nization torque, we can write:

pbπ d sin α = F .

Ms = 1/2 pbπ d 2 f = Fd f
2 sin α

.

(12.3)

(12.4)

Therefore synchronization torque will increase, at the same shift stick knob effort,

if friction coefﬁcient will increase and opening angle will decrease.

But opening angle can’t be reduced indeﬁnitely, to avoid irreversible sticking of

cones.

This happens when the self unlocking force is lower than the friction force along
the unlocking direction; the self unlocking force is done by the normal pressure
resultant along the axial direction. Boundary sticking occurs when:

504

12 Synchromesh Unit

p tan α = p f ,

(12.5)

therefore rings can unlock spontaneously if:

tan α > f .

The only effective mean of increasing available synchronization torque is increas-
ing ring diameter or active surfaces number; this last possibility is exploited on the
multiple cones synchronizers, as shown in this chapter.

Figure 12.8 represents a schematic drawing of a single cone synchronizer, who
shows the different contribution to the total axial dimension of the assembly a;
contributions to be considered are the following:

• Accepted wear on working friction surfaces; a reference value can range between
0.1 and 0.15 mm; for a conicity of 1:10 the consequent axial clearance must be
greater than 1–1.5 mm ((cid:5)s).

• Gear torque that determines hub dog teeth width.
• Synchronization torque that determines ring dog teeth width.
• The geometrical condition of sleeve engagement and disengagement; sleeve width
must be at least double of dimension l coming out from ring and hub teeth width
and from dimension (cid:5)s.

• Synchronizer body width must be such as sleeve doesn’t engage any synchronizer

ring in neutral position.

Fig. 12.8 The axial dimension a of a double single cone synchronizer is determined by the design
wear projected on the axial direction and by dog teeth width of hub, ring and body

12.2 Design Criteria

505

12.2.2 Functional Criteria

If we assume that vehicle apparent rotating mass is much greater than that of parts
to be synchronized, the synchronization transient will be completely similar to that
of the clutch during the vehicle start-up and will be described with a single equation,
because with this assumption vehicle speed will remain constant.

If we call with Ms the synchronization torque, Ma the friction torque of the
mechanical losses of parts to be synchronized, (cid:2) the rotation speed of elements
upstream the synchronizer, Jr,eq the rotating mass of parts to be synchronized, we
can write:

Ms + Ma = −Jreq

d(cid:2)
dt

.

(12.6)

Because Ms and Ma are almost constant with speed, angular acceleration will be
constant on time while rotation speed will decrease constantly on time; during up
shifts the acceleration is negative, while during down shifts it will be positive.

Synchronization torque will always show an opposite sign as that of angular
acceleration, while friction torque will show the same sign as that of synchronization
torque during up shifts, when rotating masses must be slowed down.

In the above hypotheses thermal power Pmax and thermal energy E wasted by the

synchronizer are:

Pmax = Ms ((cid:2)2 − (cid:2)1) ,

E = 1
2

Jreq

((cid:2)2
2

− (cid:2)2
1

Ma ((cid:2)2 − (cid:2)1) (cid:5)t ,

) + 1
2

(12.7)

(12.8)

where subscripts 1 and 2 apply to initial and ﬁnal conditions.

Let’s now assume that we have to design the ﬁrst gear synchronizer of a two stage
gearbox, as far as the second to ﬁrst shift is concerned; the scheme of the gearbox is
shown on Fig. 12.9.

We call with zi gear teeth numbers (i refers to the gear number on the scheme)
and with Ji the related rotating mass. The equivalent rotating mass Jr,eq to put in the
above equation is that of all rotating masses up steam the synchronizer, reduced to
the gear 3:

Jreq

= J3 + (Jd + J1)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)
2

(cid:2)

(cid:3)
2

z3
z8
(cid:3)
2

(cid:2)

z7
z1
(cid:3)
2

+ (Jca + J7 + J8 + J9)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)
2

(cid:3)
2

(cid:2)

(cid:3)
2

z3
z8

+

(12.9)

+J2

z3
z8

z8
z2

+ J4

z3
z8

z9
z4

.

506

12 Synchromesh Unit

Fig. 12.9 Scheme for the calculation of equivalent rotating mass to be synchronized, during a gear
shift manoeuvre

Masses of synchronizers and of reverse idlers are neglected; Jca is the counter-
shaft’s rotating mass. Idle wheels on the countershaft mustn’t be taken into account,
because they are already synchronous with the output speed.

On the same gearbox, if the synchronizer is put on the countershaft, the rotating

mass will be:

Jreq

= J8 + Jca + J9 + (Jd + J1)

+ J2

,

(12.10)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)
2

(cid:2)

(cid:3)
2

z7
z1

z8
z2

because the remaining wheels will be rotating with the output shaft.

The advantage with this second conﬁguration can be noticed; it can be also noticed
that the rotating mass is decreasing notably while the speed order is increasing.
On a single stage gearbox the calculation will be simpler and conﬁrm the above
conclusions.

After rotating masses evaluation it is possible calculating synchronization time
as a function of the shifting force; in the same way wasted power can be calculated
and compared, as a design parameter, with other gearboxes of success.

The synchronizer reference speed is deﬁned by:

V = d
2

((cid:2)2 − (cid:2)1) ,

(12.11)

12.2 Design Criteria

507

Table 12.1 Reference design values for synchronizers made by steel/brass and steel/steel with
molybdenum coating
Material

V (m/s)

St./Br.
St./St,m.

f
(cid:2) 0.1
(cid:2) 0.1

5
7

Es (J/mm2)
0.09
0.53

Ps (W/mm2)
0.45
0.84

p (N/mm2)
3
6

showing the relative speed at the synchronizer reference diameter at the beginning
of the shift manoeuvre.

The empirical reference values, reported on Table 12.1, can be considered for the

above magnitudes.

by the synchronizer active surface.

dynamic ﬁlm should be avoided.

Speciﬁc power and energy are derived of wasted power and energy by dividing

Because a friction coefﬁcient as high as possible is wanted, a lubricated hydro-

Nevertheless synchronizers are splashed with lubricating oil; with reference to
what we said above synchronizers active surface is grooved or threaded; threads
should unwind at the relative speed.

If surfaces are grooved or threaded the reference surface area must be consequently

reduced.

Something more must be said about dog teeth tapered ends; tangential force
consequent to the opening mustn’t rotate the ring before synchronization has been
accomplished.

If we represent some of these teeth on Fig. 12.10, we can see that, under the action
of the shifting force F, the opening angle of the end sets up a torque of opposite
direction as the synchronization one; if the ﬁrst were greater than the second, the
shifting force would be as big as to engage the dog clutch before synchronization is
accomplished.

If β is the opening angle of the tooth and ds is the teeth mean diameter, the torque

acting on the ring will be:

ds F cot

,

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

β

2

1
2

d f F
2 sin (α) .

if we neglect friction on the end of the tooth; this torque mustn’t be greater then the
synchronization torque:

Materials matching for synchronization ring and hub must be determined taking

into account the following needs:

• Wear must be small also without the help of hydrodynamic lubrication.
• Materials must be easily machined.
• Friction coefﬁcient must be as constant as possible in production.

508

12 Synchromesh Unit

Fig. 12.10 Scheme for the calculation of the condition of possible engagement before the accom-
plishment of the synchronization

• Friction coefﬁcient must be insensitive to wear and temperature.
• Materials must withstand possible overloads.

As a matter of fact the available options are very few; hubs are usually made of Cr
Mn steel or Cr Mo steel. Rings can be made of special shot peened brasses or steel
coated with a molybdenum layer. Also a paper layer could be considered in future,
with advantage on the friction coefﬁcient.

Chapter 13
Differentials and Final Drives

Sometime, the names of differential, transfer box and ﬁnal drive are used imprecisely;
in addition to that these mechanisms are sometime integrated in the same subsystem
in almost all possible combinations. We try to introduce some deﬁnition to better
clarify this issue.

The differential is a mechanism that allows dividing the torque coming from an
input shaft in two predetermined parts ﬂowing through two output shafts; torques
ratios are independent of speed ratios of the same shafts.

This mechanism can be either used to divide the torque coming out of the ﬁnal
drive in to equal parts acting on the traction wheels of the same axle, or the torque
coming out of the gearbox in two predetermined parts acting on different axles of the
same vehicle; this second application is named sometimes transfer box differential
or central differential.

The ﬁnal drive is a gear train that further reduces the speed of the gearbox output
shaft to adapt it to the traction wheels; this gear train is usually integrated with a
differential mechanism. Under this name are also sometime included those speed
reducers that are put on the transmission line after the differential ﬁnal drive and are
integrated in the wheel hub.

The transfer box is a mechanism that provides to move two or more drivelines with
the only output shaft of the gearbox; this is used on vehicles with multiple traction
axles. When multiple axle traction is permanent also a differential is necessary to
allow different mean rotation speeds on the axles; in such case the differential train
is usually integrated in the transfer box.

13 Differentials and Final Drives

13.1 Differentials and Final Drives

There are different schemes according to vehicle drive kind; in all of them the dif-
ferential mechanism shows usually the same conﬁguration.

Look at the schemes shown from Figs. II.1 to II.3 to identify all possible conﬁg-

urations.

13.1.1 Rear Wheel Driven Cars

On rear wheel driven cars ﬁnal drives carry out the task of rotating the driveline axis
of 90◦, from the longitudinal gearbox centreline, to the transversal axle centreline.
On Fig. 13.1 the cross section of this subsystem is shown. Centreline rotation and
speed reduction are achieved through a couple of bevel gears with spiral teeth; the
wheel is bolted to a hub in order to allow the easy adaptation of the same production
line to different ﬁnal transmission ratios.

Shafts are supported by bevel roller bearings, because the axial thrust is relevant.
The differential train is made with straight teeth bevel gears, because their rotation
isn’t continuous and their speed is small. Planetary wheels are ﬁxed to half axles
through splines, while satellites are idle on a short shaft ﬁxed to a carrier through a
pin; the bevel gear wheel of the ﬁnal drive is bolted on this carrier.

Fig. 13.1 Cross section of a differential assembly for a rear wheel driven car with rear independent
suspensions (Mercedes)

13.1 Differentials and Final Drives

511

The differential assembly is a suspended one, used in connection with independent
suspensions: therefore half axles will be moved through constant speed joints, as in a
front wheel driven car. It should be remembered that a suspended differential casing
must react to the vectorial resultant of the wheel traction torque, acting on x z plane
and to the gearbox output torque, acting on yz plane; for this reason the casing
features a robust ﬁxation interface, to suspend it to the car body, usually through an
auxiliary frame.

It can be noticed, on the same ﬁgure, the small elastic tube on the bevel pinion
shaft; it allows controlling the axial preload on bevel roller bearings, compensating
for axial dimension tolerance.

In this application ﬁnal drive bevel gears feature hypoid teeth, because their centre
lines lie on different planes; this conﬁguration allows having transmission line on a
lower position with advantage for the interior roominess.

Planetary wheels and satellites thrust bearings are simple wear resistant washers,

because of the small relative speed value.

13.1.2 Front Wheel Driven Cars

On front wheel driven cars differential and ﬁnal drive are integrated in the gearbox;
the reaction torque is therefore acting on the powertrain suspension. We can identify
two cases where engine is transversal or longitudinal.

In the ﬁrst case, shown on Fig. 13.2, gearbox output shaft and wheels centre lines
are parallel; a couple of spur gear with helical teeth is sufﬁcient. The pinion is cut
on the output shaft and meshes with a wheel, which also in this case is ﬂanged to the
differential carrier.

The differential mechanism is very similar to the previous one. In this case planet
wheels thrust bearing are made with needle cages to improve mechanical efﬁciency.
A following paragraph will explain the inﬂuence of this mechanical efﬁciency on the
vehicle dynamic behavior.

For the longitudinal engine, shown on Fig. 9.9, there are no relevant differences
in comparison with the rear wheel driven case; usually hypoid teeth are unnecessary.
On Fig. 13.3 we see the differential assembly corresponding to the traction scheme
on Fig. II.1; the bevel pinion is ﬁxed on a very short transmission shaft that allows
shifting the front axle in front of the gearbox output shaft end.

Also the driving wheel of this short shaft is a bevel gear and a simple damper for
the ﬂexural vibration has been provided. This kind of architecture is necessary when
front wheel overhang must be limited or when automatic epicycloidal gearboxes are
used, where input and output shafts are aligned.

13.1.3 Industrial Vehicles

On industrial vehicles ﬁnal drive and differential train (Fig. 13.4) are integrated in
the same rigid structure supporting wheels and half axles, called rigid axle.

512

13 Differentials and Final Drives

Fig. 13.2 Differential and ﬁnal drive for a front wheel driven car with transversal engine (FCA)

Fig. 13.3 Differential and ﬁnal drive for a front wheel driven car with longitudinal engine; in this
case wheel axis is shifted forward in order to reduce front overhang (Audi)

13.1 Differentials and Final Drives

513

Fig. 13.4 Rigid axle differential assembly for a heavy duty truck (Iveco). It can be seen on the
right half axle the differential lock dog clutch

Not considering the increased robustness of the group, there are no noticeable
differences in comparison with rear wheel driven cars: ﬁnal drive is made with bevel
gears with hypoid teeth. Wheels offset is used in this case in the opposite way as
before, to increase transmission shaft ground clearance.

On the right half axle a locking sleeve can be noticed; the lock is particularly

useful to improve start-up on a slippery road.

For construction or off-road vehicles transmission ratios obtained with a single
stage ﬁnal drive may not be sufﬁcient; transmission ratio is limited by the allowed
bevel gear dimension and by the minimum teeth number which can be cut on the
pinion once the pitch has been deﬁned.

This problem can be solved by installing an additional epicycloidal ﬁnal drive. In
this case the differential carrier can be integrated with the epicycloidal drive carrier,
where annulus gear is ﬁxed on the bevel wheel shaft; this way, the additional drive
doesn’t change rotation direction.

On urban busses is quite important to limit the ground height of the aisle ﬂoor.
Floor height and tire rolling radius deﬁne the maximum diameter of bevel gear wheel;
therefore, also in this case represented on Fig. 13.5, a spur gear ﬁnal drive is necessary
on the output shaft of the differential. This choice is motivated by the need of having a
bridge shaped rigid axle with the central part compatible with a low height aisle ﬂoor.

514

13 Differentials and Final Drives

Fig. 13.5 Rigid rear axle for urban busses (Iveco). The lower detail shows the additional ﬁnal
drives on the wheel hubs that shapes the axle like a bridge. Note the inclination of the input shaft,
caused by the transversal powertrain lay-out

The inverted bridge conﬁguration can be also used to increase ground clearance

on off-road vehicles; in this case will hubs will be lower as the half axles.

13.2 All Wheel Drive Transfer Boxes

On all wheel driven vehicles transfer box architecture is conditioned by two factors:
• The vehicle single axle traction conﬁguration the all wheel drive is derived of,

with reference to the architectures shown on Fig. II.3.

• The fact that the drive is permanent (can be used at any vehicle speed) or non
permanent (can be used occasionally at low speed on bad roads). In the ﬁrst case
a central transfer differential is also necessary, to avoid unnecessary tire wear and
additional rolling resistance when wheel speeds are different; in the second case
the differential can be avoided.

We consider drivelines derived of conventional rear wheel driven vehicles and

front wheel driven vehicle, either with transversal or longitudinal engine.

13.2 All Wheel Drive Transfer Boxes

515

13.2.1 Modiﬁed Rear Wheel Drives

The architectures in use are many; a possible classiﬁcation can derive of the vehicle
mission. We can identify off-road vehicles, where the main objective is to obtain a
good mobility on dirty and slippery roads and road vehicles, where the objective is
to reach superior stability and handling on paved roads at high speed also.

On off-road vehicles (scheme c, Fig. II.3), the transmission line is offset in com-
parison to the engine crankshaft to increase ground clearance. The transfer box is
also working for rear axle drive only; the transfer box lay-out is visible on Fig. 13.6.
Other functions are present; as a matter of fact the gearbox output shaft moves
a synchronized two speeds range reducer. The reducer output shaft moves a third
shaft featuring a bevel gear differential that provides splitting the torque for the two
axles. On the same ﬁgure a dog clutch is also shown; it can ﬁx the differential carrier
with the front planet gear, locking in this way the differential for slippery road at low
speed.

Fig. 13.6 Transfer box for a professional off-road vehicle (Mercedes). The transfer box integrates
the two axles drive through a bevel gear lockable differential and a range speed reducer with two
synchronized speeds

516

13 Differentials and Final Drives

Fig. 13.7 Transfer box for an all wheel drive on-road vehicle with longitudinal front engine (Mer-
cedes). The box integrates the axle drive with an epicyclical differential with slip control

The offset between crankshaft and transmission line is useful because it allows

using rigid axle suspensions without interference with the oil sump.

This type of transfer box can have a simple dog clutch to insert the front wheel

drive on low speed slippery road, instead of the differential.

On on-road vehicles, the original rear wheel drive line position is conserved; a
transfer box is added to move the front axle too, using always, in this case, a central
differential.

An example is shown on Fig. 13.7, where the motion to the front axle is given
through an idler. The differential is of the epicycloidal spur gears type, where the
carrier is ﬁxed to the rear axle transmission shaft, the sun gear moves the front drive
transmission shaft, the annulus gear is driven by the gearbox output shaft.

There is a multi disc wet clutch that controls the two axles speed difference; on

the function of this clutch we will comment later on.

A second clutch, on the right of the ﬁgure, can put the front axle to idle. Three
operating modes are available: rear wheel drive, constant rate all wheel drive, locked
differential all wheel drive.

It should be noticed that the carrier shows twin satellites, to allow the correct

rotation direction for the front axle.

13.2 All Wheel Drive Transfer Boxes

517

Fig. 13.8 Gearbox, differential and transfer box of an all wheel drive car with transversal front
engine (FCA)

The use of a spur gear epicycloidal differential allows any torque breakdown rate
different than 50/50; this is useful when axle loads are different and, in any case, to
correctly control the vehicle static margin, peculiar on vehicle stability.

518

13 Differentials and Final Drives

Fig. 13.9 Gearbox, differential and transfer box of a permanent all wheel drive with longitudinal
front engine (Audi). The gearbox output shaft is hollow, in order to install the front wheel axle drive
shaft

13.2 All Wheel Drive Transfer Boxes

519

13.2.2 Modiﬁed Front Wheel Drive Vehicles

It may be useful, in this case, to distinguish between transversal and longitudinal
engines.

In the most widely diffused case of transversal front engine, shown on Fig. 13.8, the
front axle differential is coupled to a simple bevel gear drive featuring a transmission
ratio close to one. The driving bevel gear is ﬁxed to the front axle differential carrier;
the rear axle transmission shaft is moved by the driven bevel gear. There can be a
simple dog clutch, not shown on this ﬁgure, to move the rear axle, in case of non
permanent all wheel drive.

The rear differential group is similar to that of a rear traction drive; in case of
permanent traction, a viscous coupling is usually ﬁt on the rear axle drive line; this
joint provides subtracting part of the torque available to the front axle, only when
this axle is showing an average speed greater than that of the rear axle. In a next
paragraph we will comment about this joint and his way of working.

A self locking transfer differential can be installed in the transfer case; in this case

the viscous coupling is avoided.

The case of the longitudinal engine is shown on Fig. 13.9. All wheel drive looks
simpler; the gearbox output shaft is hollow; the shaft moving the front differential
bevel pinion is left free to turn in the cavity. The gearbox output shaft moves a
Torsen type differential, we will explain later on. Planet wheels of this differential
are respectively moving the front and the rear axle; this differential transfers and
controls the torque to the two axles.

13.3 Differential Theory Outline

In these paragraphs the inﬂuence of differential mechanical efﬁciency on transferred
torque value is examined and compared with the case of an ideal friction free differ-
ential.

The friction torque is sometime deliberately increased with different devices to
control the value of the output torque. These devices will be examined and explained
and their effect on the vehicle dynamics will be investigated.

13.3.1 Friction Free Differential

The differential is a two degrees of freedom mechanism that can be idealized as a
black box where an input shaft enters at a speed (cid:2) and with a torque M; from this
black box, two output shafts exit at (cid:2)1 and (cid:2)2 speeds, with M1 and M2 torques. The
two degrees of freedom could be the input shaft rotation angle and the difference in
angular displacement of the two output shafts.

520

13 Differentials and Final Drives

Fig. 13.10 Kinematic scheme of an epicyclical train, used as a differential

The properties of a differential must be the three following:

1. There must be only one relationship between the three speeds; in this way the
speed difference between output shafts is undetermined (the mechanism is named
after this property).

2. The input torque is split in two output torques, in a constant ratio independent on

speed.

3. The two output torques must have the same direction.

These properties are fulﬁlled by an epicycloidal gear as that sketched, with the
usual rules, on Fig. 13.10. If r is the ordinary transmission ratio, that is the transmis-
sion ratio of the one degree of freedom mechanism, obtained by locking the carrier,
we can write:

and:

or:

r =

(cid:2)2 − (cid:2)
(cid:2)1 − (cid:2)

,

(cid:2)2 = (cid:2) + r ((cid:2)1 − (cid:2)) ,

(cid:2)2 − (cid:2)1 = (1 − r ) ((cid:2) − (cid:2)1) .

(13.1)

(13.2)

(13.3)

13.3 Differential Theory Outline

521

From the last formula we see that the speed difference of the two output shaft
can assume any value. The sign of r is negative, because when the carrier is locked
output speeds are opposite.

For the system equilibrium it must be that:

if there is no friction it must also be that:

If we substitute one of the speed equations in the last, we obtain:

M1 + M2 = M ;

M1(cid:2)1 + M2(cid:2)2 = M(cid:2) .

M1 = − M

r
1 − r

,

M2 = M

1
1 − r

,

M1
M2

= −r .

(13.4)

(13.5)

(13.6)

(13.7)

(13.8)

where we can see that the torque is splitted in constant parts, independent of speed.
The very well known case of conventional bevel gear differentials can be described
by the above equations where the ordinary transmission ratio is set to −1; in this
case, output torques are always equal to half input torque.

In a transfer box differential, if a split ratio different than 50/50 is desiderated, it

is necessary to use an ordinary transmission ratio different than −1.

13.3.2 Differential with Internal Friction

Let us assume now that mechanical losses do exist and that they can be expressed
through the concept of mechanical efﬁciency, in other words, the power loss is pro-
portional to the useful power.

We deﬁne η as the mechanical efﬁciency of the ordinary gear train associated to
the differential; if the shaft 2 rotates in the same direction as the torque M2, this
torque will be called input torque and M1 will be therefore output torque; in this
assumption:

M1 = −M2r η ;

(13.9)

522

13 Differentials and Final Drives

if, instead M1 is input and M2 is output, it will be:

The efﬁciency η doesn’t change value, as a ﬁrst approximation, on the two different
direction of power ﬂow; if (cid:2) is different than zero, the ﬁrst formula is valid when
the shaft 2 is slower and the second formula when the shaft 2 is faster.

Therefore, if (cid:2)1 > (cid:2) > (cid:2)2 it will be:

M2 = − M1η

.

r

M1 = r η
1 − r η

,

M2 = M

1
1 − r η

,

M2
M1

= − 1
r η

.

M1 = −M

M2 = M

r
η − r

,

η
η − r

,

M1
M2

= − r
η

.

(13.10)

(13.11)

(13.12)

(13.13)

(13.14)

(13.15)

(13.16)

Instead, if (cid:2)1 < (cid:2) < (cid:2)2 it will be:

If the three speeds are equal, the output torque will be undetermined within a
range included between the values of the above formulae, as an analogy with the
friction phenomena, where there is no relative motion, if friction torque (or force)
is still below the static friction value. The case of the axle differential can be again
obtained by setting r = −1.

On the contrary of the ideal no friction case, if one wheel can bear a lower traction
force because of a lower traction coefﬁcient, there will be no relative motion between
wheels if the difference in torque is included in the above limits.

In the case of a bevel gear differential, we can refer to the scheme on Fig. 13.11.
Forces exchanged by planet wheels and satellites teeth are reported. The scheme
represents the three reference planes of the bevel gears as if they were on the same
plane; planet gears drawing planes are turned over those of satellites.

On the satellite tooth ﬂank will act tangent forces T2 and T1, inclined according

to the pressure angle ϑ.

But, because of the friction, this forces will cause also normal components N1
and N2, who must be oriented in such a way, as to oppose the relative motion; on
this scheme we assume that:

13.3 Differential Theory Outline

523

Fig. 13.11 Scheme of forces acting on a bevel gear differential; reference planes of planet wheels
are turned over the reference planes of satellites

(cid:2)1 > (cid:2) > (cid:2)2 .

If R is the reference radius of the primitive satellites cone, we can write the rotation
equilibrium equation of satellites, bearing in mind that the friction angle φ is bound
to the friction coefﬁcient f ; it must be that:

f = tan (φ) ,
T1 tan (φ) = N1 ,
T2 tan (φ) = N2 ,
(T2 − T1)R cos (ϑ) = T1 + T2 .

If we call with R(cid:3) the reference diameter of the planet wheels primitive cone, it

must be that:

Therefore, we obtain the ﬁnal equation:

(T1 + T2)R(cid:3) = M .

η = T1 R(cid:3)
T2 R(cid:3)

= 1 − f tan (ϑ)
1 + f tan (ϑ)

.

(13.17)

(13.18)

(13.19)

13.3.3 Self Locking Differential

A self locking differential is a particular mechanism where torque difference between
the two output shafts can be limited to preset values; the limit case is when the
differential is completely locked where the speed torque is undetermined (planet
wheels are locked together).

524

or:

13 Differentials and Final Drives

We deﬁne as locking coefﬁcient b of a differential the maximum difference of
torque (referred to the total axle torque) between the two output shaft that can be
sustained with no difference in speed; the torque difference is called locking torque.

We have by deﬁnition that:

b = (M2 − M1)/(M2 + M1) ,

η = (1 − b)/(1 + b) .

(13.20)

(13.21)

The b coefﬁcient can be constant or can depend upon speed difference or input

torque values; we will see in the next paragraph some practical examples.

We remember ﬁnally that the name self locking differential is given to devices
where the locking torque is determined by the mechanical propertied of the system;
the name controlled differential is given instead to devices where the locking torque
is determined by a controlled clutch, for instance by electronic means.

13.4 Types of Self Locking Differentials

13.4.1 ZF System

According to the ZF system, shown on Fig. 13.12, the bearings where the thrust of
the planet wheels 6 is loaded, are not made by anti friction material, but by a multi
disc wet clutch.

Fig. 13.12 Self locking ZF differential. The multi disc wet clutches apply a constant (upper version)
or a variable (lower version) locking coefﬁcient

13.4 Types of Self Locking Differentials

525

On the above ﬁgure, two discs 5 are rotating with planet gears, other two discs 4
and the pressure plate 3 are rotating with carrier. Pressure plates 3 show a V shaped
groove (detail a) that match with satellite shafts 3 where total input torque is applied.
By means of this device, the discs pressure force is about proportional to the
total torque. The locking torque is therefore proportional to the total torque and will
always oppose the relative rotation of the half axles. The locking coefﬁcient b is
constant.

On the lower part of the same ﬁgure, a different version of this differential is
presented; the pressure plates are pushed by a diaphragm spring 7. In this case
the locking torque features a minimum locking value also at zero total torque; the
blocking coefﬁcient won’t be constant anymore.

13.4.2 Torsen System

A cross section of a Torsen differential (Torsen stands for torque sensitive) is rep-
resented on Fig. 13.13; planet wheels 5 and satellites 3 are made with worm gears.
Satellites centre line lies on a plane that is perpendicular to the centre line plane of
planet gears.

There are three satellites for each planet gear. The satellite teeth don’t mesh with
those of the neighboring satellite; small spur gear wheels 4 can counter rotate each
couple of neighboring satellites.

Fig. 13.13 Scheme of a Torsen differential. The locking torque is due to the high friction existing
between the worm gear planet wheels and satellites

526

13 Differentials and Final Drives

Satellites shafts are blocked in their radial and axial direction; their rotation only
is free. It should be noted that, in order to have the mechanism working correctly,
wheel threads must have same direction.

With these conditions, the ordinary transmission ratio is again – 1; as a matter of
fact, if we lock the carrier 2, a planetary rotation will cause the corresponding rotation
of the satellite that will be reversed in the neighboring satellite, which, ﬁnally, will
cause the other planet wheel to rotate in the opposite direction, at the same speed.

The relevant friction existing on helical surfaces causes the mechanical efﬁciency
to be very poor; a simpliﬁed mathematical model can lead to the same conclusions
as those of bevel gear differential. In this case also, the blocking coefﬁcient will be
constant.

13.4.3 Ferguson System

The Ferguson system is made by applying a viscous joint to two different elements
of a differential; the joint exploits the oil (silicon oil) viscosity to brake two elements
of the differential with a torque depending on the elements relative speed.

Figure 13.14 shows the scheme of a joint suitable for the transmission shaft of an
all wheel drive gearbox similar to that on Fig. 13.8; this joint can also be integrated
in a differential according to different schemes.

Fig. 13.14 Scheme of a Ferguson joint. The friction between the two shafts 2 and 3 is made by the
viscosity of the silicon oil inside the joint, working on discs 5 and 6; the friction torque depends on
relative speed between 2 and 3

13.4 Types of Self Locking Differentials

527

The joint is made by a cylindrical reservoir 3 ﬁxed to shaft 2, on the right of the
ﬁgure. A second shaft 1, on the left, is free to rotate in the reservoir; a rotating seal
avoids oil leakage outside the reservoir.

The left shaft has a spline where a series of metallic discs 6 is invested; another
series of discs 5 is connected to the inside diameter of the reservoir, again through a
spline. The two discs families are stacked with each of the discs 6 inserted between
two discs 5.

The discs are drilled or cut to activate viscous forces between the disc families,
when there is a relative rotation speed; axial forces are unnecessary, because the
braking force is controlled by the oil speed gradient in gaps between facing discs.
The torque value is determined by disc number (increasing with the number) and by
the apparent oil density; this last can be easily modiﬁed by changing the quantity of
air emulsiﬁed in the oil (decreasing with the quantity of air); this two magnitudes,
together with discs diameter, are the design parameter of the joint.

The Newton law, applied to this case, says that:

τ =

μ(cid:7)V
d

,

(13.22)

where τ is the shear on the surface element d S of two facing discs, d is the gap
dimension between discs, (cid:7)V is the local difference in speed and μ is the coefﬁcient
of dynamic viscosity; the force acting on the surface element is:

τr 2dα dr ,

(13.23)

where r is the local radius and r dα and dr are the circumferential and radial dimen-
sion of the surface element.

If we call ri and re the inside and outside radii of the facing surfaces of two
neighboring discs, the total braking torque of the joint bM, at a speed difference (cid:7)(cid:2)
will be:

bM = n

π (cid:7)(cid:2)νρ

2d

r 4
e

(1 − ri
re

)4 ,

(13.24)

where n is the number of facing surfaces of the discs.

Usually the cinematic viscosity coefﬁcient ν is used in place of the dynamic one.

The relationship between the two coefﬁcients is:

ν =

μ
ρ

.

The value of obtainable viscosity, depending on the quantity of emulsiﬁed air in

the oil, can range between 30,000 and 100,000 cSt (mm2/s).

In the Ferguson differential the blocking coefﬁcient is therefore depending upon

the relative differential speed.

differential.

As we have said, the joint can be integrated either in the central or in the axle

528

13 Differentials and Final Drives

In the ﬁrst case the differential could be a spur gear epicycloidal differential with
simple or double satellites. If the input shaft is connected to the annulus gear, one
half axle will be connected to the sun gear and the other to the carrier; the Ferguson
joint must be sensitive to the difference in speed between sun gear and carrier.

13.4.4 Active System

An active differential is able to convey the transmission torque on each wheel without
wasting a signiﬁcant part of the input power as friction and independently from the
difference of speed of the driving wheels; for this feature a system like this is also
called torque-vectoring differential.

As Fig. 13.15 shows, each side of a differential of this kind is equipped with an
epicycloidal transmission and a clutch able to transfer part of the torque from the
ﬁnal bevel gear to the half shafts directly.

In our example, each epicycloidal gear is made with two equal sun gears, two equal
satellites, cut on the same shaft rotating in the casing in a ﬁxed position, contained
in a single annulus gear; therefore the transmission ratio between the two sun gears
is 1.

The inside sun gears are rotating with the satellites case of the differential, while
the outside ones are idle on the half shafts and can be engaged with them with a
clutch. A stack of wet discs can be closed by the oil pressure, modulated by an
electronic control and determines the torque transferred from the ﬁnal gear to each
half shaft.

Fig. 13.15 Torque vectoring differential (FCA)

13.4 Types of Self Locking Differentials

529

Fig. 13.16 In a torque vectoring differential, part of the torque is applied to the half shafts from
the planetary wheels 1 and 2 and part is applied to auxiliary shaft 3, according to the total pressure
acting on the two clutches 4 and 5

When clutches are completely closed, the differential is locked-up, when they are

completely open the differential works normally.

The functional scheme in Fig. 13.16 explains this mechanism that, for sake of
simplicity, is represented with conventional gears with the same function; part of the
torque is applied to the half shafts from the differential planetary wheels 1 and 2 and
part is applied to auxiliary shaft 3, according to the total pressure acting on the two
clutches 4 and 5.

The difference in pressure determines the difference in torque applied to the two
shafts; it is theoretically possible to convey the entire torque to a single half shaft,
neglecting the effect of the friction between the rotating parts of the differential.

13.5 Differential Effect on Vehicle Dynamics

A real differential or a self locking differential have a beneﬁcial effect on vehicle
mobility, because they allow a wheel or an axle on a high traction coefﬁcient ground
to receive a traction force greater than that acting on the coupled wheel or axle on
low traction coefﬁcient ground.

530

13 Differentials and Final Drives

This advantage has an energetic cost due to the work of friction forces on rotating
elements and implies variations on traction forces as compared with the ideal refer-
ence values. We will see on the next paragraphs the effect of these variations on the
vehicle dynamic behavior.

13.5.1 Driving Axle Differential

Let us consider the case or rear wheel drive at ﬁrst.

We assume that the car is driving on a large steering-pad of 200 m of radius at

steady speeds of different increasing values.

The car working conditions, with particular reference to driving wheels speed
and torque, were calculated by means of a multibody mathematical model. The
calculation parameter is the centrifugal acceleration, measured in g. The overall
vehicle mass is about 1,300 kg.

We start from the case of an ideal differential and on Figs. 13.17 and 13.18 the
diagrams of the speed difference between driving wheels and of driving wheels torque
are represented as a function of the lateral acceleration. The results are the following:
• If mechanical efﬁciency is one, torque on driving wheels is equal, by deﬁnition.
Torque increases quickly with speed (0.7 g of lateral acceleration correspond to
about 130 km/h of speed on a 200 m steering-pad) because of the driving resistance
increase and because of side slip forces longitudinal components.

Fig. 13.17 Diagram of driving wheel torque M, for a rear wheel driven car, on a 200 m radius
steering-pad, as a function of centrifugal acceleration ay, in case of an ideal differential mechanical
efﬁciency η of 100%

13.5 Differential Effect on Vehicle Dynamics

531

Fig. 13.18 Diagram of the speed difference (cid:7)(cid:2) between the inside driving wheel and the outside
driving wheel in the case of the previous ﬁgure

• Let us remember that vertical load transfer on driving wheels increases about with
the square of the speed. The speed difference (cid:7)(cid:2) increases because of the different
wheel path, at ﬁrst, and decreases after, because of the fact that the inside wheel,
initially slower, will see its longitudinal slip increased, because of the vertical load
loss at the same traction force; speed difference is negative and inﬁnite when the
wheel looses its grip.

In the assumption that the differential has a constant efﬁciency smaller than one,

angular speed difference will allow a torque difference too.

The inside wheel, initially slower, will receive a larger torque until speed difference
becomes zero; torque difference is proportional to total driving torque. Around the
point where speed difference is zero, the driving wheels torque diagrams will cross,
towards a situation where inside wheel receives a smaller torque, because its speed
is faster.

The efﬁciency diagram will show a cusp with value one, where the speed difference
goes to zero. Speed difference is zero as long as the differential is locked, because
torque difference is too small.

Let’s assume that on the two planet wheels of the differential there is a constant
friction force (preload). Torque diagrams will cross where longitudinal slip assumes
such a value as the speed difference becomes zero (Fig. 13.19).

The efﬁciency diagram shows the already commented cusp and is shaped like a
hyperbole, that takes into account the constant value of the friction losses compared
to an increasing value of the total torque.

The Torsen and the ZF differential may be simulated, with a good approximation,
as constant efﬁciency differentials. The shape of the curve is similar to the previous
one and is not reported.

532

13 Differentials and Final Drives

Fig. 13.19 Upper ﬁgure: driving wheels torque M diagram and efﬁciency η diagram in the case
of a preloaded differential; torque on inside (dotted line) and outside wheel can be compared with
the ideal differential value without mechanical losses. Lower ﬁgure: speed difference (cid:7)(cid:2) between
wheels

In the case of a viscous differential, shown on Fig. 13.20, the difference between
driving wheels torques is not relevant between the origin of the diagram and the point
where the speed difference becomes zero, because the locking torque is very much
dependent on the value of the speed difference.

After the zero point speed difference increases and therefore the difference in

torque increases till the inside wheel spin point.

The efﬁciency diagram shows two cusps with a value of one, if we neglect the
mechanical losses, at zero acceleration and at the point where the speed difference
is zero.

Let’s study now the effect of these phenomena on the understeer curve of this car;
we will assume as understeer parameter the difference between the actual steering
wheel angle and the steering wheel angle at zero speed (about correspondent to
the Ackermann steering wheel angle). We limit the study to the case of the ideal
differential and of the Torsen differential. The understeer diagram is on Fig. 13.21.

13.5 Differential Effect on Vehicle Dynamics

533

Fig. 13.20 Diagram of the wheel torque M and of the efﬁciency η of a differential of a rear driven
car with Ferguson joint

We can outline the following facts:

• The zero speed steering angle (the value is shown on the caption of the ﬁgure)
increases because of the differential friction torque. As a matter of fact, the non
symmetric traction torque induces a yaw moment (understeering direction) at
positive speed difference; the driver must increase steering wheels side slip angle,
in order to equilibrate this torque.

• This additional yaw torque goes to zero where the speed difference becomes zero

and becomes, after this point, an oversteering yaw torque.

• The acceleration limit where the rear wheels side slip angle becomes too big and the
steering angle goes to zero (power oversteer) shifts toward higher values because
of the lower traction force on the inside wheel.

For small curvature radii steering-pads the diagrams are not very different. The
zero speed difference point moves to higher accelerations because the speed dif-
ference contribution of the curvature of the path is predominant on that of the lon-
gitudinal slip. The torque difference induced by the differential locking torque is
more relevant because of the higher longitudinal slips. Steering wheel will become
much heavier at low speed; from this stand point the constant locking coefﬁcient
differential are more penalized.

In the case of front wheel driven cars, these calculations can be repeated.
The additional yaw torque (driving torque unbalance) is now applied to the front
wheels, with a more relevant effect on the steering torque; in addition to that the
torque unbalance induces additional steering angle because of the suspension and
steering mechanism compliance.

534

13 Differentials and Final Drives

Fig. 13.21 Understeer index diagram (the understeer index is assumed to be the difference (cid:7)δ
between the actual steering wheel angle and the zero speed steering angle) of a rear wheel driven
car on a 200 m radius steering-pad in the ideal differential case and in the Torsen differential case.
The zero speed steering angle is 13.6◦ for the ideal differential and 14.9◦ for the Torsen differential

Therefore the application of self locking differential to front wheel driven cars
is very seldom, with some exception of Ferguson joints with modest self locking
torque.

We can conclude that on a rear wheel driven vehicle (the case of the rear axle
of an all wheel driven vehicle may be included) the application of a self locking
differential will increase understeer while entering in the curve, but with an ampler
exploitation of the road grip.

The worse handling is more evident on small curves or when accelerating the

An ideal differential controlled by means of a controlled clutch should satisfy the

following conditions:
• Simulate the behavior of a no friction differential for high curvature curves at low
speed, or when the rolling speeds difference is only due to pressure or when a high
grip isn’t required.

• Simulate the behavior of a locked differential on high accelerations or low grip

vehicle.

roads.

We shouldn’t forget that the interconnection torque affects braking with an ABS
system. As a matter of fact the prediction of the traction coefﬁcient through the inter-
pretation of the speed difference is affected by the effects on the locking torque; a third
requirement of the above differential should, therefore, to act as a free differential
during braking.

13.5 Differential Effect on Vehicle Dynamics

535

13.5.2 Transfer Box Differential

An all wheel drive transmission system allows higher longitudinal acceleration at a
given traction coefﬁcient value.

Let’s recall the equilibrium equations of a longitudinally accelerating vehicle;

the height from the round of the centre of gravity,
the wheel base,
the vertical loads on front and rear axles,
the peak value of the traction coefﬁcient,
the vehicle weight,
the longitudinal acceleration,
the traction forces at the adhesion limit on the front and rear axles,

on a front wheel driven vehicle there will be a vertical load transfer due to the
longitudinal acceleration:

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

said:

h
l
Fz1, Fz2
μx
P
ax
Fx1, Fx2

therefore:

in the same way on a rear wheel driver vehicle, it will be:

In the case of an all wheel driven vehicle, we introduce the parameter i, identifying

the characteristics of the transfer differential:

The former formulae become:

(cid:7)Fz = ax

Ph
lg

,

Fx1 = μx (Fz1 − (cid:7)Fz) ,

ax = g

= μx g

Fx1
P

Fz1
P (1 + hμx /l)

;

ax = g

(cid:3)

(cid:2)
1 − Fz1
P

μx
1 − μx

.

h
l

i =

Fx1
Fx1 + Fx2

.

ax = g

Fx1
P

μx
i + μx
(cid:3)

;

h
l

ax = g

(cid:2)
1 − Fx1
P

μx
1 − i − μx

,

h
l

(13.25)

(13.26)

(13.27)

(13.28)

(13.29)

(13.30)

(13.31)

according to the fact that the front or the rear axle is spinning at ﬁrst.

536

13 Differentials and Final Drives

Fig. 13.22 Diagram of the maximum longitudinal acceleration ax (on the vertical axis, measured
in g), as a function of the longitudinal traction coefﬁcient μx (on the horizontal axis), in the case of
an ideal material point, for a front wheel drive, for a rear wheel drive and for an all wheel drive with
no friction differential an for a locked differential with constant locking coefﬁcient. The higher the
locking coefﬁcient, the wider the extension where ideal material point response is copied

Figure 13.22 compares the diagram of ax as a function of μx in the three considered
cases; the advantage of the all wheel drive is evident, where, in any case, the ideal
condition of:

ax = gμx ,

is reached in one point only.

The value of the traction coefﬁcient μ∗

x where the traction force is the same as in a
material point with no load transfer can be derived when the two previous equations
are equal:

(cid:2)

μ∗
x

= l
h

Fx1
P

(cid:3)

− i

.

(13.32)

For acceleration lower than the gμ∗

x value, rear wheels will spin, because the
load transfer is not sufﬁcient to guarantee the necessary traction force; vice versa for
higher accelerations.

If the transfer differential can be modelled as a device with locking coefﬁcient b,

we can substitute in the previous formulae a ﬁctitious i (cid:3) coefﬁcient equal to:

i (cid:3) = i − b
2

and i (cid:3)(cid:3) equal to:

13.5 Differential Effect on Vehicle Dynamics

537

Fig. 13.23 Diagram of the understeer index (cid:7)δ as a function of the lateral acceleration ay for the
same car of the previous cases, with a front wheel FWD, rear wheel RWD and all wheel drive AWD
(50% of torque on each axle) with no friction transfer differential

i (cid:3)(cid:3) = i + b
2

,

to take into account the driving torque increase or decrease on axles caused by the
locking torque of the transfer differential; on the diagram representing the maximum
acceleration as a function of the longitudinal traction coefﬁcient, the curve will match
the ideal straight line with a wider extension; the larger b, the wider the extension.
Let’s examine ﬁnally the effect of all wheel drive on the understeer coefﬁcient,

again with the steering-pad simulation.

An ideal transfer differential splitting the traction torque into equal parts is con-
sidered; on Fig. 13.23 the understeer curves relative to this case are compared with
those of the front wheel drive and of the rear wheel drive.

On rear wheel drives, at high acceleration when the traction force is relevant, the
response tends to oversteer because of the high value of the rear side slip angles; on
front wheel drives, the high value of the side slip angles raises the natural vehicle
understeer to unacceptable values.

The acceleration value where the vehicle response is degenerating is almost the
same for front and rear wheel driven cars. All wheel drive reduces side slip angle
values and is characterized by a better response. In the reported case, an acceptable
understeering behavior is present also at high acceleration value, with an extension
of the manoeuvrability of the car.

Chapter 14
Shafts and Joints

Transmission shafts are used to apply torque to those driven components whose
rotation axis cannot be perfectly aligned with their driving counterpart.

The following connections are in this situation:

• gearbox output shaft or reducer output shaft with ﬁnal drive, for conventional
drive vehicles either in the case of rigid axle or independent suspensions; this
transmission shaft is also called propeller shaft;

• gearbox output shaft with reducer or transfer box input shaft, when they are not

rigidly connected, as being separately mounted on the chassis structure;

• engine shaft and gearbox input shaft, when they are separated;
• differential output shaft with driving wheels in all independent suspensions; they

are also called half shafts.

It is evident in this case that transmission shafts must be capable of working with
sensible offsets, because of the suspension stroke and, for front wheels, because of
steering angles.

Also transmission components directly connected to the chassis structure, as, for
example, gearbox and differential box by conventional drive vehicles with indepen-
dent suspensions, cannot be joined by rigid ﬂanges, because of the chassis ﬂexibility
and of dedicated elastic suspensions, addressed to vibration dampening.

The types of shaft can be classiﬁed under two different categories: propeller shaft

and half shafts.

14.1 Propeller Shafts

A typical propeller shaft can be exempliﬁed by an industrial vehicle application, as
shown in Fig. 14.1.
Fig. 14.1 Two pieces propeller shaft for the rigid rear axle of a heavy duty industrial vehicle (Iveco)

The ﬁnal drive on the rigid axle is connected with the gearbox output shaft through
a two pieces propeller shaft: the ﬁrst swinging shaft 1 and the ﬁxed shaft 2. An
intermediate bearing 3 holds the ﬁxed shaft aligned with the gearbox output shaft
and the connection with the swinging shaft.

The swinging shaft is subject to change its inclination angle with the side beams
because of the rear suspension bounce; to evaluate the offset to be covered, lateral
displacement due to suspension and chassis ﬂexibility should not be forgot.

Since the reaction to the driving or braking torque applied to the axle is taken by
the suspension elastic elements too, we can expect also axle rotation around the y
axis; see Part I above S deformation of leaf springs.

The two piece design is cause by the relevant distance between the ﬂanges to be
connected, considering the natural bending frequencies of the shaft; it is desirable
that these frequencies are far away the chassis bending natural frequencies to avoid
annoying booms.

Also for this purpose an elastic suspension is provided for the intermediate bearing.
For shorter vehicles, as semitrailer tractors or light duty industrial vehicle, a single

piece propeller shaft can be used.

Also the natural torsion frequency of the system, including powertrain, trans-
mission shaft and vehicle has a fundamental importance on vehicle comfort and
drivability; this natural frequency is directly inﬂuenced by the propeller shaft.

A very simple model of the system could include two ﬂywheels of inertia Jm
and Jv representing respectively the powertrain inertia (engine and gearbox, in a
given speed) and the inertia of the vehicle; these ﬂywheels are connected through a
transmission shaft, whose length is L.

Immaginiamo, per sempliﬁcare al massimo il problema, un sistema costituito da
due volani Jm e Jv, rappresentanti rispettivamente il momento d’inerzia equivalente
del motopropulsore (motore e cambio, in un certo rapporto) e la massa apparente
rotante del veicolo; tali volani siano collegati mediante un solo albero di lunghezza L.

14.1 Propeller Shafts

If G is the shear module of the shaft material, I p the polar inertia of its cross

section, we will have, at resonance condition:

541

(14.1)

(cid:2)

ω =

G I p
Jm L

+ G I p
Jv L

,

where ω1 is the torsional natural frequency of the transmission shaft.

As we know, internal combustion engines deliver a torque that is changing over
time, because of the shape of the pressure cycle and because this pressure is trans-
ferred to the shaft through a crank mechanism; also the engine rotating and recipro-
cating masses introduce a further cause for driving torque variation over time.

If we decompose the resulting torque in harmonics, it will be possible to identify
engine speeds introducing resonance between the driving torque on the gearbox
output shaft and the natural frequencies of the transmission shaft; the desired result
is that this resonance condition is beyond the vehicle maximum speed or at speeds
so low that they don’t affect practically the vehicle use conditions.

We should remember that other torsional excitations are coming from the joints

connecting the different pieces of the propeller shaft.

If we now model the propeller shaft with a constant section beam with section
S and inertia moment I f , and we call with E the elasticity modulus and with ρ the
density of the shaft material, we can also calculate with:

(cid:2)

2

π2

L 2

E I f
ρS

.

ωc =

(14.2)

the bending natural frequency of the propeller shaft on its bearings.2

This approach is oversimpliﬁed, because it doesn’t take into account the contribu-
tion of other elastic elements of the transmission system as clutch torsional dampers,
tires and suspensions, for torsion or bearing and powertrain suspensions for bending;
a more complete model will be introduced in the Part V of the second volume.

In any case, the issue of natural frequencies suggests to size transmission shafts
with very rigid cross section and very light design; tubular section are, as conse-
quence, the best choice.

High resistance steel or aluminum are used; sometime on sport cars, also ﬁlament

wound composite epossidic plastic materials are applied, with kevlar ﬁbers.

The propeller shaft of conventional drive cars with suspended differential is

designed with the same criteria.

By these applications a universal Hooke joint is applied, as shown in Fig. 14.2.

1In this book vibration frequency is indicated by ω, while (cid:2) is used for angular speeds. Frequencies
will be always measured in coherent units (rad/s) and no difference will be made between frequency
and pulsation.
2A more complete approach to the issue of natural frequencies and critical speeds, can be found,
for example, on the book G. Genta, Dynamics of Rotating Systems, Springer, New York, 2005.

542

14 Shafts and Joints

Fig. 14.2 Exploded view of the moving part of a propeller shaft with universal Hooke joints

The moving piece of the propeller shaft is made by two tubes 1 and 2, connected
by a spline that allow length variations due to the axle suspension motion. The spline
is lubricated by grease sealed by the rubber ring 3. The two ends of the moving piece
show the yokes of the universal joints.

Other two yokes 4 are ﬂanged to the gearbox output shaft and to the differential

input shaft or ﬁxed transmission piece, if any.

Two trunnion crosses 5 connect the yokes; the connection between crosses and
yokes is made usually by sealed needle bearings, kept in place by Seeger rings 6: we
comment in a next paragraph the universal joint operation.

14.2 Half Shafts

The half shafts layout of an independent wheels suspension for a front wheel driven
car is shown in Fig. 14.3.

Being the driving axle also a steering one, joints must be designed for big working
angles. The transversely mounted powertrain implies always half shafts of different
length.

The different length can be a problem, if because of this fact half shafts feature a
different torsional stiffness; this fact occurs by wide cars with powerful engines. In
fact, under high values of driving torque, self steering moments could be applied to
the steering mechanism, because the stiffer half shaft is transmitting higher torque.
The problem can be solved by using bigger cross sections on the longer half shaft.

14.2 Half Shafts

543

Fig. 14.3 Complete transmission for a mid size front wheel driven car with transversal engine; the
transmission is seen from its back (FCA)

By this design choice, the different geometry of the two half shaft could cause
the natural bending frequency of the longer half shaft to be too low; to avoid this
inconvenience, as by propeller shafts, the longer half shaft is divided in two pieces,
the ﬁrst of them is ﬁxed to the powertrain assembly.

What was written in the previous paragraph about torsional and bending natural
frequencies could be repeated in this case, but the application of tubular sections in
this case could be sometimes impossible because of the limited space.

It can therefore happen that a half shaft natural frequency is coupling with a tire
vertical natural frequency, with resonance. This problem can be solved by applying
to the half shaft additional masses; they are made by an iron ring press ﬁt on a rubber
bushing with suitable elasticity: this systems works as a damper tuned on its natural
frequency.

The study of torsional and bending vibrations must take into account the entire
powertrain suspension, now interested also by the reaction to the driving torque on
the front axle; again we address to the Part V to approach this study.

Because of the limited space and wide angles, universal joints are not applied to

half shafts, but constant velocity joints based upon the Rzeppa principle.

By independent rear suspensions technical solutions are similar to front driving

suspensions.

544

14 Shafts and Joints

Fig. 14.4 Universal joints layout necessary to obtain a constant speed transmission; the inertia
moments of the the shaft mass between the joints will generate, in any case, a periodic output
torque

14.3 Universal Joints

The design of a universal joint has been already described in the previous Fig. 14.2;
it is easy to understand why a universal joint alone is not a constant speed3 joint.

Let us consider the scheme in the upper part of Fig. 14.4 and in particular the left

joint.

If θ is the rotation angle of the ﬁrst shaft piece 1, before the joint, at the time t, ϕ
is the corresponding rotation angle of the second shaft piece 2, after the joint and α
is the angle between the center line of the shafts 1 and 2, we can write that:

If we derive the two members of the above equation, we obtain:

tan (ϕ) = tan (θ)
cos (α)

.

dϕ
dt

=

cos (α)
1 − sin2 (α) cos2 (θ)

dθ
dt

.

(14.3)

(14.4)

Therefore if the input speed

3In a constant speed joint, the ratio between input and output speeds is always independent of
angular position; in particular, if the input speed is constant, also the output speed will be constant
and equal.

14.3 Universal Joints

545

is constant, the output speed

dθ
dt

dϕ
dt

will not and there will be a periodic function of θ expressing the transmission ratio
between input and output shafts; this function will depend on α, and constant speed
conditions are obtained only for α = 0.

But if we install on the second shaft piece a second universal joint, connecting the
third shaft piece 3, we can, for the same equation, obtain a constant speed transmission
if the second joint has the same working angle α and its input yoke is on the same
plane as the output yoke of the ﬁrst joint. This task can be accomplished in two ways,
as in the upper and lower part of the ﬁgure.

This sentence is only true in the ideal case where the rotating mass of the second
shaft piece 2 is negligible in comparison with the total rotary mass of the system;
if not the non constant speed of the shaft 2 will introduce torque variations in the
system that will not conserve its constant velocity.

The conﬁguration applied to propeller shafts is that shown in the upper part of
the ﬁgure and implies that the shafts 1 and 3 are always parallel; this condition must
be obtained by a suitable elasto-kinematic behavior of the rear axle suspension. This
condition is only approximately obtained by leaf springs suspension because of the
S deformation of springs because of the driving torque.

The second layout in the lower part of the ﬁgure is used particularly by half shafts
of front driving axles of some off-road vehicles, featuring rigid axle suspension,
where the high value of the torque doesn’t allow to use constant speed joints.

Figure 14.5 shows an application of this kind. The stub and the axle are articulated
through the king-pin for steering; the king-pin axis must be coincident with the middle
of the shaft 2; this is very short and is reduced to the minimum necessary to contain
the needle bearing of the trunnion crosses.

In this arrangement, the steering motion induces two equal working angles in the
two universal joints, as requested by the previous scheme. The axle and the stub have
a particular shape building up a sealed rotula to protect the transmission.

Sizing universal joints is not difﬁcult; usually they are selected in a catalog,
taking into account transmission torque and working angles. It is important to take
into account that torque is limited by working angles and there are also geometric
limits, due to interference between yokes and cross that must be veriﬁed before the
application.

It also important to avoid applying transmission shafts with too small working
angles; in fact small working angles can wear locally needle bearings because of too
small rotation.

546

14 Shafts and Joints

Fig. 14.5 Scheme for a universal joints transmission for a front rigid steering axle of an off-road
industrial vehicle; the two yokes of the shaft 2 are almost coincident (Iveco)

14.4 Constant Speed Joints

The double universal joint cannot be used in the transmission to the steering wheels
of an independent suspension; this solution has been applied in the past for non
steering rear wheels: also this solution doesn’t appear today acceptable because of
the limitations on camber recovery, in order to keep parallel the ﬁrst and third shafts
of the transmission.

By independent wheel suspensions only constant velocity joints are applied of
the Rzeppa type, as those shown in the upper part of Fig. 14.6; the scheme repre-
sents a section of a complete half shaft for a front wheel driven car; the wheel, not
represented, is on the right of this scheme.

The joint on the wheel side must be able to rotate because of two components: the
steering angle, in an almost horizontal plane and the angle imposed by the suspension
motion (stroke and camber) in an almost vertical plane; the total working angle
allowed by these joints is about 45◦.

The other joint on the gearbox side is only subject to the angles caused by the
suspension stroke in an almost vertical plane and by the steering angle in an almost
horizontal plane; in fact, because the joint on the wheel side cannot be set on the
king-pin axis, the wheel steering motion will move the joint center on an almost
horizontal plane; the total working angle allowed for these joints is about 20◦.

14.4 Constant Speed Joints

547

Fig. 14.6 Complete half shaft for a front wheel driven car (a) with a ﬁxed joint on the right and
a sliding joint on the left. Scheme b represents a tripod joint that can be used in place of a sliding
Rzeppa joint. Details c and d show the cross sections of these joints

The wheel steering and the suspension stroke impose to the joint on the wheel side
a trajectory not coincident with a circle with its center on the joint on the gearbox side;
for this reason a sliding joint must be applied that allow till 50 mm of displacement.
Rzeppa sliding and ﬁxed joints are made with a crown of balls engaged in corre-
sponding grooves on the inside nut and on the outside cup where the wheel or the
differential output shafts are connected. Balls are kept on the same plane by a cage,
made with a ring with holes.

The scheme d on the ﬁgure shows a section of the ﬁxed joint, not very different

in this view from the sliding joint one.

The shape of the ball grooves on the nut and cup is such as to determine four
different contact points where the surface in contact is almost perpendicular to the
force to be exchanged.

The intersection of the plane containing the ball centers with the joint rotation axis
determines the joint center or the half shaft articulation point; the cup of the joint on
the wheel side has its grooves with a curvature that avoids ball displacements along
the rotation axis, while the cup on the gearbox side has straight grooves to allow half
shaft sliding freedom.

It is important to verify that no suspension position (usually the most dangerous

one is at rebound with full steering angle) can bring any ball to exit its groove.

Cups are sealed with rubber bellows, rotating with the half shaft, that keep balls

lubricated for life.

The constant speed behavior of these joints can be justiﬁed by means of Fig. 14.7.
In this scheme only one ball 3 is represented, engaged with two grooves in the same
time; these grooves are respectively ﬁxed to the two parts of the joint 1 and 2; only

548

14 Shafts and Joints

Fig. 14.7 Scheme of a constant speed Rzeppa joint; only one ball 3 is represented, engaged with
the two grooves on shafts 1 and 2

the part of these grooves represented with full line is really existing on the nut and
the cup.

The shape of the groove is such as to impose to any ball to have its center on
the bisector plane of the angle made by the two rotation axis of the shafts of the
joint; in this condition the distance between each ball and the two rotation axis will
be constant, determining the same rotation speed of the two axis. During the joint
rotation balls will be subject to displacements along their grooves proportional to the
joint working angle.

From the description of their operation appears that friction must be carefully
considered by ball joints; in fact in a complete revolution of the joint each ball is
displaced along its groove in proportion to the working angle; this displacement
cannot be covered by pure rolling of the balls in their grooves.

The friction is causing a small energy loss in the transmission and an exchange of
forces in the transversal direction, because of suspension and powertrain motions;
these forces can cause vibrations and harshness that is not efﬁciently ﬁltered by the
powertrain suspension.

For this reasons the limit of the force necessary to have the joint sliding under
torque must be carefully speciﬁed and taken under control; tripod joint try to solve
this problem with a different architecture.

A scheme of this joint is represented on the scheme b in Fig. 14.6. The balls are
substituted by three rollers; they are mounted on pins with needle bearings and can
roll on the straight grooves of the cup. This design is suitable to contain friction by
joint sliding motion under torque.

Chapter 15
Automatic Gearboxes

15.1 General Issues

Opposite to manual gearboxes, automatic gearboxes show a wide diversity of tech-
nical solutions; this situation could demonstrate the fact that this gearbox doesn’t
have reached his technical maturity yet.

Automatic gearboxes have been born, in fact, for high displacement engine com-
fortable family cars. They are increasing now their minicars and sport cars share,
in a market where consumption and emissions are particularly relevant; these issues
have proliferated technical solutions, with no ﬁnal winners, for the time being.

Technical solutions will be described in this chapter that have reached the highest
diffusion share for cars market; some solution speciﬁc to industrial vehicles will be
also outlined.

A very important topic for automatic gearbox study is their control system; modern
cars automatic gearboxes have mainly electronic control systems. Their study is
usually undertaken in a course on electric and electronic systems.

Nevertheless we will examine automatic gearbox control strategies, which can be
deﬁned as rules and methods that are adopted in control systems to decide actual
speed and to control speed shift. Hybrid vehicle automatic transmissions are also
not considered here; they feature a further function of deciding, which is the most
convenient energy source in a given situation (prime engine, energy storage system,
wheels).

15.1.1 Automation Level

In a historical perspective, the ﬁrst goal to be reached by automatic gearboxes has
been driver and passengers comfort improvement.

As far as the driver is concerned it is evident that he is relieved of the physical effort
of operating clutch pedal during start-up and speed changes and of gears shifting;
15 Automatic Gearboxes

also the need of identifying the most suitable shifting moment and of coordinating
operations, especially in an uphill start, is eliminated.

As far as passengers are concerned the objective has been the limitation of the
jerk (derivative of the vehicle acceleration) during gear shifts and starts; as a matter
of fact the human body is quite sensitive to this parameter and it can be assumed as
relevant to travel comfort.

If we consider automatic gearboxes from the level of automation standpoint, we

can identify the following types:

• Full automatic gearboxes; shifting speed and starting-up functions are both carried
out automatically, with mechanisms that are developed for this purpose. Between
different available working modes, there is usually a semi automatic one where
speed ratio choice is left to the driver, being shifting sequence made entirely
automatically.

• Semiautomatic gearboxes; one of the above automatic functions is partly or totally
missing. For example start-up device operation is automatic, but not gearshift; or
this second function is automatic, but decisions about the most suitable shifting
moment are left to the driver. In this second version accelerator pedal must be
operated by the driver in coordination with clutch operation, to avoid engine over
speed or stall or any kind of shock. This kind of gearbox has lost interest on
cars, because it doesn’t represent a favorable cost beneﬁt trade-off. It is vice versa
adopted on some industrial vehicle, because of the relevant effort of moving manual
commands; sometime these gearboxes share with their manual counterparts most
components.

• Robotized or automated gearboxes; mechanisms are deliberately derived of man-
ual gearboxes, including friction clutch. They can’t be deﬁned as semiautomatic
gearboxes, as previous ones, because their control system can handle all automatic
functions. The decision of using a modiﬁed manual gearbox can be justiﬁed by
other targets, such as reducing production and operation cost. The ﬁrst is reduced
because existing production facilities can be used. The effect on the second is due
to reduction of mechanical losses in comparison with automatic gearboxes. We
should not forget, ﬁnally, a positive impact on improving car sport performance,
because shifting and start-up time can be reduced to ﬁgures not easily available
also to professional drivers.

This last category of gearboxes is reaching a signiﬁcant market share and could

have a further development in next years.

15.1.2 Gearshift Mode

A very important aspect conditioning automatic gearbox conﬁguration is gearshift
mode; we usually distinguish between gear shifts with power interruption and gear
shifts without power interruption or powershifts.

15.1 General Issues

551

Fig. 15.1 Qualitative diagrams of traction force and speed as a function of time for gear shift with
interruption of power and powershifts

In the ﬁrst case gears are shifted as in a manual gearbox using synchronized or
non synchronized dog clutches; during gear shift the power ﬂow going through the
gearbox must be interrupted to allow the disengagement of the existing speed and
the engagement of the next one.

The power available to move the vehicle goes to zero during this manoeuvre and
the vehicle slows down; the jerk is signiﬁcant also if it human body is not sensitive
under certain duration values.

Figure 15.1, in the upper part, shows a qualitative diagram of traction force and

of vehicle speed during a gear shift with power interruption.

The same ﬁgure shows on the lower part the case of a powershift gearbox. It is
possible to bring the jerk to a minimum and to continue to accelerate the vehicle if
the manoeuvre occurs without interruption of power. This result can be achieved on
stepped gearboxes if each synchronizer is substituted with a clutch and disengage-
ments and the engagements are overlapping; it can be easily understood that gear shift
sequence implies a more signiﬁcant power dissipation than a conventional synchro-
nizer; with this procedure shifting time is not so important and can be compromised
in favour of a better driving comfort.

We should notice that on automatic gearboxes with power interruption synchro-
nizers may be avoided, if an external power source is used: this can be the engine
that can speed up itself and rotating parts to be synchronized with a double clutching

552

15 Automatic Gearboxes

manoeuvre, during down shifts, and a brake on the gearbox that slows down same
parts during up shifts.

This option isn’t only conditioned by costs but also by shifting time reduction; in

this case a drive-by-wire accelerator system is mandatory.

On continuously variable gearboxes the shifting manoeuvre is, by deﬁnition, pow-
ershift type, in consideration of the very small difference between the previous and
the next transmission ratios; also the wasted energy during gear shift can be very
small.

15.1.3 Stepped and Continuously Variable Gearboxes

Automatic gearboxes are said stepped if they have available a limited number of
transmission ratios (steps) as in manual gearboxes. The total number of speeds is
seldom larger than six in consideration on the increased mechanical complexity.

When designing the number of speeds on an automatic gearbox with torque con-
verter, it is useful to remember that this start-up device is a continuously variable
transmission.

In this case it is usual to avoid the ﬁrst speed of corresponding manual gearbox;
its function is performed by the torque converter from stall to lock-up and therefore
the number of available speeds is reduced by one unit without affecting vehicle
performance. A four speed torque converter automatic gearbox can be compared
with a ﬁve gear manual gearbox with clutch and so on.

Stepless or continuously variable transmissions, shortly CVT, feature an unlimited

number of transmission ratios between a lower and an upper limit.

Mechanisms that perform this function are developed for the purpose and will be
explained later on. An important design parameter for CVT is the so called range,
which is the ratio between the highest and the lowest available transmission ratio.
When designing CVT range, it must be kept in mind that it should be the same as
for stepped gearboxes for the same vehicle, taking into account what was said about
torque converter application. A CVT with very large range (with very short low ratio)
could avoid start up device.

Gear trains used on stepped automatic gearboxes can be classiﬁed according to

two categories:

• Gear wheels with ﬁxed rotation axis, similar to those adopted on manual gearbox;
the solution is simple but seldom adopted on powershift gearboxes because of the
installation space to be left for clutches.

• Epicycloidal gear trains of different conﬁguration that in association with band
brakes or multi disc clutches can realize different ratios including reverse speed,
featuring always coaxial input and output shafts.

15.2 Car Gearboxes with Fixed Rotation Axis

553

15.2 Car Gearboxes with Fixed Rotation Axis

15.2.1 Synchronizer Gearboxes

Automatic gearboxes with synchronizers are often derived from manual transmis-
sions.

In the past, manual gearboxes with torque converter received a limited diffusion.
In these gearboxes the torque converter was coupled to a clutch. It worked as an
automatic CVT from stall to lock-up. The clutch, with electromagnetic actuator, was
open automatically at any speed change.

Selection and engagement manoeuvres were manual, acting on the shift stick;
the electromagnet of the clutch was switched by a sensor, able to measure the effort
applied to the shift stick knob.

This kind of semi automatic gearboxes eliminated the clutch pedal only, being
shift stick still manual. They don’t exist anymore on cars but could be reconsidered
in the future.

Automatic gearboxes, whose mechanisms are shared with those of manual gear-
boxes with hydraulic clutch, are present now on the market with growing volumes;
their shifting mechanisms are on the contrary very speciﬁc.

External shifting mechanisms are electrically or electrohydraulically servo actu-
ated. Firsts look less appropriate to a quick response. As a matter of fact hydraulic
systems can feature higher power peaks, by use of pressure accumulators; electric
12 V actuation is, on the contrary, limited by battery capacity and wiring harness
dimension.

On hydraulic systems, the external shifting mechanism is made by two categories
of components: a group providing for hydraulic energy generation, regulation and
distribution and a set of actuators. Actuators are as many as the displacements to be
made: one for the clutch and two, at least for the gearbox (one for selection and one
for engagement).

Figure 15.2 presents a system of this kind; a hydraulic actuator 1 engages and
disengages the clutch, while a second double actuator provides for shifting and
turning the shaft 2, for engagement and selection motions; the hydraulic group 3
includes an oil pump, a pressure accumulator and actuation electric valves. The
selection mechanism is done by a rack which can raise the shaft 2 matching the
ﬁnger with the three selection gates (ﬁrst and second speed, third and fourth speed,
ﬁfth and reverse speed).

The second actuator can rotate the same shaft to obtain engagement and dis-
engagement; it must feature three different positions: the engagement of the two
neighboring speeds and the intermediate idle position.

On the next Fig. 15.3 actuators are illustrated with more detail. The clutch actuator
1 is moved by pressure acting on his back chamber (coil spring side): oil pressure oper-
ates disengagement, while engagement is obtained by opening a controlled exhaust;
the coil provides for actuator return.

554

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.2 Scheme of an electro-hydraulically actuated internal shifting mechanism; a hydraulic
actuator 1 disengages and engages the clutch, while a second combined actuator provides for
rotation and shift of the shaft 2; a hydraulic group 3 includes an oil pump, a pressure accumulator
and actuation electric valves (Marelli)

Fig. 15.3 Hydraulic actuation group for a gearbox; 1 is the clutch actuator; 2 and 3 the engagement
and selection actuators (Marelli)

15.2 Car Gearboxes with Fixed Rotation Axis

555

Fig. 15.4 Actuator piston with three stable positions. Two bushings 2 and 3 are set inside the
cylinder; stroke limiters on bushings determine an intermediate stable position that can be obtained.
While feeding the oil to the left chamber (scheme a), a stable position with right full stroke can be
obtained; feeding the oil to the right chamber (scheme b), a the stable position with left full stroke
can be obtained. Feeding both chambers (scheme c) brings the two bushings to the end of their
stroke and an intermediate stable position is obtained (Marelli)

Pressure control must be made through a proportional valve, suitable to control
actuation and exhaust pressure to obtain a suitable actuation speed (i.e.: slow start-
up, quick start-up, speed change, etc.). Clutch actuators must feature two stable
rest positions (disengaged and engaged clutch) made by stroke limiters; the control
system must recognize the driven plate wear and adjust the incipient engagement
point accordingly.

Selection actuator 3 and engagement actuator 2 must feature, vice versa, three dif-
ferent stable rest positions (for three selection planes and for idle and two engaged
neighboring speeds). These positions remain almost unchanged during gearbox use-
ful life; they must be adjusted at the assembly only. Contrary to clutch actuators,
engagement and selection actuators don’t have return coil springs and must there-
fore receive oil pressure on two piston sides.

Figure 15.4 shows the design feature which allows also the obtainment of an
intermediate stable piston position. Two bushings 2 and 3 are invested on the double
effect piston 1, inside the cylinder 4; they are free to move inside the cylinder. Their

556

15 Automatic Gearboxes

stroke is limited by a collar that determines the intermediate stable position too
(scheme c). Feeding the oil to the left chamber (scheme a) the right stable position
can be obtained; feeding the oil to the right chamber (scheme b) the left stable
position can be obtained. Feeding the two chambers at the same time (scheme c)
brings the two bushings to the end of their stroke and the intermediate stable position
is obtained.

In the generator, regulator and distributor group there is a pressure accumulator
that regulates pressure at a value almost independent on the ﬂow rate required by
actuators. To obtain this, the pump is driven on-off by an electric motor, controlled
by a pressure sensor. In the accumulator pressure oil is available also when motor is
stopped; it is possible to design the pump according to the averaged required ﬂow,
instead than on peak values.

Three different electrovalves are also present in the group:

• One, proportional type, for clutch actuation;
• Two, proportional type, for engagement mechanism;
• Two, on-off type, for selection mechanism.

Valve type choice for engagement mechanism is decided by of the need of con-
trolling thrust in order not to damage synchronizers and in the mean time to obtain
high actuation speed. The selection valves can be on-off type because isn’t necessary
to control actuation force with high precision.

Clutch actuator is similar to that already seen for manual clutch hydraulic mecha-
nism; shift control system includes also an axial position sensor (engagement stroke)
and an angular position sensor (selection stroke); through them selected gears can
be identiﬁed.

When selection planes number is increasing, for example on a six speeds gearbox,
actuation system could become quite complex for the added fourth selection plane;
in this case a cam actuation system is used, named S-cam, after the shape of his cam.
With reference to the Fig. 15.5 shift actuator is made by a single bistable piston
1 that moves the ﬁnger of the internal shift mechanism. The piston can rotate in the
cylinder, in order to reach different selection planes.

The two piston stroke ends correspond to the two engagement positions of each
sleeve; an intermediate idle position couldn’t be obtained with sufﬁcient precision.
Because of this limitation, the internal mechanism is completely reorganized, by
bringing neutral and reverse on the ﬁrst selection plane, ﬁrst and second on the
second plane and so on. See the scheme on the lower left of Fig. 15.6.

How can be seen on the same ﬁgure, the piston 1 engages through a pin 4 a cam
cut on a sleeve 3; this cam is shaped like an S. The sleeve can rotate or can be ﬁxed
by a magnetic actuator 5. Since there is a spring plunger that can match one of the
axial grooves on piston 1 (one groove for each selection plane), piston 1 engages
alternatively two neighboring speeds, until actuator 5 is switched on; if this occurs,
when the piston goes to the left, the ﬁnger tip lowers of one selection plane, or rises
of one, when the piston moves to the right.

Working on the piston and on the actuator 5 all speeds can be selected and engaged
in a sequential way only, according to the order R, N, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and vice versa.

15.2 Car Gearboxes with Fixed Rotation Axis

557

Fig. 15.5 S-cam actuator (Marelli). See the working details on the next ﬁgure

Fig. 15.6 Working details of an S-cam actuator; on the lower left there is the selection scheme of
the relative gearbox (Marelli)

15.2.2 Multi Disc Clutch Gearboxes

The conﬁguration of this automatic gearbox kind is still similar to one of a manual
gearbox. Synchronizers only are substituted by multi disc wet clutches and speed
shift can be power-shift type.

558

Fig. 15.7 Countershaft
powershift gearbox with
multi disc wet clutches
(Honda)

15 Automatic Gearboxes

15.2 Car Gearboxes with Fixed Rotation Axis

559

Reverse speed too is made with an idler, in a similar way to a manual gearbox.
With this kind of gearbox there are no limits, how in epicycloidal ones, to choose
desired transmission ratios.

The simplicity of the basic concept should not suggest that this kind of gearbox
can be really derived of a manual one. As a matter of fact, clutch dimension notably
increases centre distance between gearbox shafts and shafts are complicated by drills
for oil abduction to the different clutches; a gearbox with ﬁve speeds only needs to
have three transmission stages.

A construction drawing of a ﬁve speed gearbox for a front wheel driven car with
transverse engine is showed on Fig. 15.7. On this drawing shafts are represented on
the same drawing plane; input shaft gears (the ﬁrst from top) match with those of the
output shaft (the second from top) and with those of a counter shaft (the third from
top), through a gear set drafted on the left.

This double gear set is necessary because the rotation of the countershaft must
not be inverted as compared with the input shaft; the design complexity is due to
space limitation.

Let’s look, on the upper right of the same ﬁgure, the lock-up torque converter
whose hydraulic clutch is fed through a hole on the input shaft; the converter pump
moves a gears oil pump for gearbox lubrication and pressure supply to different
actuators.

Gears for third, ﬁrst and second are on the countershaft, starting from the right.
On the input shaft, always from the right, there are gears for fourth and ﬁfth; gears
radial dimensions are conditioned by clutch diameters. The reverse speed gears are
on the right of the input and of the output shaft and are in constant mesh with an
idler; a sleeve dog clutch is shared with the ﬁfth speed.

15.2.3 Dual Clutch Gearbox

Since the ﬁrst dual clutch gearboxes or transmissions, shortly called DCTs, have
appeared at the beginning of the new century, they have constantly increased their
market penetration thanks to their design simplicity and high mechanical efﬁciency,
showing very few limitations in gearshift quality, as compared with conventional
epicycloidal gearbox with torque converter.

They are extensively applied to small and medium size cars but there are no

theoretical reasons against their adoption in large high-class cars also.

Their working principle is quite simple: a double clutch Ce and Co with coaxial
output shafts can operate two different sets of gears, engaging each with two different
countershafts, as shown in Fig. 15.8.

Both countershafts end with a common output gear that is operating the differen-

tial.

The gears on one countershaft are dedicated to even speeds, while those on the
other are dedicated to odd speeds; obviously, there is also a third countershaft, not
shown in the scheme, for the reverse speed, engaging with the even speeds shaft.

560

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.8 An eight speeds dual clutch gearbox includes two clutches Ce and Co with coaxial output,
operating two single stage transmissions, where each output gear is moving the differential

Fig. 15.9 Working scheme of a powershift dual-clutch six speeds gearbox (Audi)

15.2 Car Gearboxes with Fixed Rotation Axis

561

Fig. 15.10 Cut away of a dual speed powershift six speeds gearbox (Audi)

Each idle gear can be engaged with its countershaft through a conventional syn-

chronizer, moved by an electro hydraulic actuator.

Let us suppose that the gear i is presently engaged and the clutch Ce of even
speeds is closed; according to the accelerator pedal position and the values of vehicle
speed and acceleration, the control system is able to predict if the next ratio to be
engaged will be gear i + 1 or i − 1: as a consequence the selected synchronizer will
be engaged, with no consequence on car motion because the odd speeds clutch Co
is still open.

Only at the shifting time, the even speeds clutch will be open and the odd speeds
clutch will be contemporarily closed, with a pressure cycle suitable to the continuity
of power transmission. Obviously, gears i + 2 and 1 − 2 cannot be selected without
applying gears i + 1 or i − 1 before.

On Fig. 15.9 a DCT conﬁguration conﬁguration scheme is reported; the scheme
is suitable for a front wheel drive with transverse engine, but could be easily adapted
for different traction conﬁgurations.

Clutches F1 and F2 can move two coaxial shafts, where one is ﬁxed to the odd
speed input wheels and the other to the even speed input wheels. In ﬁrst speed, for
example, clutch F2 is engaged, while clutch F1 is disengaged; the second gear shaft

562

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.11 Multi disc concentrical wet clutches suitable to a dual clutch gearbox; two oil pistons
operate the clutches trough ball bearings (Schaefﬂer)

is idle and doesn’t receive torque. If the sleeve of the second speed is engaged, the
internal shaft starts moving but will be still idle; at any time clutch F1 can be engaged
and the clutch F2 disengaged, according to a powershift change of speed procedure.
In the same way ﬁrst gear can be disengaged, to engage the third, in preparation
for the next shift. As we have already said, peeds must be used sequentially; double
up or down shifts are impossible.

The clutch F2 is used for the start-up of the vehicle too. The particular architecture
of this gearbox features a reduced number of idle turning clutches and no torque
converter. The effect on mechanical efﬁciency is surely positive; the advantage is
paid by an increased design complexity.

The scheme is drafted on the same plane, as usual; on the engine shaft are installed
the two clutches F1 and F2 (start-up device) that move shafts A1 and A2; shaft A1
moves the input wheels of ﬁrst, third and ﬁfth speeds, while the shaft A2 moves the
input wheels of second, fourth and sixth (one single wheel).

Two countershafts A3 and A4 match the ﬁnal drive wheel and are respectively
ﬁxed with the driven wheels of ﬁfth and sixth speeds and with the driven wheels of
ﬁrst, second third and fourth speeds.

The reverse speed shows a third idler countershaft, not shown on the scheme;
it can be seen on the front of the following Fig. 15.10. It meshes with the driving

15.2 Car Gearboxes with Fixed Rotation Axis

563

Fig. 15.12 Dry clutch seven speeds multidisc transmission; note that each countershaft is bearing
odd and even gears (Volkswagen)

564

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.13 Scheme of a simple epicycloidal gear train

wheel of the ﬁrst speed on the A2 shaft and with the R wheel on the A3 shaft; its
synchronizer is neighbor of that of the sixth speed.

In this gearbox the clutches are multi disc oil wet type, because of the relevant value
of the torque to be transmitted; as Fig. 15.11 shows, two different pressure plates are
pressed, against two concentric discs stack, by hydraulically actuated pistons, acting
through ball bearings.

For lower values of torque, below about 300 Nm, dry clutches can be also used,

as shown in Fig. 15.12.

In this case the clutch is more complicate than usual; there are three pressure
plates, one at the engine side, one at the gearbox side and one in the middle: this one
only is connected to the engine, through a number of straps, as shown in Fig. 11.3.
The odd speed pressure plate in pulled by a diaphragm spring, while the even speed
pressure plate is pushed; the two necessary diaphragm springs are both installed at
the gearbox side and two different disengaging mechanisms are provided, operated
by hydraulic actuators.

The drawing, reporting a seven speeds gearbox, is again represented with the four
shafts on the same plane as usual; remember that the three output shafts are engaged
with the ﬁnal ratio gear of the differential.

15.3 Epicycloidal Car Gearboxes

565

15.3 Epicycloidal Car Gearboxes

15.3.1 Epicycloidal Trains

We will examine the most important gear trains used on automatic gearboxes; we
admit that the conﬁgurations in use are many more.

These trains are always made with spur gears; in the past some example with

bevel gears was available.

The simplest conﬁguration for an epicycloidal gear train is shown on Fig. 15.13;
the same was presented for gear speed reducers, splitters and transfer differentials.
The wheel train is made by an internal tooth gear (annulus) and by an external tooth
gear (sun) with concentric centre lines; the two wheels mesh with other wheels (satel-
lites) whose hubs are supported by shafts mounted on a rotating structure coaxial to
the sun, called carrier.

Satellites are normally three and are put on the carrier at constant angles; radial

components of gearing forces are, therefore, self equilibrated.

This systems shows three degrees of freedom; in order to transmit a torque from
an input element to an output element, the third element must be ﬁxed to the gearbox
casing (stator); three transmission ratios that can be obtained with a train of this kind
(as many as the elements that can be stator: sun, carrier, annulus), multiplied by two
(the number of possibilities for a given element to be input or output shaft). To this
six possible transmission ratio, one more should be added as a direct drive, by ﬁxing
the input and the output shafts together.

If we call with:

τ0 = − z3
z1

the ordinary transmission ratio that can be obtained by ﬁxing the carrier, we can
obtain the six different value of the transmission ratio τ reported on Table 15.1.

It should be noticed that τ0 is negative, because, when the carrier is locked, the
output shaft is counter rotating as compared with the input shaft; not all ratios can be
utilized on the same gearbox, for the obvious difﬁculty of having the same element
working as input and output in the same mechanism. With this mechanism two ratios
(one reduced and one direct drive) can be obtained in practice.

To obtain a larger number of transmission ratio, more epicycloidal gear train
must be combined together; an obvious solution is putting more simple gears in
series, where each of them makes available one of the desiderate ratio alone or in
combination with the remaining ones.

A second way is utilizing compound gear trains, where different elements are
integrated together. This second way, preferred on not very modern conﬁgurations,
allows design simpliﬁcation but with limited ﬂexibility in determining transmission
ratios.

Table 15.1 Possible values of the transmission ratio of a simple epicycloidal gear, in function of
the constraints and of the ordinary transmission ratio τ0, with reference to Fig. 15.13
Input

Output

Stator

566

1
3
1
2

2

3

3
1
2
1

3

2

2
2
3
3

1

1

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Transmission ratio τ
τ = (cid:2)1/(cid:2)3 = τo
τ = (cid:2)3/(cid:2)1 = 1/τo
τ = (cid:2)1/(cid:2)2 = 1 − τo
τ = (cid:2)2/(cid:2)1 =
1/ (1 − τo)
τ = (cid:2)2/(cid:2)3 =
1/ (1 − 1/τo)
τ = (cid:2)3/(cid:2)2 =
1 − 1/τo

Fig. 15.14 Scheme of a Wilson compound epicycloidal gear train; two speeds can be obtained by
stopping one of the two annulus wheels with B1 and B2 band brakes

The Wilson epicycloidal gear train, shown on Fig. 15.14, is a ﬁrst example of
compound train. In this mechanism two simple trains are matched is such a way as
the carrier of the ﬁrst train is ﬁxed to the annulus of the second one; by stopping one
of the annulus wheels at a time, two different not inverted transmission ratios can be
obtained.

By ﬁxing the two carriers together, a direct drive can be obtained.
An alternative scheme of the same mechanism is shown on Fig. 15.15; on this
ﬁgure B1 and B2 are band brakes, while C1 and C2 are two multi disc clutches. Three
forward and one reverse speed can be obtained by locking the different elements
according to the table shown on the same ﬁgure (X designates locked elements).

On ﬁrst speed, when the B2 brake is locked, we can write for the left mechanism

with blocked carrier:

(cid:2)As
(cid:2)S

= − z S
z A

.

(15.1)

15.3 Epicycloidal Car Gearboxes

567

Fig. 15.15 Scheme of a second Wilson compound epicycloidal gear train with brakes and clutches;
the table shows statuses corresponding to different speeds

In the above formula, (cid:2) are the angular speeds, z the gear teeth number, subscripts
d and s show the right and the left gear train, where A and S stay for annulus and
sun gear. It should be noticed that teeth numbers don’t show any d or s subscript,
because the corresponding wheel of the two simple trains are equal.

For the right train, distinguishing again with the 1 and 2 subscripts the input and

the output shafts:

(cid:2)1 − (cid:2)2
(cid:2)S − (cid:2)2

= − z S
z A

.

let’s remember that (cid:2)AS and (cid:2)2 are equal, because their corresponding elements are
ﬁxed together.

From the two equations derives the ﬁrst gear transmission ratio:

For the second speed the right sun gear is locked and the left simple gear train is
idle; the right gear train has the annulus ﬁxed to the input shaft and the carrier ﬁxed
to the output shaft; therefore:

For the third gear the contemporary lock of clutches C1 and C2 puts the mechanism

in direct drive, with:

τ1 = 2 + z S
z A

.

τ2 = 1 + z S
z A

.

τ3 = 1.

(15.2)

(15.3)

(15.4)

(15.5)

568

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.16 Scheme of a compound Ravigneaux epicyclical gear train; the satellite s1 is represented
conventionally with dotted lines, because its drawing plane is not on the sketch plane

For the reverse gear the carrier of the left simple train is locked, while the right
train is idle. The sun gear of the left train is ﬁxed to the input shaft and the annulus
gear is ﬁxed to the output shaft; therefore:

τR M = − z A
z S

.

(15.6)

If, for example, z S/z A = 1/3, the ﬁrst speed ratio will be 2.333, the second speed
1.333, the third 1 and the reverse – 3; if, instead, z S/z A = 2/5, the ﬁrst speed ratio
will be 2.4, the second 1.4, again 1 for the third and – 2.5 for the reverse speed.

If we remember what we said about torque converters, obtainable ratios are similar
to those of a reference manual four speed gearbox (the stall torque converter torque
ratio can be about 2.5); the possibility of obtaining a desired speed step or a suitable
reverse speed ratio is unfortunately compromised.

A different compound gear train conﬁguration is that of the so called Ravigneaux
train, shown on Fig. 15.16; it is very much diffused on automatic gearboxes. In this
train a single annulus wheel is provided with two satellites s1 and s2 on the same
carrier P; satellites mesh with two different sun wheels S1 and S2. Satellites s2 mesh
with the smaller sun S2; they don’t mesh with the annulus but with the satellites s1
of the larger sun S1.

Since satellites s2 have their centre line on a different drawing plane, they are

conventionally sketched with dotted lines.

On the following Fig. 15.17, different gearbox statuses are shown with the already
known procedure. With this scheme, with three multi disc clutches and two band
brakes, four different forward speeds and one reverse speed can be obtained.

We adopt the same symbols of the previous example; we have, in ﬁrst speed, the
right sun gear ﬁxed to the input shaft and the annulus gear ﬁxed to the output shaft,
while the carrier is the stator element; therefore:

15.3 Epicycloidal Car Gearboxes

569

Fig. 15.17 Scheme of an automatic gearbox with a Ravigneaux epicycloidal gear train; the table
shows statuses of clutches and brakes in different speeds

it represents the ordinary transmission ratio of the right gear train; the sign is positive
because the double meshing satellites don’t change the rotation direction.

In second speeds the annulus wheel is ﬁxed to the output shaft, while the input
shaft is ﬁxed to the right sun gear, being the left one locked. For the left gear train,
we can write:

because the left sun gear is locked and the annulus is ﬁxed to the output shaft:

For the right epicycloidal gear train, we can write:

If we remember that the right sun gear is ﬁxed to the input shaft, we can also

write:

τ1 = z A
z Sd

;

(cid:2)Ss − (cid:2)P
(cid:2)A − (cid:2)P

= − z A
z Ss

;

−

(cid:2)P
(cid:2)2 − (cid:2)P

= − z A
z Ss

.

(cid:2)Sd − (cid:2)P
(cid:2)2 − (cid:2)P

= − z A
z Sd

.

(cid:2)1 − (cid:2)P
(cid:2)2 − (cid:2)P

= z A
z Sd

.

(15.7)

(15.8)

(15.9)

(15.10)

(15.11)

570

15 Automatic Gearboxes

If we compare the equations, we obtain:

(15.12)

(15.13)

(15.14)

(15.15)

τ2 =

1 + z Ss
z Sd
1 + z Ss
z A

.

τ3 = 1 ;

τ4 =

1
1 + z Ss
z A

.

τR M = − z A
z Ss

.

In third speed the carrier and the right sun gear are ﬁxed, therefore the gearbox is

in direct drive, and:

in fourth speed, the carrier is ﬁxed to the input shaft and the annulus is ﬁxed to the
output shaft, while the left sun gear is locked; therefore:

In reverse speed the carrier is locked, the sun is ﬁxed with input shaft and the
annulus with the output shaft; the transmission ratio is that of the ordinary left gear
train and therefore:

Also in this case remarks made for previous case about the possibility to obtain a

given range and ratio step do apply.

If the number of available speed increases, applied gear train gets more complex;
for example a scheme suitable for a ﬁve speed gearbox may be conceived by adding
a simple epicycloidal gear train to the Ravigneaux gear train previously described.
The scheme could be compared to the application of a range speed reducers that

we described for the industrial vehicles.

The total speed number should be eight, by multiplying the four speeds of the
compound gear train by the two of the added speed reducer (reduced and direct
drive); in a real example many obtainable speed ratios should be too close and
therefore useless.

The simplest scheme, considered till yesterday, are abandoned in favour of com-
pound gear trains that look unnecessarily complicated, but obtain transmission ratio
values closer to theoretical speciﬁcation.

Figure 15.18 shows the example of a Ravigneaux compound gear train joined to
two simple epicycloidal gear trains; the number of theoretically available speeds
is well over the ﬁve practically implemented. Since many possible combinations
were discarded, the implemented transmission ratios can assume almost the desired
values and therefore allow a better optimization of performance, fuel consumption
and emission.

On the same ﬁgure is represented with the same procedure brakes and clutches
status for different speeds; this scheme has been designed and applied for longitudinal
engine conventional driven cars.

15.3 Epicycloidal Car Gearboxes

571

Fig. 15.18 Scheme of an automatic powershift gearbox featuring three epicycloidal gear trains,
conceived by Mercedes; ﬁve different speeds are obtained

Quite recently, this scheme has been modiﬁed in a very simple manner, to obtain
what represented on Fig. 15.19; substantially an additional annulus wheel has been
added to the Ravigneaux gear train and the lay-out of brakes and clutches has been
modiﬁed, without increasing their number. The result is seven forwards speeds and
two reverse speeds, haw the status table shows on the picture.

The transmission ratio calculation will be omitted for the two previous schemes

for sake of simplicity.

This overview on gearbox schemes doesn’t pretend to be a complete report on what
is or can be produced. Possible combinations of simple and compound epicycloidal
gear trains are many more.

The epicycloidal gear solution is, for the time being, the most diffused one for

powershift automatic gearboxes.

15.3.2 Production Examples

Conventionally driven cars beneﬁt of the alignment of input and output shafts.

The example on Fig. 15.20 corresponds to the scheme on Fig. 15.18 and adopts,
as we have seen, a Ravigneaux gear train 3 and two epicycloidal speed reducers 2
and 4, downstream of the ﬁrst; it features ﬁve forward speeds and a reverse speed.

We draw the attention on the fact that on torque converter automatic gearboxes is
impossible to keep the vehicle braked at parking, by engaging only the lowest speed,
how is possible on manual gearboxes.

572

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.19 Scheme still conceived by Mercedes derived of the previous one; it allows seven forward
speeds and two reverse speeds

On these gearboxes engine compression and friction torque is used to withstand
vehicle tendency to move. The torque converter, inserted on the transmission line,
acts as free wheel joint at low speed; also the lock-up clutch, if any, couldn’t keep the
car braked, because actuation pressure is not available when the engine is stopped.
To keep the vehicle stopped, a manually actuated park pawl is added, matching a
sprocket wheel on the output shaft; in the ﬁgure the pawl is the element 15 and the
corresponding sprocket wheel is the element 14.

Also the torque converter can be seen (without lock-up clutch), the oil pump 6

and the different multi disc wet clutches used for gear engagement.

A recent evolution of this scheme is represented on Fig. 15.21; the operation prin-
ciples are explained on the previous Fig. 15.19. Epicycloidal gear trains are almost
the same as in previous case. A lock-up clutch can be noticed on the torque converter.
Automatic gearboxes for front wheel driven cars, with longitudinal or transversal
engine, are complicated by the necessity of having an output shaft at a convenient
distance of the input shaft, not coaxial as on epicycloidal gearboxes; in addition,
particularly critical on transversal engines are space limitation caused by the front
steered wheel.

Nevertheless, automatic gearboxes have gear trains that are substantially similar
to those of conventional drives. Additional single stage trains are added to locate the
output shaft on the desiderated ﬁnal drive pinion position.

One example of this architecture is reported on Fig. 15.22, for a front wheel driven

car with longitudinal engine.

15.3 Epicycloidal Car Gearboxes

573

Fig. 15.20 Scheme for a ﬁve speed automatic powershift gearbox for conventional drive (Mercedes)

574

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.21 Scheme for a seven speed automatic powershift gearbox for a conventional drive (Mer-
cedes)

15.3 Epicycloidal Car Gearboxes

575

Fig. 15.22 Six speeds automatic gearbox with epicycloidal gear trains; the lateral shaft connects
the gearbox output shaft with the differential pinion, behind the engine (Audi)

The scheme includes a simple and Ravigneaux gear trains that in conjunction
with three clutches and two brakes make six speeds available. The Ravigneaux gear
train output shaft moves the differential ﬁnal drive through an auxiliary shaft. The
presence of the all wheel drive doesn’t inﬂuence the lay-out.

The possibilities available to front wheel driven cars with transversal engine

are two.

576

15 Automatic Gearboxes

A ﬁrst solution provides for torque converter and oil pump in line with the engine;
the torque converter output shaft is ﬁxed to a sprocket wheel that, through a silent
chain, moves the input shaft of the real gearbox on a parallel centre line. Every geo-
metrical problem on the transversal direction of the car is eliminated; on the contrary
there are consequences on the front overhang of the car that becomes relevant.

A second solution provides dividing the epicycloidal gearbox in two sections.
The ﬁrst section could include a Ravigneaux gear train coaxial to the engine;
its output shaft moves through a single stage train a simple epicycloidal gear train
coaxial to the differential pinion. It is therefore possible to have ﬁve speeds within
the space available on a front wheel drive with transversal engine.

15.4 Car CVTs

15.4.1 Motivations

Continuously variable transmissions (CVTs) are mostly diffused on front wheel
drives. They are particularly appreciated for having available an unlimited number
of transmission ratios, with beneﬁts for comfort, performance and fuel economy.

A simple explanation of this sentence can be supplied by Fig. 15.23. On this
ﬁgure the speciﬁc fuel consumption map is reported using engine torque and speed

Fig. 15.23 Engine speciﬁc fuel consumption map; the minimum fuel consumption line ABC and
the area of practical use for a stepped gearbox are shown. This area is included between the wide
open throttle curve and the dotted curve showing the torque obtained on the higher speed, when
existing

15.4 Car CVTs

577

as parameters; for each output power value, one and only one minimum fuel con-
sumption working point does exist.

These points are represented by the thick line below the wide open throttle curve;
it can be drawn by connecting all tangency points of equal fuel consumption curves
(quoted on the ﬁgure) with the hyperbola (drafted with a line and dots) representing
the constant power curves.

This curve is made by a vertical straight line AB on the left of the map that
represents the minimal stable working speed of the engine; this speed depends on
engine characteristics, on elastic and damping properties of the transmission line,
made of clutch, gearbox, on car suspensions and on tires.

Other notable points of this curve are point C, coincident, by deﬁnition, with full
power point and point O that represents the minimum absolute fuel consumption
value.

Let’s assume changing plane coordinates in such a way as they represent the wheel
torque and vehicle speed at the actual speed i − 1 of a stepped gearbox; the dotted
curve, similar to the maximum torque curve, represent the wheel torque at the next
i speed.

A very efﬁcient usage of a stepped gearbox allows speciﬁc fuel consumption to
ﬂuctuate between the maximum torque curve at the i − 1 speed and the maximum
torque curve at the i speed, at a given power level; actual fuel consumption can be
higher than minimum.

At the last speed, fuel consumption can ﬂuctuate between the maximum torque
and the road load torque at the last speed; in this case fuel consumption increase
could be substantial.

It is possible to have the engine working at the speciﬁc minimum fuel consumption

only if an unlimited number of speeds are available.

This fact explains why in these last years so many efforts have been made to

increase the speeds number either for manual or for automatic gearboxes.

It should be said that only on these lasts, when a sufﬁciently sophisticated control
system is available, the instantaneously optimum speed is guarantied to be engaged.
Similar statements can be made about acceleration and pollutant emissions.
Possible systems suitable for a CVT include in principle:

• Electric transmissions;
• Hydrodynamic transmissions (among them the torque converter);
• Hydrostatic transmissions;
• Variable geometry mechanical transmissions.

The ﬁrst three categories have been considered many times in the past, but have
been abandoned on conventional vehicles for the poor transmission efﬁciency; this
penalty jeopardizes the advantage theoretically available by a CVT.

These kinds of transmissions can be reconsidered for hybrid vehicles, where the
intermediate form of energy generated by the transmission (electric or hydraulic
pressure energy) can be used to recover vehicle kinetic energy or as a temporary
source alternative to fossil fuel.

578

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Variable geometry mechanical transmissions can show similar efﬁciency as that
of gear transmissions. At this time belt or chain drives are available and roller traction
drives are at the developmental stage.

On special purpose vehicles, such as tractors, earth moving machines, airport

boarding busses, etc. some hydrostatic CVT are used.

15.4.2 Production Examples

Steel belt transmissions represent the most diffused technical solution for CVT. Steel
belts that are known today are the VDT belt and the LuK chain, which is used as
a belt anyway. Their working principles present many common points but some
differences are presents mostly as far as component design is concerned; this issue
will be explained later on.

The cross section of a CVT with a Van Doorn Trasmissie steel belt (VDT) is
shown on Fig. 15.24 with the usual drawing system. The gearbox on the ﬁgure doesn’t
include a torque converter, because start-up functions are performed by an electron-
ically controlled multi disc clutch on the output shaft.

The reason for this choice is twice:

• While towing the car, any damage on the belt is avoided; the belt in fact is loose

without oil pressure on pulleys;

• During emergency braking manoeuvres, transmission ratio can be changed inde-

pendently of vehicle speed, making the next acceleration quicker.

The engine is ﬁxed to the carrier 8 of an epicycloidal gear train with twin satellites
that is used for forward and reverse speed; the gearbox input shaft 1 is instead ﬁxed
to the sun gear 9 of the same train. By using the clutch 4 is possible to set the train
in direct drive; by engaging instead the brake 5, the annulus is locked and sun gear
rotation is opposite to that of the carrier, obtaining reverse speed.

With this design it would be possible, if necessary, to change transmission ratio

in both forward and reverse drives.

The transmission ratio variation is obtained through two variable gouge V pulleys

which match the belt (see detail on Fig. 15.25).

Each pulley is made by two steel cones that can slide axially but are ﬁxed together
when turning. Looking at the drawing, the left input semi pulley and the right output
one are also ﬁxed in the axial direction; the other two semi pulleys are instead free
to slide.

Because the developed belt length cannot change, by narrowing the two driving
semi pulleys the driving pulley primitive diameter will be increased and the two
driven semi pulleys must be accordingly widen, to reduce their primitive diameter;
the belt will be shifted to the right and the transmission ratio will be decreased. With
the opposite motion the transmission ratio will be increased.

15.4 Car CVTs

579

Fig. 15.24 VDT steel belt CVT; the gearbox is characterized by the start-up multi disc clutch on
the output shaft (Honda)

A given transmission ratio range will be obtained with a minimum overdrive ratio

and a maximum reduced ratio.

The two limit ratios are reciprocal numbers; this situation where the 1:1 value is
in the middle of the ratio range must be adapted to the vehicle use by an additional
ﬁnal drive bringing higher ratio to be close to one.

For this reason there is an idler gears ﬁnal drive between output pulley and the
differential pinion; it should be necessary, in any case, to position different centre
lines appropriately to the engine compartment lay-out. This ﬁnal drive is also used
to adapt same gearbox to different cars.

Semi pulleys active surfaces are moved by hydraulic pistons; this motion can
change their primitive diameter. Oil pressure determines semi pulleys contact force
with the belt.

Controlling this parameter is vitally important, because contact force determines
torque transmission through friction between the pulley and the belt; if this force
is insufﬁcient parts would slip, with lack of efﬁciency and surface damage; if this

580

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.25 Detail of the pulley motion in a VDT steel belt CVT (upper part); detail of the belt
(lower side). The torque is transmitted by belt compression

force is excessive, also mechanical losses would be higher than necessary, because
contact area between belt and pulley exceeds the cinematically correct primitive
circumference.

VDT belts include the use of many thrust elements as that on the lower side of

Fig. 15.25.

Each of them contacts the next and is set along the belt centre line; they are kept
aligned with a series of ﬂexible steel ring bands, one inserted inside the other with
no clearance. Thrust elements have a trapezoidal shape with a median appendix; the
two inclined sides match pulleys sides and exchange the friction force necessary to
torque transmission.

The median appendix of each thrust element matches the two sets of concentric
rings; ring contact surfaces are inclined in such a way as the rings don’t come in
contact with pulley sides.

Rings must be very as the curvature stress will be contained within reasonable

values; the necessary tension is supported by an adequate number of rings.

Ring developed length must allow an assembly without clearance do uniformly

distribute tension between rings.

Thrust elements can only exchange compression forces with neighboring ones;
therefore VDT belt will never work with positive tension and will transmit the torque
through the compression of the driven part of the belt circuit.

15.4 Car CVTs

581

Rings only purpose is keeping elements at the correct radial position in the pulleys

and aligned when outside of pulleys.

Friction forces between elements and pulleys wouldn’t waste energy if there
weren’t relative motions. They are very limited because there isn’t macroscopic
slip between parts; nevertheless there is local microscopic relative motion because
of two facts:

• Thrust element contact area must have a certain radial extension to limit contact
pressure; on each contact area there will be a small slip on points outside primitive
radius.

• Thrust elements entering and leaving pulleys must slide because they change their

path from straight to circular.

The power wasted by these small relative motions will be in any case determined
by pressure acting between belt sides and pulleys; this pressure must be limited to the
minimum necessary to avoid a macroscopic slip. Contact pressure must be therefore
carefully adjusted as a function of transmitted torque.

There are also belt CVT with torque converter between engine and speed variation

unit, as that shown in Fig. 15.26.

Fig. 15.26 VDT steel belt CVT with start-up torque converter (Mercedes)

582

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Other CVT apply different steel belts that could be better named as chains.
Figure 15.27 shows a chain CVT lay-out, not very different as compared with the
ﬁrst as far as pulleys are concerned; start-up clutch is instead before speed variation
unit. The gearbox shows the usual ﬁnal drive before differential drive, but differential
shows a bevel gear drive, to adapt the gearbox to a longitudinal engine.
The LuK chain is represented on the upper part of the same ﬁgure.
The links of this chain are made by a stack of plates mounted on pins, rolling on
their contacts without slip; pin ends are inclined to match pulley sides. The friction
between pin tips and pulley transmits efforts from belt to pulleys and vice versa; in
this case the belt is in tension on the driving side of its circuit.

Plates length can show a limited difference in different links, to avoid whistles

and vibrations.

A good point in favour of the chain is the possibility of adopting a smaller mini-
mum radius on the pulley, reducing dimensions at the same performance; mechanical
efﬁciency should also be slightly better.

Chain or belt design has presented many problems; steel has been chosen as most

suitable material because of stress necessary level and for oil compatibility.

Many solutions of reinforced elastomeric materials have been also proposed for
belts; they must be used outside of gearbox lubricated areas and have found their
application for limited torque, particularly on scooters.

A different working principle usable for CVT, not present on mass production yet,
is that of rolling bodies able to exchange signiﬁcant tangent forces with rather limited
contact areas. This is possible thanks to special synthetic lubrication oils having the
property of viscosity increasing with contact pressure (traction ﬂuids).

The advantage of this principle consist in a high mechanical efﬁciency, that can
be reached because of very limited slips of contacting parts, working very closely
to pure rolling conditions; on the contrary, the disadvantage is due to the very high
mechanism weight, necessary to obtain a sufﬁcient contact pressure, for adequate
traction at lubricated conditions.

A typical conﬁguration according to this principle is that of the so called toroidal
gearbox; the essential parts of this gearbox are shown on Fig. 15.28. The gearbox
shows two identical traction bodies each of them made by two symmetric toroidal
surfaces.

These toroidal surfaces are made by two revolution surfaces obtained by turning
a circumference arc around the rotation axis; on rotating facing surfaces, a number
of rollers are set whose main curvature is slightly higher than that of the toroidal
surface.

By changing the rotation axis angular position of these rollers, it is possible
changing transmission ratio between toroidal bodies; when rollers rotation axis is
perpendicular to the toroidal surface rotation axis, transmission ratio will be 1:1; by
turning the rotation axis in the two directions on the same plane it will be possible
to decrease or to increase transmission ratio.

In order to limit reaction loads on casing, two symmetric mechanisms are
employed whose thrusts can be self equilibrated in a simple way though a central

15.4 Car CVTs

583

Fig. 15.27 On the lower side: chain CVT suitable to front wheel drive with longitudinal engine
(Audi). On the upper side: view and cross section of a LuK chain

584

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.28 Rolling bodies toroidal CVT; by steering appropriately satellites it is possible changing
transmission ratio between input (on the left) and output pinion (in the middle) (Torotrak)

shaft. The output shaft is meshing with the central pinion ﬁxed to the two toroidal
driven surfaces.

Three rollers are employed to limit contact forces; a particular mechanism must

be used to obtain on all of these rollers the same centre line inclination.

15.5 Gearboxes for Industrial Vehicles

Automatic gearboxes for industrial vehicles don’t show substantial differences if
compared with automobiles ones; the countershaft architecture is diffused on semi-
automatic gearboxes or in automatic gearboxes with many speeds, where an epicy-
cloidal train conﬁguration could be difﬁcult to be adopted. In these applications both
clutches and torque converters are used.

Epicycloidal gear train gearboxes, not different as those considered on cars, are
particularly applied on busses, where comfort is a major priority and the number of
speeds is limited.

A relevant problem for industrial vehicles is torque converter behaviour. The
mechanical efﬁciency of this device is particularly poor when pump and turbine
exchange their function; this happens when reaction torque inverts because the engine
is expected to brake the vehicle with its mechanical friction or with dedicated devices
(engine brake).

This fact is justiﬁed by blades angles that can’t be optimized for two opposite

ﬂow directions.

15.5 Gearboxes for Industrial Vehicles

585

Engine brake effect at these conditions is particularly decreased, as compared
with a manual gearbox. This fact can be accepted and is sometimes beneﬁcial on
cars fuel economy; is unacceptable vice versa on a heavy vehicle.

Some speciﬁc devices (retarder) are used to solve this problem; they will be

explained later on.

15.5.1 Semiautomatic Gearboxes

Together with the already commented pre selection semiautomatic gearboxes, there
automatic and automatized gearboxes are on the market with clutch and torque con-
verter in series.

Torque converter is set at ﬁrst with the purpose to increase start-up torque and to
smooth transmission output torque; the torque converter features a lock-up clutch to
increase the transmission efﬁciency in cruise drive.

Torque converters include an additional free wheel between pump and turbine;
this free wheel is designed to be able to transmit only negative torque, i.e. it is like
an open joint when the engine is driving, it is like a locked joint when the engine is
braking; in this way the desiderate engine braking effect is granted.

After torque converter, an additional component is ﬁt, not necessarily only because
of gearbox automation; this is the retarder that helps the vehicle brakes on long
downhill drives.

Retarders can be assimilated to high diameter hydrodynamic clutch, with a limited
radial blade dimension; this shape is dictated by the needs of limiting longitudinal
gearbox length and obtaining a high stall torque.

The pump is ﬁxed to the torque converter output shaft; the turbine blades are

directly cut on gearbox casing and are still.

During vehicle slow-down, the hydrodynamic clutch absorbs a braking torque
equal to stall torque and wastes the corresponding power to heat; to adjust or delete
braking torque, clutch oil quantity is adjusted or eliminated with dedicated valves.

Remaining gearbox elements are those already seen.

15.5.2 Automatic Gearboxes

Totally automatic gearboxes are also available to industrial vehicles and they are
almost similar to those of conventional drive cars with torque converter and epicy-
cloidal gear trains.

Speed number is limited to 5 or 6; for this fact this kind of gearbox is suitable to

busses or limited speed trucks, subject to frequent stops.

Figure 15.29 shows an example of this gearbox, with six forward and one reverse
speeds; there are three simple epicycloidal gear trains that can be used separately or
in combination.

586

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.29 Epicycloidal gear trains automatic gearbox for industrial vehicle; on the right the retarder
unit 7 is shown that can be optionally mounted in place of the back cover 8 (Iveco)

15.5 Gearboxes for Industrial Vehicles

587

Fig. 15.30 Automatic gearbox for urban bus; the architecture is characterized by a torque converter
in the central section of the gearbox; it is used for vehicle start-up as well as a retarder (Iveco)

588

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.31 Working scheme of the previous automatic gearbox; three normal forward speeds, three
retarded forward speeds (I R, II R, III R) and one reverse speed are available

The back gearbox cover 8 can be changed with the retarder unit 7 we described
in the previous paragraph. In this case radial dimensions are reduced by using a two
side bladed wheel; the central rotor is ﬁxed to the output shaft, while the stator is cut
in the casing.

Braking torque regulation is made by oil quantity in the clutch.
We introduce ﬁnally a very particular automatic gearbox, suitable for urban busses;

it was developed to obtain different retarded speeds useful in hilly towns.

The gearbox is presented on Fig. 15.30 and is characterized by having the torque
converter installed in the central section of the gearbox, instead of the joint ﬂange
with the engine, as usual.

The torque converter (6 is the pump, 7 is the turbine, 8 the stator) is used as a
start-up device as well as a retarder; input shaft 1 is ﬁxed to the engine through the
joint 2 that acts as a torque damper. Two different clutches 3 and 4 are provided
for a ﬁrst stage epicycloidal gear train 13 and for the direct drive. The two output
epicycloidal gear trains 17 and 18 are used to mix energy ﬂows through the input
shaft and the turbine and for the reverse speed. The heat exchanger 19 can waste the
heat generated by the retarder.

The scheme on Fig. 15.31 and the related status table of brakes and clutches allow

us to understand how the mechanism works.

In ﬁrst speed, power ﬂows through two parallel ways. The ﬁrst way is made by
a rigid connection with the epicycloidal gear train carrier 13; the second way ﬂows
through the torque converter, whose pump is ﬁxed to the sun gear of the same train
and turbine is ﬁxed to the sun gear on train 17. The annulus gear is ﬁxed to input
shaft.

15.5 Gearboxes for Industrial Vehicles

589

In second speed, the revolution speed is reduced by the epicycloidal gear train 13

whose sun gear is locked; the torque converter isn’t loaded.

In third speed the gearbox is a direct drive.
In retarded speeds the third brake involves the epicycloidal gear train 18 the
counter rotates the turbine which becomes pump; the torque converter pump is locked
by the B1 brake and acts like a stator.

The torque converter is now an effective retarder.

15.6 Control Strategies

Next paragraphs are going to explain the main rules for speed choice and speed shift
actuation that automatic gearbox control systems must observe to interpret driver’s
intentions in the best way, taking into account the power requested by the road proﬁle
and speed.

We assume that the gearbox adopts an electrohydraulic control system where
engagements and disengagements are made by hydraulic actuators fed through elec-
tronically controlled electrovalves. This technology is common to new automatic
gearboxes, even if some applications exist on the market where also control func-
tions are performed by hydraulic logic circuits.

A typical electronic control system for an automatic powershift gearbox with

epicycloidal gear trains receives the following magnitudes as inputs:

• speed selector position; typically positions P, R, N, D exist which indicate situations
for parking, reverse speed, neutral position and automatic forward drive; selectors
can also show:

– ﬁxed speed positions (i.e. 1, 2, 3, 4) to indicate driver’s will to lock the gearbox
in one of the speeds or, alternatively, to limit automatic shifts up to one of these
speeds;

– selectors to choose different automation programs such as W for winter (when
ice and snow are on the road the ﬁrst speed is inhibited and shifts are slower),
E for economy to show the driver’s will to drive at low fuel consumption, S for
sport driving, etc.

• +/– positions to use the gearbox sequentially, increasing or decreasing speeds of
one unit at a time; in this case additional commands may exist on the steering
wheel;

• engine speed;
• throttle position in petrol engines or pumped quantity on diesel engines; more
recent engine that have a drive-by-wire regulation system and this signal can by
accelerator pedal position or some calculated magnitude indicating the required
power;

• cruise control position;
• torque converter turbine speed;

590

15 Automatic Gearboxes

• gearbox output shaft speed;
• accelerator kick-down position;
• oil brake pressure or stop light switch, indicating a braking situation;
• gearbox oil temperature; this sensor is particularly important because oil actuators

response is inﬂuenced by viscosity and therefore temperature;

• engine coolant temperature, showing the engine readiness to deliver maximum

• driver’s door opening to inhibit the gear selection from the outside or other safety

performance;

signals.

The control system manages normally the following output actuators:

• on/off electrovalves, as many as hydraulic lines for brakes and clutches actuation;
valve number may be reduced combining more functions on the same valve;
• proportional valves, as many as the functions to be contemporarily actuated with
regulated pressure; at least one for the next speed engagement and one for the
torque converter lock-up clutch, on powershift gearboxes;

• engine control system communication line, to regulate engine torque during speed

shifts when critical to clutches life;

• instrument panel communication line to show selected gear and possible malfunc-

tions;

• selector interlock to inhibit N/D or N/R or P/R shifts if the brake pedal isn’t
depressed; the vehicle could in fact move if isn’t braked when torque converter is
applied.

Input and output list will be surely implemented as control system functions will
increase for number and complexity. Many inputs used by gearbox control system
could be already available for other vehicle controls; in this case signals could be
gathered by a serial communication bus.

15.6.1 Speed Selection for Minimum Consumption

The ﬁrst function, to be performed by control systems, is speed selection; speed
selection doesn’t have a unique deﬁnition because available speeds in certain engine
operation regions could be many.

Let’s for instance consider the diagram on Fig. 15.32, where available power
curves at different gearbox speeds and power necessary to motion at different slopes
are shown as a function of car speed; at zero slope, between 15 and 20 km/h the
engine can work in ﬁrst and second speed; between 40 and 60 km/h all speeds are
usable.

Speed selection must take into account the requested acceleration too; to deliver
for instance 50 kW at 50 km/h the ﬁrst speed is necessary, but to deliver 40 kW only
ﬁrst and second can be utilized. To deﬁne gearbox speed in an unambiguous way
another condition must be set, that we assume to be minimum fuel consumption.

15.6 Control Strategies

591

Fig. 15.32 Diagram representing available power at different gearbox speeds to accelerate the
vehicle on an assigned slope at a given vehicle speed; available power is the distance between one
of the thick lines and the selected slope curve

If we recall the speciﬁc fuel consumption map on Fig. 15.23, we see that the min-
imum consumption curve is a bit lower than the maximum power one. At minimum
engine speed, if constant versus load, the minimum consumption curve is a vertical
segment and the engine must be regulated on load only.

If we imagine drawing the map of Fig. 15.32 on the diagram of Fig. 15.23 and if
we consider the already deﬁned transmission ratios, we can say that ﬁrst speed is
suitable for minimum consumption within the working area limited:

• on the left by maximum power available in ﬁrst and by minimum feasible engine

speed in ﬁrst and

• on the right, by minimum feasible speed in second, by maximum available power

in second and by maximum engine speed in ﬁrst;

same conclusions can be drawn for all speeds till the ﬁfth, where one of the boundaries
is given by the power absorbed by driving resistance.

Desired power isn’t in reality an available input to the control system; in addition
to that drivers aren’t used to think in terms of power, but act on accelerator pedal
by increasing or decreasing its stroke after comparison of actual performance with
desiderate one.

In fact, when drivers think about accelerating vehicle, they depress the pedal until
the desiderated feeling is obtained; if maximum acceleration is desiderated they push
the pedal all the way down.

Let’s consider, for example, a petrol engine with throttle valve and mechanically
linked accelerator pedal; the torque delivered by the engine isn’t very linear on the
engine speed as we can observe on Fig. 15.33 on different diagrams at different
throttle angles α. The same torque can be offered at different speeds and different
throttle angles.

592

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.33 Map of the torque delivered at different throttle angles (on the left); with simple elab-
orations it is possible to calculate the fuel rate curves necessary to obtain a given traction. Starting
from the intersection of these curves it is possible to obtain throttle angles at a given speed where
shifting speed is convenient

If we imagine to elaborate the fuel consumption map as to build up, for each
vehicle speed (on Fig. 15.33, on the right, the example for 30 km/h is shown), the
traction diagram as function of fuel rate, we can draw a set of curves for each of the
available transmission ratio at that vehicle speed.

Intersections between traction curves show shift points to keep the consumption

at a minimum.

Shift point throttle angle can be easily calculated.
From fuel consumption map and throttle valve map, by repeating this process for
a sufﬁcient number of vehicle speeds, it is possible to draw the curves of Fig. 15.34
which limit the optimum utilization regions of each gearbox speed on the throttle
valve versus vehicle speed plane; both magnitudes are known to the control system.
To avoid, ﬁnally, any oscillation between two neighboring gearbox speeds, the
obtained curves are now interpreted as upshift curves; other curves are moved to
lower speeds for downshifts (in grey). Within the area between curves actual speed
is maintained.

15.6.2 Speed Selection for Comfort

If we consider, instead, the problem of deﬁning the most suitable shift speed for
comfort, we must request that traction at a given gearbox speed is the same as for
the next speed, at the same accelerator pedal position; as a matter of fact, with an
automatic gearbox, the driver doesn’t foresee shifting time and doesn’t move, usually,
accelerator pedal during speed shifts.

Let’s consider again a petrol engine; the case of a diesel engine isn’t substantially
different. We transform now throttle angle map into a family of traction curves at the

15.6 Control Strategies

593

Fig. 15.34 Qualitative diagram of optimum shift curves for minimum consumption; the black
curves are for upshifts, the grey ones for downshifts

same throttle angle (we produce, in other words, the traction map as a function of
speed, having throttle angle as parameter); we can have two different situations that
are explained in the following examples.

On the left side of Fig. 15.35 we see the curves family for a small throttle angle,
of 5◦ (usually the wide open position is at 90◦); curves show an intersection that
represents the most suitable point for shifting.

In the case of an opening of 45◦ (right side), the curves don’t have any intersection;
in this situation the optimum shift point should be set where curves have minimum
distance; at wide open throttle shift point is positioned at the maximum engine speed.
If we group the optimum shift points on a throttle angle diagram as function of

vehicle speed, we obtain a curves family similar to that of previous paragraph.

The minimum consumption curves family is usually shifted to lower speeds as
compared with that of maximum comfort, except maximum power point (wide open
throttle) where the two families are coincident.

15.6.3 Deﬁnition of a Compromise Choice

Engaged speed choice on a gearbox can be made according to different approaches.
A ﬁrst simple approach is compromising between the two criteria, deﬁning a curve
family in between. But, at very low vehicle speed the jerk produced by lowering the

594

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.35 Traction curves family at the same throttle angle, for two different values of this last
parameter. At small angle values curves show an intersection, at higher angle values intersection
may not exist

shift speed may be disappointing, because acceleration is modest; in addition to this,
damage on fuel consumption may be of some percent if leaving optimum condition.
The most diffused approach was, in the past, assigning the choice responsibility to
the driver, by introducing a program selector which determines the two alternatives.
The economy option can be selected, for instance, in city trafﬁc or slow suburban
trafﬁc, while comfort option is for different situations.

This approach is questionable because introduces an additional command without

immediate feed-back, which can be easily forgot in the wrong position.

On more modern control systems, algorithms are implemented that recognize
driver’s intention and driving environment by quick statistic elaborations on operation
parameters already known to the control system.

15.6.4 Speed Choice in Real Driving Conditions

A ﬁxed shift speed curve at a given vehicle speed and throttle angle doesn’t represent
an acceptable choice in conditions different of driving on a ﬂat road with no trafﬁc.
Let’s assume that the vehicle is moving on a ﬂat road on a high gear ratio. The
operating conditions are represented on Fig. 15.36 by the point 1 of a diagram; the
dotted curves represent the traction force Fx at the wheel, as a function of the throttle
angle α.

15.6 Control Strategies

595

Fig. 15.36 Typical gearbox speed oscillation cycle occurring when desiderate traction value is
between feasible values of two neighboring speeds at the same throttle angle

Let’s assume also that the car is facing a sudden slope, rising traction to Fx,0, as
shown on the diagram; the driver will feel the car slowing down and react increasing
throttle angle up to the corresponding value of point 2, where a downshift is started.
When the shift has been completed the driver must probably release the accelerator
pedal, in the attempt to reach the desiderated value, starting a new upshift that reduces
again traction force.

A series of not requested speed shifts will occur (cycle 2, 3, 4, 5), very well known

to people having driven a car on hilly roads at imposed low speed.

The solution of the problem should be to temporarily move the shifting line to a
lower throttle angle as to reach the desiderated traction value on the lower speed, as
it is accomplished on a manual gearbox.

A similar situation occurs when on an uphill road a sudden short descent is met or
when a curve is met on a ﬂat road. In the ﬁrst case the accelerator pedal is released and
the next speed may be shifted with a following upshift when the uphill road restarts.
With a manual gearbox the speed wouldn’t be changed. On the sudden curve, the
same situation could occur.

The above inconvenience can be avoided when setting the selector to a manual

condition as to maintain the low gear.

The solution isn’t satisfactory because implies additional operations and because
drivers may forget the selector in the wrong position, particularly if a high gear is
chosen.

As an alternative, drivers expert of automatic gearbox increase distance with
preceding cars as to avoid any action on the accelerator pedal; power reserve for
acceleration will decrease, making overtaking more difﬁcult and sometimes reducing
average speed.

596

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Manual gearbox drivers can see the oncoming descent or curve and decide whether
to maintain or to change speed; this possibility isn’t available to automatic gearbox
control systems; the diffusion of satellite navigation systems could, in future, leave
this option available.

A simpler and effective system of solving this problem comes from the observation
that on a hilly or bending road the accelerator pedal is moved much more frequently
and with ampler displacements, if the driver desires to drive quickly.

The presence and the value of a slope may be estimated of throttle angle average
value and variance. By comparing calculated values with reference one that can be
achieved empirically, is possible deciding to lower the downshift points.

Another road slope indicator may be engine torque; it can be guessed by control

systems by a statistical analysis of injection time and other engine parameters.

A sport driving behavior can be detected by the throttle angle ﬁrst derivative.
If after accelerator depression, vehicle response isn’t adequate (the existing gear-
box speed has been maintained) a second actuation step on the pedal will follow;
this event can be an indicator of the driver’s lack of satisfaction.

This situation may suggest adopting a higher upshift curve; in the same way the
persistence of low throttle angle speeds may suggest to return to lower speed shifts
more suitable to fuel consumption.

Another particular situation may occur when the accelerator pedal is released to
obtain weak slow down, strong slow down or slow down with brakes usage. In the
ﬁrst case it is better to leave the actual gearbox speed or to select a higher one to
lower fuel consumption; in the second and third case a downshift may be necessary
to enhance the engine braking force.

The ﬁrst behavior is already implemented in the shifting lows of the previous

paragraphs.

The second behavior can be implemented by considering brake pressure and
throttle angle ﬁrst derivative; a desire for stronger slow down is characterized by
higher accelerator release speeds.

15.6.5 Brakes and Clutches Actuation

A last problem to be tackled with the control system is clutches or brakes actuation,
involved during speed shifts and torque converter lock-up clutch actuation.

In previous paragraphs we have deﬁned shift conditions for maximizing comfort
or minimizing consumption; above conditions still don’t consider shifting transient
generated by clutches.

It is necessary that clutches disengagement and engagement, involved in speed

shifts, follow certain criteria to avoid disturbing jerk during the manoeuvre.

Let’s consider the example of Fig. 15.37. An epicycloidal gear train is represented
with four different speeds; we consider only the ﬁrst to second speed shift in order
to understand what is going on during this period of time.

In ﬁrst gear the band brake BI is closed.

15.6 Control Strategies

597

Fig. 15.37 Epicycloidal gear train scheme suitable for four speed; the rotating masses involved in
the shift from ﬁrst to second speed are shown

Let us consider the ordinary transmission ratios of the left and right trains, called

τo,d and τo,s respectively.

Subscripts m and v show elements turning at engine speed and at vehicle trans-

mission shaft speed; for sake of simplicity torque converter is ignored.

In ﬁrst gear the band brake BI I bell that will be actuated to obtain the second

speed is turning at a speed given by:

(cid:2)I I = −(cid:2)vτo,s .

(15.16)

In second gear the brake BI I is closed why the bell of the band brake BI will be

left free to turn.

The shift procedure from ﬁrst to second will start working on brake BI I ; the engine,
gearbox and vehicle system will be slowed down by braking moment application
but will receive a positive contribution of the partial transformation of brake BI I
rotating parts kinetic energy. They are modelled with ﬂywheel JI I while the engine
is modelled with ﬂywheel Jm; in the same way a positive contribution will come
by the torque reduction of brake BI , and a negative contribution will come of the
absorbed work to accelerate ﬂywheel JI to the speed:

(cid:2)I = (cid:2)v +

1
τo,s((cid:2)m − (cid:2)v)

.

(15.17)

598

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.38 Diagram versus time t of the most important magnitudes involved in an upshift; from
the top gearbox output torque M (real and ideal values), engine speed (cid:2)m and oil pressure p on
brakes are represented

Input magnitudes for a good quality upshift are therefore many; on Fig. 15.38 is
reported as an example a typical diagram of most relevant magnitudes as a function of
time, for the ﬁrst to second upshift at wide open throttle. Engine speed is increasing
before and after shift, if supplied power is greater than resistant one; engine speed
will decrease as a consequence of transmission ratio decrease.

Gearbox output torque will be reduced as a consequence of the upshift; an ideal
solution, with the aim of reducing jerk, will be to have a torque diagram made with
a straight line joining the torque values before and after shift point; the real value is
represented by the oscillating line.

In the two hydraulic circuits for clutch or brake actuation there will be:

• a decreasing pressure versus time on elements locked on ﬁrst speed;
• an increasing pressure versus time on the element to be locked for the second speed;
the two diagrams should overlap with a precise criterion to minimize traction
variation.

The curve shape of pressure rise and fall is assigned to proportional control valves

to obtain a traction curve continuous shape.

Optimum actuation lows for brakes and clutches must be determined for each
speed shift as a function of torque and speed. Mapping actuation functions can be
a too heavy work in terms of experimental activity and of control system memory
occupation; mathematical models could be more convenient.

15.6 Control Strategies

599

Fig. 15.39 Scheme for the study of speed shift transient in a powershift gearbox with ﬁxed rotation
axis

While designing these models it must be taken into account that gearbox output
torque is not only determined by input torque, but also by gearbox rotating elements
inertia, which can’t be neglected, particularly for epicycloidal gear trains.

The best result, in terms of jerk reduction, can be reached when clutches (or brakes)
pressure can be regulated proportionally and independently; acceptable results, such
that shown on the ﬁgure, can be obtained with a continuous regulation of the closing
element and with a pulsed discharge of the opening one.

Also in case of non epicycloidal gear train gearboxes (ﬁxed rotation axis and dual

clutch) the inertia contribution isn’t negligible.

Let’s consider a two speed gearbox, as represented by the scheme in Fig. 15.39;
MI and MI I are the instantaneous slip torques (function of time) of clutches BI and
BI I involved in the transmission ratio variation from τI to τI I . The apparent vehicle
rotating mass is represented by Jv while Jm is the equivalent inertia of the engine,
Mm is the engine torque and M (cid:3)

m the driving torque at the gearbox output shaft.

We assume that during shifts there is no important change in resistant torque.
Engine torque can be sometimes considered as being constant too; in most general
case, Mm is a known function of (cid:2)m, if the throttle valve angle remains unchanged
during the manoeuvre.

We assume ﬁnally that the clutches actuation forces are linear on time.
On Fig. 15.40 we can draw a schematic diagram of the phenomenon; we can write:

600

15 Automatic Gearboxes

Fig. 15.40 Schematic diagram of torque on engagement clutches of a countershaft powershift
gearbox during an upshift

(cid:2)

Jm

Jv

d(cid:2)m
dt
d(cid:2)v
dt

= Mm((cid:2)m) − MI (t) − MI I (t)
+ Mv = τI MI (t) + τI I MI I (t) = M (cid:3)

m

.

(15.18)

The derivative of the second equation is the jerk; it could never be zero because
the M (cid:3)
m torque will change at least because of the change of the transmission ratio.
We can understand that the minimum jerk is achieved if MI and MI I are linear on
time and when t1 and t0 are equal.

Piston ﬁlling and emptying times are not only determined by their volumes and

by oriﬁces dimensions, but also by:

• oil circuit pressure, which is determined by pump speed (rotating with the torque
converter pump) and by oil viscosity, function of temperature; pressure is in fact
determined by the oil internal spillage in the pump;

• clutches rotational speed, because, very often, the centrifugal pressure ﬁeld is not

• friction coefﬁcient on clutch working faces, dependent on wear and on temperature;
• oil viscosity and temperature that condition ﬁlling and emptying time at a given

negligible;

pressure;

• dimension tolerances of the gearbox.

For this reasons the development of a reliable mathematical model can be partic-
ularly difﬁcult. It is a good practice to use a ﬁrst approximation mathematical model,
integrated by feed-back parameters; they can be considered from time to time to
compensate for the tolerance or, more frequently, for temperature effects.

The ideal feed-back parameter should be output torque, but at this time viable
torque sensors don’t exist; but torque can be estimated by accelerations, once inertia
masses are known.

A further parameter to be used to minimize acceleration variations is controlling

engine torque too, through spark advance or, if possible, directly on the throttle.

15.6 Control Strategies

601

It is also important to eliminate some of the variables of the system, by regulating
oil pressure on a constant value, eliminating part of the effects of temperature and
viscosity.

Some few words must be written on lock-up clutches; to their actuator apply all

considerations made for clutches and brakes.

The lock-up clutch must be engaged when converter slip ratio goes to small values,

indicating that torque multiplication is no more necessary.

The clutch engagement eliminates damping capacity too, which is quite useful

particularly for low speeds where the vehicle equivalent rotating mass is high.

On old gearboxes lock-up clutch was only actuated on top gear. A higher attention
given on more recent models to fuel consumption, forced to use lock-up clutch in all
gearbox speeds; the beneﬁt on consumption is of some percent.

In this case the actuation pressure must be carefully controlled as a function of
torque also during normal operation and not only at the engagement, to allow a small
slip when torsional vibrations may occur.

A damper similar to that of a conventional start-up clutch is in this case recom-

mended.

Chapter 16
Design and Testing

In this chapter we will discuss about design rules and procedures for those
transmission components, we have not considered in previous chapters yet, and
about test methods applied for validation and qualiﬁcation.

We shouldn’t forget, looking at the essential nature of reported information, that
the objective of this manual is only to offer some complement to the knowledge
gathered in engineering courses of machine design and calculation; we refer back to
them for the fundamental know-how.

16.1 Transmission Mission

We will describe in this paragraph the operating condition of the transmission during
the vehicle’s life, to understand qualitatively which loads are applied and how long
they must be withstood without damage.

The transmission plays a top importance role on the vehicle system operation and,
therefore, must have an average useful life at least as long as that of the vehicle itself;
a suggested maintenance program must be obviously attended.

Transmissions must not only preserve their structural integrity but also their func-
tional characteristics, where ease of use, we have described writing on shifting mech-
anisms and synchronizers, mechanical efﬁciency and generated noise are the most
relevant.

Transmission life, as other vehicle systems one, cannot be described by determin-
istic terms, but only by statistic terms, because loads coming from road and driving
stile have statistic nature.

Therefore endurance speciﬁcation also, normally adopted by manufacturers, is
assigned statistically through the magnitude B10 that corresponds to the endurance
which isn’t reached by the 10% of produced transmissions.

16 Design and Testing

The endurance is the maximum distance traveled according to the foreseen

mission, without any major damage.

If we take into account the recent product evolutions, we shouldn’t only include
in the major damage category the failures that interrupt vehicle motion, but also all
those that are usually claimed by customers at the service shop, as:

• noise increase,
• shifting loads increase,
• lubricant spills, etc.

As reference values for B10, we can assume:

• automobile transmissions > 150,000 km,
• construction trucks > 300,000 km,
• urban busses > 400,000 km,
• long haul trucks > 800,000 km.

The ﬁnal result it should be obtained is clear enough; it must be said that the
quantitative speciﬁcation of transmission life is made difﬁcult by working conditions
which are always changing and sometimes unforeseeable.

If we only cover the automobile case, we can say that in Europe the life is shared

in these four typical environments:

• 40–70% on motorways,
• 15–30% on suburban roads,
• 15–20% on urban roads,
• 3–10% on mountain roads.

Each manufacturer promoted independently test campaigns addressed to obtain
reliable date on usage of cars; the results of these tests are an important part of the
company know-how and are published very seldom.

These data acquisitions must be made for different groups of homogeneous cus-
tomers, for different car types and must be repeated at different times, to take into
account evolutions in living habits, in road network, in trafﬁc and in car preferred
types.

It is usual to employ data gathered of special costumers’ ﬂeets, such as taxis,
company cars, etc., which allow data measurement on their cars (through inboard
digital recorders), in change of favorable selling prices.

A typical data acquisition includes time histories of car speed, gear shift position,
clutch position, accelerator position and road slope; they are statistically synthesized
to obtain information easier to be used. From these many other data are derived,
such as those related to transmissions; transmission operation is identiﬁed by input
torque, engaged speed and clutch pedal position.

The time history of these parameters can be used as reference mission for design

calculations and experimental endurance validations.

As an example, in Fig. 16.1 data elaborations results are reported, for a car and
for a medium duty truck, showing the percentage of use of available gearbox speeds.

16.1 Transmission Mission

605

Fig. 16.1 Qualitative diagram of use percentage of the different speeds, in the average life of a car
(dotted bars) and of a medium duty industrial vehicle (dashed bars)

The input torque is strongly changing versus time and can also be negative; all

structural transmission components service life is therefore limited by fatigue.

Gears and other rotary elements introduce additional load variations versus time.
Table 16.1 shows a qualitative description of the transmission life, after having

accepted some simpliﬁcations.

As a ﬁrst assumption, to stay on the safe side, only mechanisms stressed by I and
II speed are designed for a limited life; mechanisms stressed by III, IV and V speed
are designed for unlimited life; since they are basically made by steels a life of 100
million cycles is assumed.

As far as the reverse speed is concerned a life as long as one quarter of the I speed

life is usually assumed.

The endurance requested for the I and II speeds are simply derived by multiplying

the target life of 200,000 km by the percentages shown in Fig. 16.1.

Load conditions are simpliﬁed and made much more severe by assuming that the

car is working:

• 70% of the time, at maximum torque and at the corresponding engine speed;
• 20% of the time at maximum power and at the corresponding engine speed;
• for the remaining 10% of the time with the engine braking the car with a torque

as big as half of the maximum torque and at maximum engine speed.

606

16 Design and Testing

Table 16.1 Qualitative description of the average use condition of a car transmission. The life spent
in I and II speeds is measured in (km), that spent in III, IV and V speeds is measured in million
cycles
Speed

Max torque

Max power

Braking

Total

I
Shifts N/I
II
Shifts I/II
III
Shifts II/III
IV
Shifts III/IV
V
Shifts IV/V

5,600

21,000

70

70

70

1,600

6,000

20

20

20

800

3,000

10

10

10

8,000
260,000
30,000
180,000
100
100,000
100
20,000
100
20,000

Gear shifts are estimated by assuming that the gearbox is used during its entire
life of 200,000 km as in the fuel consumption and emission cycle that is, therefore,
driven 20,000 times. As consequence of the assumption made in the third points a
number of downshifts is added equal to 10% of upshifts.

These load conditions can be used for designing gears, shafts, bearings, housings
and seals, while the number of up and downshifts can be used to design synchronizers,
shifting mechanisms and clutch.

This table should be improved with an accurate statistic study, for the application
under exam, but can be considered as a starting point for a preliminary design of a
car transmission.

Input parameters acquired during real driving conditions are useful to estimate
component average life; as a good praxis, we recommend to consider also some
exceptional condition that may occur when transmissions are used in a non correct
but possible way; in this conditions also, catastrophic failures are not accepted.

Also these test procedures are part of manufacturers’ know-how; they are per-
formed driving the car according to very heavy driving schedules that condense the
car useful life in short time; a typical test of this kind consists, for example, in releas-
ing the clutch pedal suddenly as it may happen while wearing muddy and slippery
shoes.

The transmission components are classiﬁed for design process, according to three

different categories:

• A category, including components that are critical to correct transmission operation
and can be calculated following reliable and validated procedures (shafts, gears,
bearings);

• B category, including components that are critical to correct transmission opera-
tion, but can’t be calculated following reliable procedures (synchronizers, lubri-
cants, seals, etc.);

16.1 Transmission Mission

607

• C category, including non critical components, because previous experience

doesn’t record failures (circlips, venting valves, housings, etc.).

B category components are designed in similitude to previous successful exam-
ples; the prototypes of these components must be extensively tested on bench and
vehicle, to assure their reliability before building the ﬁrst transmission prototype.

It is therefore very important, for an effective management of development plans,
that all components accomplish the experimental validation process with the same
level of conﬁdence on success.

All components, including those which beneﬁt of a reliable design process, will
be tested on a real transmission on a bench and ﬁnally on a real vehicle, as soon as
they have reached their ﬁnal design, to demonstrate the achieved reliability.

Reliability is the probability of surviving a certain mission without failures.
Reliability demonstration must be made on a sufﬁciently wide prototype sample;
these must be built with their critical characteristics on the border of their tolerance
ﬁeld in a real production process.

The design of these tests, oriented to guarantee a sufﬁcient conﬁdence level can

be studied on more speciﬁc handbooks.

16.2 Gears

16.2.1 Endurance

Gear life is limited by four different tooth failure kinds:
• bending;
• pitting;
• scufﬁng;
• wear.

Figure 16.2 shows the qualitative extension of survival ﬁelds to these phenomena,

on a diagram of transmitted torque versus circumferential speed.
Following issues are very relevant to determine the gear life:

• working conditions (transmitted torque, circumferential speed, oil temperature),
• tooth material,
• tooth geometry,
• surface treatment,
• lubricant formulation.

For spur gear wheels calculation, the standard procedure ISO 6336 is used by

almost all car manufacturers.

Tooth bending failure occurs when a substantial part of gear wheel is removed; it

is useful to separate failures due to overload from those due to fatigue.

608

16 Design and Testing

Fig. 16.2 Qualitative
diagram of the transmitted
torque M as function of
circumferential speed V
showing the typical shape of
operation boundary curves
for bending fatigue, pitting,
scufﬁng and wear; the area
below curves envelope
corresponds to operation
without damage danger; in
consideration of the most
diffused speed values, pitting
is the most important
limiting condition

Failures of second kind have the aspect shown on Fig. 16.3 and show very clearly
a point where the failure started (a surface defect, a notch or a non catastrophic
overload failure).

A set of lines which are almost concentric to the starting point, show the prop-
agation direction of the failure. The failure surfaces are polished by the continuous
shock of the two parts, due to load pulsation.

A failure terminal part can be seen, which is characterized by a very irregular
surface with crystal aspect, due to a sudden rupture when the resistant section is too
much decreased.

Overload failures have the aspect of the terminal part of fatigue failures.
The stress variation at the origin of the fatigue phenomenon is due to the following

causes:

• low frequency torque variation; torque can also change direction;
• cyclic teeth mesh and number variation of teeth in contact, at medium frequency;
• engine torque harmonic content, at high frequency.

By their nature, idler are working under alternate loads.
Pitting damage is shown by the appearance of growing craters which can join each
other. They are due by failures under the tooth surface caused by too high hertzian
contact pressure.

The aspect of this failure can be characterized by very small craters, which give
the surface a velvety aspect, as in Fig. 16.4 or by big and irregular craters as those
on Fig. 16.5; the aspect difference is caused by the severity of the phenomenon in
question.

16.2 Gears

609

Fig. 16.3 Aspect of a tooth ﬂank damaged by bending fatigue

Fig. 16.4 Aspect of a tooth ﬂank damaged by pitting

It must be remembered that pitting phenomenon occurs on lubricated surfaces

only; therefore lubricant characteristics play a major role.

The low speed wear is characterized by abrasions on tooth ﬂanks, according to
relative speed direction; it is very seldom on automotive transmissions, except with
evident geometric errors or by lack of lubricant.

Scuffed surfaces aspect is quite similar two the previous one; the damage can be
caused by a rupture of lubricant ﬁlm, due to high temperature or high pressure. It

610

16 Design and Testing

Fig. 16.5 Aspect of a tooth
ﬂank damaged by heavy
pitting

can cause metal on metal contact; the aspect is caused by micro welds and rips or by
chemical action.

The quoted ISO norm includes calculation procedures addressed to verify that

none of the above phenomena occur, except scufﬁng.

On the diagram of Fig. 16.2 relative to automotive transmissions, the safe tooth

operation area is essentially limited by pitting.

Because of applied load time variation, we must consider the phenomenon of

fatigue at the design stage.

curves is reported on Fig. 16.6.

Therefore the so called material Wöhler curves must be considered; one of these

The two lines (inclined and horizontal) on the right of the ﬁgure represent, on
a bilogarithmic scale, stress amplitude (on the vertical axis) in function of cycle
number leading to failure; there is, as known, a horizontal limit, the fatigue limit,
below of which, according to a simpliﬁed theory, failure will never occur.

It is a good praxis, to consider not only material probe average failure curves,
but also B10, B50, B90 curves, if not only average life, but also reliability has to be
predicted.

In order to compare working stress with Wöhler limit, it is useful to transform, as

a ﬁrst step, torque time history into stress time history.

16.2 Gears

611

Fig. 16.6 Comparison of a Wöhler curve with an assigned load proﬁle (staircase line). Stress is
divided by a reference value; N1, N2, N3 represent cycles number during which relative loads h1,
h2, h3 are applied

It is possible, at this time, to count cycles number at the same stress amplitude (h
in the diagram) in such a way as to deﬁne a histogram in which each stress amplitude
class is represented with the corresponding cycle number (N in the diagram); this
histogram is the so called load proﬁle.

Road proﬁle, reordered in decreasing load amplitude classes, is represented by

the staircase line below the Wöhler curve.

At this time the comparison of actual stress with allowed one is possible.
The rule that is normally applied in this comparison was developed by Miner;
according to this rule, each group of same amplitude loads produces on the material
a partial damage, equal to the ratio between actual load cycles and no damage cycles,
on the Wöhler curve.

The same rule says that failure occurs when the sum of partial damages (less than

one, by deﬁnition) is equal to one.

Miner’s rule implies no damage for load amplitudes below fatigue limit; this
hypothesis should be put under discussion, because if a partial damage already
occurred, cracks have been already started; it is possible that also stress levels below
fatigue limit are causing the damage to proceed.

To take into account this fact, some empirical corrections are used; according to
those corrections the horizontal fatigue limit line is changed to an inclined one, whose
slope is deﬁned by the bisector line (on the bilogarithmic representation) between
inclined and horizontal lines. It is reported on the diagram with dots.

While choosing in literature the appropriated Wöhler curve for gear material, it
is important to take into account for the actual heat treatment (case hardening or

612

16 Design and Testing

nitriding, this last applied usually to epicycloidal gears) and the ﬁnishing of surface
in contact that can be ground, shaved or honed.

A common characteristic of countershaft automotive gearboxes is adopting the
same centre distance for all gears. The centre distance of a gearbox is decided by the
most stressed wheels couple, usually those of ﬁrst and reverse speeds.

The smaller stress for other speeds will be taken into account with a smaller face
width; the ratio between face width and diameter is conditioned by the available space
to install the transmission: for this reason this ratio isn’t very different in different
gearboxes (between 0.3 and 0.6).

The centre distance is therefore an engineering parameter indicating design value;

it may be used to compare same torque capacity gearboxes.

Many different noise qualities produced by the gearbox are judged unpleasant and
can draw driver’s attention; they can be classiﬁed according to different categories
and precisely:

16.2.2 Noise

• gearing whistle;
• gearing rattle;
• speed shift grating;
• bearing whine.

Whistle can be caused by three different reasons:

• pitch errors in contacting teeth and pitch variations due to contacting teeth defor-

mation;

• tooth bending stiffness variation along the contact line; under this aspect helical

spur gears show a better behavior as straight ones;

• undulations of contacting teeth surfaces.

Rattle noise is particularly disagreeable and is produced by idle gear wheels in
constant mesh and by sleeves and synchronizers hubs; in Fig. 16.7 is reported, on the
left, the case of a single stage gearbox and on the right the case of a double stage
countershaft gearbox.

The engaged gear wheels are shown by their sleeves position; circles mark mesh-
ing points of rotating idle gears. On the ﬁgure top what happens on a conventional
drive gearbox in idle speed is shown.

Constant gear puts countershaft in rotation. Because engine speed isn’t constant,
the countershaft will have torsional oscillations that will cause teeth ﬂanks to hit in
the two angular directions, left free by clearance.

A similar phenomenon may occur between sleeve spline and synchronizer hub

and may be perceivable on idle couples, in direct drive or other speeds.

16.2 Gears

613

Fig. 16.7 Schemes of a single stage and a double stage countershaft gearboxes; circles mark
meshing points of rotating idle gears, responsible for rattle noise generation

Single stage gearboxes, on the left ﬁgure, present the same kind of phenomena,
except at idle speed and for wheel couples that have sleeves on the driving shaft;
these will be in fact still.

Rattle noise at idle is similar to rattle noise in acceleration, but, due to the limited
speed may produce a metallic like sound; during acceleration the sound has many
more harmonic frequencies and is similar to the ﬂow noise of ﬂuids in pipes.

The probability to perceive this noise is reducing consistently at medium engine
speed, because many harmonic frequencies exit the audible ﬁeld and the noise is
covered by other sources.

The inﬂuence of oil viscosity is notable, because when high, for example at low

temperature, the vibration of the aforesaid parts is damped.

Grating noise is produce during speed shifts only, if the thrust force has overcome

the synchronizer reaction to a premature completion of the shift manoeuvre.

This noise is caused by an inadequate synchronizer dimension or to a violent
manoeuvre; it can be detected at slow speed and low ambient temperature, when the
synchronizer cone doesn’t succeed in removing oil ﬁlm.

614

16 Design and Testing

Bearing whine, ﬁnally, is a precursor of bearing failure only and is produced by

rolling bodies when clearance with their runs is too high.

Noise reduction must be approached at a system level. To transmission noise
contribute other subsystems, at the source, such as engine, powertrain suspension,
elastic parts of transmission line and half axles and, sometime, suspensions and tires.
Air borne noise and structurally transmitted noise through the car body contribute

to noise perception.

Thinking of reducing gearbox noise working on the gearbox only, could be mis-
leading and cause excessive product cost; nevertheless some good design rules should
be taken into account.

As far as whistle is concerned, it is better to apply helical spur gears only, with a
coverage ratio greater or equal to 2.5; it can be further increased by applying high
contact ratio proﬁles, by increasing the ratio of teeth height and pitch.

A proﬁle correction oriented to achieving a slim tooth tip could be also beneﬁcial.
Entire transmission ratios should be avoided; the preferential wear of ever coupled

gears can modulate gearing sound.

It is better to use reasonably tight tolerances, such those included under IT5 and
IT7 classes; tighter tolerance may be prescribed for gear wheels of most frequent
use, to contain product cost.

Teeth surface must be smooth enough. Satisfactory results are reached by shaving

and honing; grinding can be used exceptionally.

Rattle noise is bound, as we have seen, to circumferential clearance; it can be

reduced by:

action;

• reducing clearance;
• reducing inertia rotary mass of passive parts;
• improving lubrication; the better washed are hitting parts, the higher the damping

• by a more suitable tuning of the clutch damper, natural frequencies can be moved

outside of a critical region;

• by adoption of a double mass damping ﬂywheel.

Because noise is irradiated partly through the air and partly through the structure,
it is a good practice to stiffen housing panels as much as possible, by suitable ribs
and to increase local stiffness of interface points with the powertrain suspension.

16.3 Shafts

Gearbox shafts are made with many diameter changes, as they must allow ﬁtting
many different parts; it may also happen that some tooth proﬁle is directly cut on
them, because of small diameter.

Figure 16.8 shows the details of a shaft for a front wheel drive gearbox with
transverse engine. The many diameter variations must be smoothened with chamfers

16.3 Shafts

615

Fig. 16.8 Some example of notching effect reduction on diameter transitions and transverse drills
of a shaft of a single stage gearbox for front wheel drive (FIAT)

or with edges rounding, to reduce torsion and bending stress concentration, even
reducing resistant section.

Machine design manuals report static form factor for the most widely diffused
section transitions; these factors are coefﬁcients by which the stress obtained by the
De Saint Venant theory application must be multiplied, to obtain real stress.

Shaft calculation can be performed following the same procedure we have sug-
gested for gear wheels, to take into account fatigue phenomenon and changes in load
amplitude.

While designing shafts, it is vitally important to introduce the displacement cal-
culation due to load application; as a matter of fact, displacements (both linear and
angular) may change teeth working conditions, with negative impact on noise and
useful life.

From displacement study, some good design rules arise than can be summarized

as follows:

• to reduce the shaft span between bearing, by limiting as much as possible gear

wheels and synchronizers width;

• to install the wheels subject to highest loads as close to the bearings as possible;
• to avoid too steep diameter transition, organizing components by increasing or

decreasing diameters;

• to avoid feather keys, preferring spline connections;
• to smoothen diameter transitions and drilling, as shown on Fig. 16.8;
• to use circlips at the ends of the shaft only.

16.4 Bearings

Gearbox bearings are normally roller bearings; bush bearings are limited to lowly
stressed idle gear wheels and to sliding bearings for internal shift mechanisms.

If possible, bearings are limited to two per shaft, avoiding hyperstatic mountings,

too sensitive to machining tolerances.

616

16 Design and Testing

The problems to be considered when choosing a roller bearing are:

• adequate component life;
• compliance to shaft angular displacements;
• compliance to differential thermal elongations of shafts (made of steel) and hous-

ings (made of aluminium or magnesium);

• resistance to the oil pollution caused by components wear particles.

The bearings applied to shafts ends are mainly of four different types:

• deep groove ball bearing;
• four contacts ball bearings;
• cylindrical roller bearings;
• tapered roller bearings.

Deep groove ball bearings are widely applied because they can withstand both
radial and axial loads. They are easily assembled on the shaft, don’t request position
adjustment and are reasonably cheap; on the contrary they have the disadvantage of
large dimension and oil pollution sensitivity.

In consideration of this point, sometime self lubricated sealed ball bearings are

preferred, also if gearbox splashed oil is abundantly available.

Four contact ball bearings are almost equivalent to previous ones, with the advan-

tage of smaller dimensions at a slightly increased cost.

Cylindrical roller bearings have a high radial load capability but can’t withstand
axial loads; they are usually coupled to ball bearings at the other end of the shaft. They
have the disadvantage of a higher cost and not working correctly, when substantial
angular displacements are foreseen.

Tapered roller bearings are more and more extensively applied because of their
optimum radial and axial load capacity (see for reference Fig. 9.11). They have limited
dimensions; their assembly on the gearbox is difﬁcult, because inner race with roller
cage and outer race are separable components.

They require, for a correct operation, an appropriate axial preload, which must be
maintained at every work condition. The axial position of at least one the two bearing
must be adjusted, to compensate for the length tolerance of shaft and housing; in
addition to that, one of the two shoulders must be conveniently made, in such a
manner as to be insensitive to thermal displacements. This result can be achieved by
a spacer made with high thermal expansion material.

Bearings on idle gear wheels are mostly needle bearings; sometimes the races are
the outer surface of the shaft and the inner surface of the gear wheel, to reduce radial
dimensions.

16.5 Lubricants

The correct lubricant speciﬁcation is vitally important for gearbox endurance, con-
sidering the manifold functions it is expected to perform; the lubricant functions are
the following:

16.5 Lubricants

617

• reducing friction and wear of metallic and non metallic (rotary and sliding seals)

• distributing to colder areas the heat generated in hot ones, contributing to generated

• building up lubricated hydrodynamic ﬁlms;
• protecting components against corrosion;
• deterging residual particles produced by wear;
• performing all of the above functions for long time and at any possible working

parts;

heat dissipation;

temperature.

Gearbox components lubrication is usually made by splashing and spraying oil
by rotating gears. It is therefore necessary to correctly exploit moving parts in order
to grant presence and renewal of oil to all couples which need lubrication.

It is therefore necessary to design oil channels into the housing in such a way
as they pick up the oil projected by wheels and distribute it to less exposed parts;
transversal drilling on shafts may contribute to lubricate bearings of idle gear wheels.
On heavy duty manual gearboxes and on automatic gearboxes pressure lubrication
is used; a gear wheels pump is moved by the input shaft and dedicated pipes and
channels distribute the oil to the utilization points.

The lubricant distribution study would be rather difﬁcult if tackled by mathe-
matical models; in a simpler way, experimental analyses are set up, using modiﬁed
gearboxes with transparent windows.

When teeth ﬂanks mesh together different phenomena can be identiﬁed:

• boundary lubrication, when surfaces are in contact without interposition of lubri-
cant oil; their protection is solely granted by their nature; in this situation only
lubricant additives modify surfaces chemical nature and prevent micro welding
(friction modiﬁers);

• mixed lubrication, when a partial separation of surfaces takes place, by effect of

hydrodynamic forces generated by lubricant;

• hydrodynamic lubrication, when a completely separated lubricant ﬁlm is set up.

These three different situations take place according to the position of the contact
point on the tooth ﬂank and to the peripheral speed; on the tooth part which is closer
to the primitive circumference mixed lubrication will take place at low speed, while
hydrodynamic lubrication will take place at high speed; on parts near to the ﬁrst and
last point of contact there will be boundary and mixed lubrication.

These facts should be taken into account while choosing lubricant, as well as
maximum temperature; it can reach 90–100 ◦C, in the bulk of the lubricant, and
150–160 ◦C locally.

On present cars the expected lubricant life is as long as gearbox life.
Lubricants which satisfy above conditions are mineral oils mixed to synthetic

ones; a suitable additives package must be provided to:

• prevent corrosion and oxidation products build up;
• deterge and disperse pollutant particles;

618

16 Design and Testing

• modify chemical nature of surfaces in contact, to prevent micro welds in boundary

lubrication conditions.

Viscosity grade depends on operation temperature; multigrade oils are widely
applied in Europe to standardize product throughout the market and to avoid unac-
cepted seasonal oil changes.

16.6 Housings and Seals

Functions of housings are the following:

• reacting to forces and torques applied by the contained parts and distributing

resultant forces to interfaces with engine and powertrain suspension;

• maintaining the exact position of part contained inside;
• wasting generated heat;
• insulating generated noise;
• allowing simple gearbox assembly and disassembly.

Housing lay-out can be classiﬁed according to three alternative architectures:

• through housing, when bearings seats are cut on the same housing element which
results particularly stiff and simple to be machined; there are openings, closed by
removable covers which allow assembling and disassembling interior parts;
• end loaded housings; the housing is cut transversely to shafts in two halves, there-

fore the bearing seats of the same shaft rest on different housing parts;

• top loaded housings; they are cut along shafts in two halves, therefore each bearing
rests on two different half seats; also in these last cases, additional covers must be
provided, to make assembly and disassembly possible.

If the housing is divided in two halves each part is machined separately during
most of the cycle. Final boring of bearing seats will be made on assembled parts, to
grant necessary tolerance; there are therefore no clearance location pins that allow
unambiguous half housings assembly.

The most diffused architecture is the second one; it shows the advantage of an
easier assembly and, on industrial vehicles gearboxes, allow organization by modules
(clutch, splitter, gearbox, reducer, accessories, etc.) assembled in different versions.
Housings are usually made in aluminium and, sometime, in magnesium for weight
reduction; they show a large number of local reinforcements, such ribs and webs to
reach maximum stiffness with contained weight.

The example in Fig. 16.9 shows inclined ribs to increase torsional stiffness to

shafts reaction forces.

Housings must have breathers. As a matter of fact, lubricant doesn’t occupy all
available interior volume, to contain weight and the friction losses; without breather,
the air in the free space would change its pressure, because of temperature variation,
with problems on seals.

16.6 Housings and Seals

619

Fig. 16.9 Industrial vehicle gearbox housing, characterized by considerable inclined ribs; they
increase global torsional stiffness and panel bending stiffness (Iveco)

Air must exit during vehicle operation and re-enter at stops; dust and other pollu-
tants must be kept away. The breather is like a cap; suitable openings with separation
labyrinths and ﬁlters, these lasts made with low density sintered metal are provided
on the cap.

Rotary and sliding seals must be carefully designed. Seals must be completely
tight; even small leakages are now unaccepted for environment pollution and conse-
quent reﬁlls.

To seal ﬁxed parts are used preformed gaskets (Fig. 16.10, middle), or in situ
polymerized gaskets (Fig. 16.10, right). In this case, gaskets are made with synthetic
materials that are distributed on parts as paste and polymerize, becoming solid, after
assembly; for this reason, covers must have suitable teeth (pointed by an arrow in
ﬁgure) to avoid paste intrusion, after bolt tightening. Covers must also have suitable
projections to make the gasket rupture easier at disassembling.

For limited dimension and round covers, O-rings are also used (Fig. 16.10, left).
In case of preformed gaskets the number of bolts and the cover plate stiffness must
grant an almost constant pressure contact.

To verify this fact a photographic pressure sensitive ﬁlm can be useful.
Rotary seals are lip type with coil spring that clamps rotary shaft (Fig. 16.11, top).
Seals must be assembled with their springs inside the housings, to improve tightening
to pressure increase due to temperature; a second lip can be added on the seal, to
protect the sealing circle of dust contamination.

620

16 Design and Testing

Fig. 16.10 Examples of seals on covers; from the left, an O-ring seal for round covers, a preformed
gasket and a gasket polymerized in situ

Fig. 16.11 Examples of rotary seals (top) and of sliding seals (bottom)

Sliding seals or small angle rotary seals (selector rods, Fig. 16.11, bottom) are

made with O-ring or square rings.

Seals for multi disc clutch actuation pistons are subject to high pressure and are
made with rectangular rings with pressure sensitive lip (Fig. 16.11, bottom right);
these seals must be correctly oriented at assembled.

16.7 Test Technologies Outline

To verify functions and reliability of a gearbox, suitable test activities are conve-
niently performed after calculation ones; these tests must be made on different pro-
totypes, to grant the suitable conﬁdence level.

Test activities can be classiﬁed according to their time position, with reference to

the development process of a new gearbox.

16.7 Test Technologies Outline

621

There will be test demonstrating design adequacy, performed on a limited number

of prototypes, manufactured with experimental tools.

After these tests there will be a second series of them, suitable to demonstrate
manufacturing process adequacy, performed on a signiﬁcant number of prototypes
manufactured with mass production tools.

These tests are performed on benches and prototype vehicles; they are followed
by a vehicle reliability demonstration program that should conﬁrm transmission
reliability and identify residual problems.

Same test cycle must be separately performed on all supplied parts.
Test activities can also be classiﬁed according to expected results; from this point

of view we identify functional and reliability tests.

The fundamental characteristic of functional tests is that they are performed in

short time, because the life doesn’t imply sudden result changes.

Some functional test can be repeated on the same prototype at different times of its
life. For example, mechanical efﬁciency measurements should be repeated after run-
in in time, to verify the consequent improvement. In the same way leakage tests must
be performed on new gearboxes to verify design and production process adequacy
and at the end of useful life to ﬁnd out unacceptable variations due to wear.

Typical functional test results are characteristic measurements that must be com-

pared with project objectives.

Functional tests include the following:

• Lubrication tests, where it is veriﬁed that oil reaches all points to be lubricated, also
when the gearbox is inclined in three directions, according to the vehicle mission.

• Leakage test of lubricant oil.
• Power absorption tests, to be performed at any possible input torque, engine speed

and gearbox speed.

• Selection and engagement forces, to be performed at different gearbox speed,

vehicle speed and different meaningful oil temperatures.

• Noise emission tests at idle and at different working conditions at different speeds.
• Operation temperatures measurements.
• Misuse and abuse tests.

All these tests can be performed on few prototypes that must be machined and
assembled with those dimensions that are relevant to phenomena in cause, as close to
tolerance limits as possible; for instance rattle noise tests should be performed with
the widest angular clearance, allowed by drawing speciﬁcations.

Endurance tests consist in having the component working for the expected life
according to different possible mission proﬁles. Expected results consist of failures
that must occur after useful life; if they occur prematurely, they must be analyzed to
design corrective countermeasures. Repetition of all scheduled tests is in any case
requested, until success is reached.

Reliability can be demonstrated by repeating endurance tests on a statistically

signiﬁcant prototype number.

Almost all functional and endurance tests can be performed on a bench or on a
vehicle; it is useful to test a vehicle only for result conﬁrmation, when success has

622

16 Design and Testing

Fig. 16.12 Schemes for transmission test benches; on the lower part of the ﬁgure there is the scheme
of a recirculation power bench

been reached in an adequate number of bench tests. These are, in fact, easier to be
supervised and failures are easier to be analyzed.

The stand-by time of a vehicle on test and the kind of damage consequent to a
gearbox failure are unacceptable, in consideration of the high prototype fabrication
cost.

Transmission test benches are particularly simple and include a foundation block
on which a complete transmission can be installed; it can be put in rotation by an
actual engine or by an electric motor; this last is more appropriate for long endurance
tests.

When an electric motor is used, for some kind of test, a control circuit is necessary
to produce an input torque with the periodic irregularity of the internal combustion
engine. The same result can be obtained by connecting motor and transmission
through a torque pulsator.

According to the kind of test, bench schemes drawn on Fig. 16.12 can have a brake

to simulate the vehicle resistance.

Brakes can be coupled to variable inertia ﬂywheels when vehicle inertia must be
reproduced; brake and ﬂywheel assembly can be substituted by a suitably controlled
motor/generator, able to emulate vehicle resistance and to recover part of the wasted
energy.

Sometimes (Fig. 16.12, at bottom) and when tests imply constant input torque,
shafts are connected through a transmission line. The transmission line is preloaded
through a constant torque, which stresses the gearbox at the desiderate level. In this
case motor power must pay for friction resistance only.

The picture in Fig. 16.13 shows the interior of a typical modern test cell for

complete transmissions.

16.7 Test Technologies Outline

623

Fig. 16.13 Interior of a typical modern test cell for complete transmissions. This kind of test cell
can be adapted to all kind of tests, including acoustic emission measurement: it is acoustically
reverberant, but it can be changed to anechoic, by encapsulating the only transmission in a suitable
cabin

This kind of test cell can be adapted to all kind of tests, including acoustic emission
measurement: it is acoustically reverberant, but it can be changed to anechoic, by
encapsulating the only transmission in a suitable cabin.

We can see on the left the electric motor and its control system, the transmission
test bed and the torsiometer shaft to measure the output torque. In the small picture
below, taken from the control console, we can see the electric brake.

The electric brake has a maximum power of 220 kW and a maximum torque of
600 Nm and can operate up to 7,000 rpm, simulating the torque ﬂuctuation of an
internal combustion engine in the ﬁeld of frequencies between 0 and 500 Hz.

The brake can absorb up to 200 kW, with a maximum torque of 3,000 Nm at
650 rpm; a maximum transmission ratio of 5 at maximum torque can be simulated,
sufﬁcient to test gearbox and ﬁnal drive separately, for the maximum torque or
together for reduced torque.