Tribology is existed at the interface of two materials which are in relative
motion and this causes friction at the interface. Due to friction, heat is generated
between two meting surfaces which causes wear on surfaces either one or both the
materials. To reduce friction and wear at interface, a lubricant is supplied. This
lubricant may be either solid lubricant such as graphite, graphene etc. or liquid lubri-
cant such as base oil, mineral oil etc. or semisolid lubricant such as grease. In this
chapter, the detailed description of friction, wear and lubrication is given. Further-
more, a number of examples are also presented where tribology is very important
such as bearings, gears, engines, orthopaedic joints and micro-machines. At last,
the brief introduction of important applications are also discussed along with brief
prescription about book chapters.
Keywords Friction · Wear · Lubrication · Automobile · Bearing · Gears etc.

1.1 Introduction

The word “Tribology” has been taken from the Greek word “Tribos” which means
“rubbing” or to rub and sufﬁx “Ology” means “the study of”. Thus, tribology means
“the study of rubbing of two materials” (Duncan 1997). Therefore, Tribology is
existed at the interface of two materials which are in relative motion and this causes
friction at the interface. Due to friction, heat is generated between two meting surfaces
which causes wear on surfaces either one or both the materials. To reduce friction
Tribology

Friction

Wear

Adhesion

Lubrication

Surface 
Modification

Erosion

Fig. 1.1 Different aspects of tribology

Fig. 1.2 Schematic
representation of friction

and wear at interface, a lubricant is supplied. Tribology involves the study and the
applications of the principles of friction, wear, lubrication and surface modiﬁcation
which is diagrammatically shown in Fig. 1.1.

1.1.1 Friction

The resistance force experienced in relative motion of solid surfaces, ﬂuid layers,
and/or material elements sliding against each other is known as friction which is
shown in Fig. 1.2. There are two types of friction, dry friction and ﬂuid ﬁlm friction
(Rabinowicz 1995). When there are two solid surfaces sliding against each other and
energy is entirely dissipated between the surfaces then it is known as dry friction.
This dry friction is again subdivided into two parts; static friction and kinetic friction.

1.1.2 Wear

The degradation of material or removal of material is known as wear. Wear occurs
due to the friction between two surfaces. There are different types of wear which is
shown in Fig. 1.3.

When a hard material rubs against a soft or hard material in direct contact than
abrasion wear occurs. It may also happen that hard particles are present at the interface
as contamination or as “third body”. The third body is deﬁned as the wear debris or
oxidized particles that is trapped at the interface (Williams 2005).

1 Introduction of Automotive Tribology

5

Wear

Abrasion

Errosion

Adhesion

Corrosion

Surface 
Fatigue

Fig. 1.3 Classiﬁcation of wear processes

When a small solid or liquid particle impacts a solid surface, deformation may
take place on the solid surface. If such impacts are repeated over and over again with
continuous impact of particles, there will be removal of the material locally. This
mechanism of wear is known as erosive wear.

When the surfaces are soft and plastically deforming than adhesive wear occurs.
Large adhesive forces between materials lead to plastic deformation and material
removal in the form of highly deformed ﬂakes. Very large adhesive forces can also
lead to what is known as cold welding at localized contact points. The cold-welded
part can also tear-off the material locally. The best example of adhesion is joining of
slip gauges. They are joined because of applied pressure through hands.

Surface fatigue occurs because of repeated forces applied on the surfaces. Due to
which cracks are propagated on subsurface which further grows and generated the
wear debris on surface.

Corrosion is widely occurs in hydro turbines. This occurs because of the moisture

present in surrounding and universe.

1.1.3 Lubrication

To overcome the effect of friction and wear at interface, the lubrication is provided.
It is either in the form of solid lubricant such as graphite, graphene etc. or liquid
lubricant such as base oil, mineral oil etc. or semisolid lubricant such as grease. The
basic principle of lubricants are control friction, control wear, control interfacial tem-
perature, control corrosion, remove contaminants, form a seal (grease) etc. (Stribeck
1902). The performance of a lubricant depends on its chemical, physical and rheo-
logical properties. It also depends on the external parameters imposed such as contact
pressure, relative speed, and temperature. Based on the nature of the ﬂuid ﬁlm for-
mation, different lubrication regimes are deﬁned and they are, Boundary lubrication,
Mixed Lubrication, Elasto-hydrodynamic lubrication and Hydrodynamic Lubrica-
tion (Dowson 1993). These lubrication regime are shown in Fig. 1.4.

6

J. K. Katiyar et al.

Fig. 1.4 Different regimes of lubrication

1.1.4 Factors Which Affect the Tribological Performance

There are various factors which affect the tribological performance of any system
(Briscoe and Sinha 2002; Spikes 2001; Rathaur et al. 2018). These factors are shown
in the Fig. 1.5.

Fig. 1.5 Factors inﬂuenced the tribological performance of any system

1 Introduction of Automotive Tribology

7

1.1.5 Application of Tribology

It is very important to note that the tribological performance of any system, whether
nano, micro or macro-scale, depends upon a large member of external parameters
and important among them are temperature, contact pressure and relative speed. A
number of examples, where tribology is very important. These are different kinds of
bearings, gears, engines, orthopaedic joints and micro-machines etc. Among all these
applications, tribological issues in automobile is discussed brieﬂy in this chapter and
detailed development in further chapters.

In automobile, there are various parts which are in a relative motion when vehi-
cle moves. Among all parts, engine is most important part in automobile. This is
also known as heart of automobile (Taylor 1998). The engine consists piston and
piston ring, piston cylinder, connecting rod, gudgeon pin and cam-follower assem-
bly. The lubrication is very important in all parts of engines. Now a days, customer
satisfaction and environmental protection are very important factors in governing
the development of automotive technology. There are various components present
in automobile which affect the efﬁciency of engine largely such as bearing, piston
ring, valve train and crank shaft etc. The researchers had tried various methods such
as surface texturing, surface coating, modiﬁcation in lubricant etc. for improving the
efﬁciency of engine. The efﬁciency of any engine is largely affected by friction. The
percentage of various friction losses with respect to engine components have been
shown in Fig. 1.6. Therefore, in further sections, the various types of energy losses
are described in brief.

Fig. 1.6 Friction losses with respect to engine components (Taylor 1998; Nakasa 1995; Akiyama
et al. 1987)

8

J. K. Katiyar et al.

1.1.5.1 Energy Losses in a Vehicle

Engine Losses

The internal combustion engines (ICE) are very incompetent in converting the chem-
ical energy of fuels into mechanical energy by movement of piston from top dead cen-
tre to bottom dead centre. Because of this movement, the friction occurs at interface
which generates the frictional heat. In one survey, it is reported that approximately
62% of the fuel’s energy is vanished in the ICE. For reduction of these losses, the
advanced engine technologies are adopted. These are variable valve timing and lift,
turbocharging, direct fuel injection, and cylinder deactivation. In addition, diesels
are ~30 to 35% more competent than gasoline engines. This is because of the devel-
opment in technologies and fuels which makes diesel vehicle more attractive.

Accessories

There are various types of accessories used in automobile such as air conditioning,
power steering, windshield wipers, and other accessories. These accessories are used
around 2% energy generated from the engine. Therefore, the improvement in fuel
economy around 1% may be attainable with more efﬁcient alternator systems and
power steering pumps.

There are other losses of energy around 5% due to the transmission and other parts of
the driveline. For reducing these losses in driveline various technologies developed
which are automated manual transmission and continuously variable transmission.

Drag is directly related to shape of the vehicle. Around 2–3% of energy is lost
as aerodynamic drag in automobiles. The drag is signiﬁcantly reduced by using
smoother vehicle, but further reductions of 20–30% are possible.

For forward movement of tier, a force is required which is known as rolling resistance
force, which is directly proportional to the weight of the load supported by the
tire. There are various technologies developed nowadays to overcome the rolling
resistance such as improvement in deigns of shoulder and tier thread as well as
improvement in materials which is used in the tire belt and traction surfaces. For

Driveline Losses

Aerodynamic Drag

Rolling Resistance

1 Introduction of Automotive Tribology

9

passenger cars, the fuel efﬁciency is increased by 1% by reducing of rolling resistance
by 5–7%. However, the balancing in these improvements are required against traction,
durability, and noise.

Overcoming Inertia; Braking Losses

For moving forward a vehicle, it is required to overcome the vehicle’s inertia, which
is directly related to its weight. This is carried out by using drivetrains which provides
the enough energy. If the vehicle weight is less than less energy is required for moving
a vehicle. This can be achieved by using lightweight materials and lighter-weight
technologies (e.g., automated manual transmissions weigh less than conventional
automatics).

1.1.5.2 Energy Losses in Engine

More than 60% of losses in an automobile occur in the engine. These losses are
exhaust gas losses (23.40%), in-cylinder heat losses (20.50%), and friction losses
(7.70%), after cooler (7.30%) etc. Due to these losses, currently from an engine only
40% net power can be extracted. The net power is in engine can be improved by
10% by reducing exhaust gas losses, in-cylinder heat losses and frictional losses.
Friction losses contribute to around 8% of total energy loss in an engine. The major
subsystems of engine contributing to mechanical friction in an automobile engine
are piston and ring pack, bearing and crank shaft system and auxiliary valve drives.

1.1.5.3 Systems in Engine Causing Friction

Figure 1.7 shows the stribeck curve of different components in engine and the lubri-
cation regime they undergo during operation.

Fig. 1.7 Different engine
parts and corresponding
lubrication regime (Tung and
McMillan 2004)

10

J. K. Katiyar et al.

Piston Assembly System

The piston assembly system consists of piston, piston rings, piston pin, connecting
rods and bearings. There are three main friction and lubrication groups contributing
to friction in piston assembly system: piston skirt sliding up and down against liner,
ring pack reciprocating against liner, and bearings in connecting rod and wrist pins.
The piston ring is one of the most intricate tribological elements in an engine which
subjected to large variations in load, temperature, velocity and lubricant accessibility.
Early studies show that the hydrodynamic lubrication theory is applicable to the
interface of piston assembly and cylinder liner throughout most of the piston middle
stroke. However, when the piston motion ceases near top dead centre (TDC) or bottom
dead centre (BDC) of the stroke, the piston velocity is not adequate to establish a
hydrodynamic lubrication action. Lubricating ﬁlms become very thin and contact
between the surface asperities on the ring and the liner will support part of the piston
ring restoring force. Therefore, wear on the cylinder liner surface may occur in the
vicinity of TDC and BDC. Severe surface wear could affect the liner-ring sealing
performance and result in excessive gas blow-by and fuel consumption.

The Crankshaft and Connecting-Rod Bearing Systems

The main bearings in crank shaft, connecting rod and piston pin, connecting rod and
crank shaft interface are falls in the category of journal bearing lubrication. Most of
the friction in crank shaft originate from the main bearings supporting crank shaft in
its rotational motion. Lubrication regime in main bearings is primarily hydrodynamic.
Oil is supplied to the bearing surfaces through oil feeds along the crank shaft.

If the bearings are adequately lubricated, wear on bearing will be lower after
an initial stage of running in period. However, shaft misalignment or particulate
contamination of the lubricant supply can lead to excessive wear. Corrosion is also
reported as an additional failure mechanism.

Valve Train System

This system consists of a series of mechanical parts that are used to control the intake
and exhaust valves. The lubrication in valve train system ranges from hydrodynamic
to boundary lubrication. Most of the friction in valve train system is contributed by
camshaft bearings, cam/cam follower interface, rocker arm pivot/shaft and linear
oscillatory components such as valves, guides, valve lifter, valve seal etc. The cam-
follower interface is mostly under boundary lubrication, where the role of chemical
reactions in thin ﬁlms is vital. The action of lubricant additives especially extreme
pressure additives is very important in this interface. Also, surface interactions takes
place in cam and follower, thus surface topography of these parts is a critical param-
eter.

1 Introduction of Automotive Tribology

11

1.1.5.4 Lubricants

Engine runs smoothly if correct engine oil is chosen. The lubricant creates a thin
ﬁlm between two mating surfaces of automobile which prevent them from rubbing
against each other and becoming worn or damaged. Oil also prevents corrosion, cools
the engine and helps to keep the engine clean and protected.

Generally, 80% base oil and 20% additives were presented in engine oil. These
additives include anti-wear additives, antioxidants, dispersants and detergents that
keep the engine clean, and viscosity index improvers that ensure the oil maintains an
optimum viscosity throughout the engine’s operating temperature range. The base oil
carries these additives to where they are needed, and provides vital cooling to engine
components, by drawing away heat. Base oils can be either mineral or synthetic, and
engine oils can contain all mineral base oil, all synthetic base oil, or a mixture of the
two. Engine oils containing a mixture are typically described as part-synthetic.

Causes of Lubricant Degradation

The life of lubricant is ﬁnite in operation. After that, the degradation of lubricant is
started or sometimes it becomes contaminated which indicates the lubricant change.
There are various factors which are responsible in degradation of oil in an engine.
Among all factors, the most common factors are oxidation, thermal breakdown of
the lubricant oil, micro-dieseling, additive depletion and contamination. The brief
description of the factors are given below:

Oxidation:

In this process the oil molecules reacts with oxygen molecule. Due to which the
viscosity of lubricant is increased, causes the formation of sludge and sediment. It
is also responsible for chemical depletion and breakdown. After starting of oxida-
tion, the increment in acid number is started. In addition, rust and corrosion in the
equipment is because of oxidation of lubricant.

Thermal Stability:

The thermal stability of lubricant is inversely proposal to the temperature means an
increase in temperature of lubricant will result in a decrease in thermal stability. In
research, it has been shown that, if the oil operating temperature is increased by
10 °C than the rate of the oil oxidation is doubled. This statement stated that the life
of the oil is halved. This situation is not quite as calamitous because it reﬂect that the
oils naturally have quite a long life time. Temperature is only a signiﬁcant issue if it
reaches above 65 °C. The mostly lubricants which are used in high temperature for
certain period of time, blended with additives which prevents the oxidation in lube
oil.

12

Additives:

J. K. Katiyar et al.

The performance additives are twenty or more chemicals that is combined with
the base stock to improve or impart different properties. Most of the additives are
sacriﬁcial in nature which means that they get used up during the lifetime of the
oil. But, when the oil is using for lubricate a machinery components, the additives
present inside the lube oil start depletion. Which causes wear at the interface of
meting surfaces. This indicates the change of lube oil inside the machinery.

Furthermore, the rate of degradation of lubricant is widely inﬂuenced by contam-
ination such as soot, water, air, etc. Because of depletion, wear occurs at the meeting
parts which contains the ﬁne metal particles. The ﬁne particles start the catalyst pro-
cess which start sparks and speeds up the degradation process of lubricant. Air and
water also provides the source of oxygen. This oxygen is reacts with the oil, causes
the oxidation of the lubricant. Because of this reason, the oil analysis sometimes can
be helpful in monitoring your lubricant’s contamination levels.

The present monograph provides the current and emerging research in the ﬁeld
of automobile which is very useful for readers in enhancing their knowledge in the
various dimensions of research. The present book is summarized some of the novel
materials, lubrication and surface morphology used for automotive application into
three different sections.

1. New Materials for Automotive Applications
2. New Lubricants for Automotive Applications
3. Surface Morphologies for Automotive Applications.

The editors sincerely hope that the present monograph gives the comprehensive
study of current trends adopted by automobile sectors in the development of new
technologies and materials for reduction of friction and wear because the customer
satisfaction and environmental protection are very important factors in governing
the development of automotive technology. Furthermore, the present monograph is
intended for all level of students (UG, PG as well as Doctorate), research scientist
and industry persons.
New Materials for Automotive Applications

Chapter 2
Tribological Aspects of Automotive
Engines

Vikram Kumar and Avinash Kumar Agarwal

Abstract There is tremendous requirement for development of compact and fuel
efﬁcient automotive engines with reduced emissions. From tribological point of view,
automotive engine components such as piston assembly, bearings and valve trains
are lubricated and their surface behaviors have been extensively studied. In this
chapter, current and future trends of automotive lubrication and requirements from
automotive lubricants are discussed in detail. American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM) standards are used for selection of automotive lubricants. The
lubrication of light weight materials (Al, Mg) was studied, which was used to replace
heavier cast iron blocks used presently. In this chapter, future trends of light weighted
tribological materials to be used in near future as well as nano tribology are discussed.
New trends of tribology in automotive engines were explained and also selections
of new lubricant used in advance engines were discussed. The overall studies of
tribology of engines components enhance the engine performance.
Keywords Tribology · Light weighted materials · Automotive lubricants · Surface
ﬁnish

2.1 Introduction

Study of surfaces of automotive engine components under relative motion is essen-
tial to understand their mechanical and tribological behaviour. Solid surfaces give
complex responses due to many external variables such as temperature, strain rate,
gaseous environment, humidity etc. When the surface interacts with external envi-
ronment, physical and chemical changes occur in the solid surfaces. When surfaces
are in relative motion under contact, shear stress develops which wears out both mat-
ing surfaces by plastic deformation, fracture and fatigue. Wear of material also leads
to noise, vibrations and ultimately failure of machine elements. Understanding wear
phenomenon requires knowledge of friction between materials. Friction is deﬁned
as the force resisting the motion, when there is a relative motion between the two
mating surfaces. Friction occurs due to surface morphology i.e. physical and chem-
ical nature of the surfaces. Friction and wear of contacting surfaces can be reduced
by providing interfacial lubrication. Lubrication is needed to separate the contact
between surfaces by forming a liquid ﬁlm or a boundary ﬁlm, which adheres to the
metallic surfaces. This liquid or boundary ﬁlm by virtue of its physical or chemical
nature provides low shear stress and bears load mechanically.

The word “Tribology” originates from the Greek word “Tribos”. The meaning
of tribos is rubbing (Jost 1966). Nobel Prize winner physicist Wolfgang Pauli had
quoted that, “God made solids, but the surfaces were the work of devil” (Jamtveit
and Meakin 1999). This quote signiﬁes the challenges and importance of tribology
at any scale (micro- to nano-scale). Friction and wear are not always undesirable.
Sometimes friction is necessary, such as for holding, walking, braking, rolling etc.
The use of rubbing is in existence since ancient ages (~0.2 million years ago), when
humans generated ﬁre by rubbing two (wood) surfaces against each other. After that,
around 3500 B.C., wheels were invented. Egyptians were ﬁrst recorded tribologists
(nearly 2400 B.C.). They used sticky, greasy substances, and water as lubricant in
transportation of objects by sliding. In modern era, Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519)
showed some friction experiments through his sketches. Amonton (1689) indepen-
dently gave two laws of friction, which surmised:
(cid:129) Frictional force (F) is proportional to the applied normal load (N). This law pro-

vides the relation, where μ is the coefﬁcient of friction.

(cid:129) Friction force is independent of the (apparent) area of contact.

Leonhard Euler (1778) (Euler 1778) explained that coefﬁcient of friction is due for
interlocking of asperities and is equal to the tangent angle of interlocking asperities (μ
= tanθ). He also proposed two types of coefﬁcients of friction (static and kinematic).
The thermal and mechanical efﬁciencies of IC engines are low and this is their
main drawback. 4–15% of total fuel energy is lost due to friction alone in the engine.
Major part of the fuel energy is wasted in the form of heat (Taylor 1998). Apart from
this, IC engines cause air pollution by generating particulates and harmful gases.
There is tremendous effort underway for development of fuel efﬁcient and compact
automotive engines with lower environment impact, required for the 21st century.
Engine efﬁciency can be also improved by adequate application of tribology. Friction
and wear of engine components such as bearings, piston assembly and valve trains
can be reduced by developing new lubrication technique. These techniques must be
durable at high loads, speeds and temperatures. Overall ~15% fuel energy is lost
due to friction from these components and based on the data, ~10% reduction in
frictional losses would lead to ~1.5% lower speciﬁc fuel consumption. Piston ring
assembly, bearings and valve trains are the main contributors to frictional losses in
an IC engine (Andersson 1991). Engine components such as engine bearings, piston-
rings systems, and valves trains are loaded to very fast and broad variations in speeds,
loads, temperatures and lubricant availability (Dowson et al. 1983).

2 Tribological Aspects of Automotive Engines

19

2.2 Automotive Engine Tribology

2.2.1 Engine

IC engines are very popular because of their reliability, versatility and performance.
However major drawback of IC engine is lower thermal and mechanical efﬁciency
due to dissipation of energy into heat and frictional losses. IC engines also con-
tribute to the environmental pollution by emitting unburned hydrocarbons, particu-
lates, oxides of nitrogen (NOx), carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide.

Tribological studies are required to reduce the wear and friction by adequate lubri-
cation of all engine components, which are under relative motion. This study is done
in the large set of working conditions of varying loads, speeds and temperatures. Bet-
ter tribological performances of IC engine have advantages of lower fuel consump-
tion, higher power output, lower oil consumption, lower harmful emissions, superior
reliability, longer durability and engine life, and reduced engine maintenance and
longer service intervals. A small improvement of engine durability, efﬁciency and
emission levels have large impact on the global environment and economy. Energy
produced from the combustion of fuel is dispersed into engine and powertrain. 12%
of total energy is used to drive the automotive wheels and 15% of mechanical energy
is lost in frictional heat. Engine frictional losses due to piston rings, piston skirts and
bearings are ~66% of total frictional losses and ~34% losses are due to crankshaft,
valvetrain, gears and transmission lines (Nakasa 1995). Largest friction loss is due
to sliding of piston rings and piston skirts against the cylinder wall. Next higher
frictional losses are due to engine bearings, followed by valvetrains.

2.2.2 Engine Lubrication Regimes and Wear Calculations

Different IC engine components work in different lubrication regimes to achieve bet-
ter performance. Some components operate in more than one regimes of lubrication.
Mostly thrust and journal bearings operate in hydrodynamic regimes of lubrica-
tion. Regimes of lubrication also depend on the engine speeds. Generally piston
ring assembly, valvetrains and transmission lines operate under boundary and mixed
lubrication regimes. Lubrication regimes are also affected by surface roughness of
mating interfaces, lubricant degradation and wear of mating surfaces.

Lubrication of engine components can be understood by the modiﬁed Stribeck
curve, shown in Fig. 2.1 (Dowson 1998; Tayler 1998). It is a plot of coefﬁcient
of friction versus Sommerfeld number (ηV/W). The dimensionless parameter λ is
deﬁned as the ratio of ﬁlm thickness to the surface roughness.

Lamda (λ) = ﬂuid ﬁlm thickness (h)/surface roughness (Ra)

20

V. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

Fig. 2.1 Lubrication
regimes curve for various IC
engine components

Engine components design and wear was investigated by numerous researchers.
They have given many mechanisms to understand the wear of engine components
(Lancaster 1973; Priest et al. 1999). The wear can be simply calculated by using
Archard equation, which is as follows:

V = kW L

(1)

where,

V wear volume (m3),
K wear coefﬁcient (m3/mN),
W load (N),
L sliding distance (m).

2.2.3 Piston Ring Assembly

Piston-ring assembly is the heart of the engine, and it forms a very critical linkage to
transform the energy generated by the combustion of fuel into useful kinetic energy.
It consists of a ring pack, piston, cylinder liner (wall) and connecting rod. The ring
pack acts as dynamic gas seal between the crankcase and combustion chamber,
and restricts the oil deportation into the combustion chamber. It also transfers heat
from piston to the cylinder wall and eventually into the lubricant. Top two rings are
‘compression rings’ and ﬁring pressure is exerted on to the faces of rings to push
then against the cylinder wall, and they experience maximum temperature and loads.
Top compression ring is coated with wear resistant materials such as molybdenum
and have barrel-faced proﬁle. The second compression ring has tapered face with
descending scraping proﬁle. The bottom ring is the oil control ring with two running
faces.

2 Tribological Aspects of Automotive Engines

21

For the improvement in performance and durability of piston rings, Priest and

Taylor proposed the following solution (Priest and Taylor 2000):
(cid:129) Improvement of surface roughness, proﬁle and better understanding of mixed

(cid:129) Understanding the linkage between chemical and lubrication mechanisms and

lubrication regime.

additive’s reaction with the ﬁlm.

The piston rings are very complicated in tribological aspects since there is a very
large variation in speed, load, temperature and availability of lubricant. The lubrica-
tion regimes at piston rings and cylinder wall interface is boundary, mixed, elastohy-
drodynamic and hydrodynamic, all in one engine cycle (Ruddy et al. 2017). As the
piston assembly moves from bottom to the top, lubrication regime also changes. It
is full ﬁlm lubrication at the bottom dead center, mixed in the middle of the stroke,
and boundary lubrication at the top dead center (Hamilton and Moore 1974; Brown
and Hamilton 1977; Wakuri et al. 1978; Dowson et al. 1979). The most common
piston ring materials used are gray cast iron, carbide malleable iron and malleable
nodular iron However steels have become more popular off late because of their
high strength. Grey cast iron and aluminum alloys are used as cylinder bore mate-
rials. Engine piston is mostly made of silicon aluminum alloy. Piston rings, piston
and cylinder liner is coated to reduce friction and wear. Friction and wear control is
necessary for enhanced engine performance. Hence lubrication study is necessary
for clearly understanding the complicated interactions between wear and lubrica-
tion. Wear is an after-effect of mechanical interactions, and corrosion takes place in
the upper region of the cylinder and dictates the failure of the engine. Wear is also
dependent on the surface ﬁnish of piston rings and cylinder liner. Surface ﬁnish of
cylinder liner, piston rings and piston skirt affects retention of oil within surface and
reduces scufﬁng during engine operation.

2.2.4 Engine Bearing

Crankshaft, camshaft and connecting rod are supported by engine’s journal bearing,
which rotates during engine operation. Hydrodynamic load bearing capacity is gen-
erated by the lubricant ﬁlm pressure, which balances the load applied. The lubrication
of bearings is by jet trespass or by ﬂeeting the lubricant through the shaft holes. The
initial wear of bearings is very slow under lubricated conditions of engine operation.
If the crankshaft is misaligned or there are contaminants present in lubricant, then
excessive wear takes place. Journal bearing tribology is a complex issue of thermal
effects, lubricant supply, dynamic loading and elasticity of the surroundings (Booker
and Booker 1965). Many assumptions have been considered for the lubricant mobil-
ity. The lubrication of engine bearings is assumed entirely to be in hydrodynamic
regime. Some researchers have hypothesised that engine bearings operate in mixed
lubrication regime and designed the bearings accordingly to improve the engine
performance (Priest and Taylor 1998).

22

V. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

2.2.5 Valve-Train

The valvetrain consists of valves, valve keys valve springs retainers, valve springs,
piston rods, lifter/tappets, rocker arms and a camshaft. The main function of valve-
train is to convert rotary camshaft motion to linear valve motion, in order to control the
ﬂow of ﬂuid into the combustion chamber. It also drives water pumps, fuel pumps and
power steering pumps. Three main valvetrain systems are sleeve, poppet and rotary
valve. The poppet valvetrain system is most popular for exhaust and inlet valves of
engine amongst all major engine manufacturers. The opening and closing of valves is
controlled by crankshaft driven camshaft and synchronizes the valve movement with
the piston movement and hence with the combustion cycle. Each contact undergoes
either sliding or rolling friction.

Friction is a very important parameter for the selection of valvetrain. Roller fol-
lower, which reduces friction signiﬁcantly, is the best conﬁguration for valvetrain
since roller contact contributes lower coefﬁcient of friction compared to sliding con-
tact. Friction contribution of the valve systems is a small fraction (10%) of mechani-
cal losses compared to piston assembly (50%). The coefﬁcient of friction is reduced
by introduction of friction modiﬁer additives such as molybdenum dithiocarbamate
(MoDTC) into the lubricating oil (Korcek et al. 1999). Wear of valve seat and its
recesses is also a big problem in valvetrains, which affects the engine timing. Hence
materials having wear and corrosion resistance, high strength and high temperature
stability are selected for the valve seat. Inlet valve materials are hardened low alloy
steel with higher strength and wear resistance. Exhaust valve materials is hot hard-
ened stainless steel, which is corrosion resistant and survives the high temperature.

2.2.6 Cam Follower

The lubrication of cam follower interface is very difﬁcult in the valvetrain system. The
cam follower operates under boundary lubrication regime hence material selection
and surface treatment is taken care off. In addition, wear resistant lubricant additives
such as zinc di-alkyl di-thio-phosphate (ZDDP) are added into the lubricating oil.
Some researchers investigated tribological performance of cam follower under mixed
and elastohydrodynamic lubrication regimes (Taylor 1994). Cam follower materials
are generally steels or iron with modiﬁed surfaces (surface treatments) in order to
avoid early failure. Recently, ceramic cam followers are mostly used to minimize the
frictional losses (Gangopadhyay et al. 1999). Cam follower failure is due to polishing,
pitting and scufﬁng, which are affected by design, materials, lubrication and operating
conditions. Hence durability of cam followers is dependent on materials selection,
surface treatment, additives and lubricants.

2 Tribological Aspects of Automotive Engines

23

2.3 Transmission and Drive Line Tribology

2.3.1 Transmission Line

Tribological study of transmission band and clutch are very important because band
and clutch performance and durability is controlled by tribology. The transmission
clutches include two plates which are friction lined clutch plate and reaction steel
plate respectively. The transmission band and clutch is acted as lubricated brake. The
clutch plate consists of core plate, adhesive coating and friction facing. The friction
facing is conﬁned with the adhesive to steel core on one or both sides. Frictional
materials must survive high temperature, compressive forces and shear, and must
offer adequate friction. These materials are made of particle ﬁllers, ﬁbers and friction
modiﬁers. These materials have adequate porosity to transmit the transmission ﬂuid to
the friction interface as lubricant basin. All transmission ﬂuids consist of base-stock
and additives including friction modiﬁers. Desired friction for smooth engagement
of clutch is low static friction and higher stable dynamic friction, which is provided
by friction modiﬁers (Tung and Wang 1989; Stebar et al. 1990).

2.3.2 Traction Drive Components

Advancements in continuously variable transmission (CVT) enhance the drivability
beneﬁts and fuel economy by applying traction drive components. The traction CVT
is replacement of bands, clutch and gears with a ‘variator’, which allows continu-
ous and smooth ratio variation over entire range of operations. The main advantage
of traction drive CVT are that engine can be operated over full range of loads and
speeds (Heilich 1983). The power transmission by traction drive is through rolling
contact via varying forces, which depend on the radius at which traction force is
applied. Thin ﬁlm is formed between two rolling contacts, which experience high
load and shear force and forms lubricating oil ﬁlm in elastohydrodynamic regime.
Instantaneous viscosity of ﬂuid is enhanced by many order of magnitude due to
these stresses. Then torque is transmitted through this semi-solid lubricant through
the drive. Mechanical efﬁciency is enhanced by traction drive due to efﬁcient rolling
motion and their working in elastohydrodynamic lubrication regime (Dowson and
Higginson 2014). The traction drive requires high traction coefﬁcient for power trans-
mission along with better lubrication. Traction drive efﬁciency is greatly dependent
on the lubricant used. The traction ﬂuid must survive high temperature and should
not deteriorate under repeating shear conditions. Several synthetic ﬂuids and naph-
thenic base compounds have superior traction properties than parafﬁnic or aromatic
compounds (Hata and Tsubouchi 1998; Machida and Kurachi 1990). Signiﬁcant new
research can be undertaken in future to formulate new traction ﬂuids and optimize
its performance for automotive applications.

24

V. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

2.3.3 Wheel Bearing

Most commonly, rolling bearings are applied in the hubs of the wheel. These parts
are made of high carbon steel, which is hardened and has excellent surface ﬁnish.
These bearings are ﬁlled with grease and assembled with seals made of elastomeric
materials. Bearings fail due to surface damage caused by improper ﬁtting or impacts
during operation. Surface damage causes the initiation of fatigue failure and its
propagation.

2.3.4 Drive Chain

Chain drives are used for driving and timing of ancillary components. Chains offer
their own advantage such as increased durability and relatively simple and cheap, and
have high capacity. Chains can be lubricated by splash and jets lubrication methods.
In splash lubrication method, chain is dipped into the sump during its move, however
in jet lubrication method, a lubricant jet impinges on to the chain at the entrance.
Within the roller chain, rollers revolve around the sprocket tooth, while pin slides
inside the bush amid enunciation. Hence there is excessive wear of the bush and pin
contact, causing elongation of chain after some time.

2.4 Trends in Automotive Engine Tribology

Thinner oil ﬁlm formations for the lubrication of engine components provide more
efﬁcient lubrication and higher power output. Hence lower viscosity engine oils (SAE
0W-20 and 5W-20) are used to improve the fuel economy and reduce the frictional
losses (Priest and Taylor 1998).

2.4.1 New Material Development

Currently, heavy cast iron engine blocks are being replaced with non-ferrous lighter
materials (Al and Mg). However the lubricants are formulated according to blocks
of cast iron, and not for these newer block materials (Tung and Hartﬁeld-Wünsch
1995a; b; Tung et al. 1996). Sleeves of cast iron are used inside the aluminum cylinder
bores for better lubrication. Piston skirts and cylinder liners are coated with scufﬁng
and wear resistant materials. These coatings are of amorphous carbon, which offers
very low friction and reduces the wear, thus improving engine component durability
(Erdemir 2000). These coating materials acts as self-lubricant.

2 Tribological Aspects of Automotive Engines

25

2.4.2 Development of Nano-tribology

The engine component lubrication contact scale moves from micro- to nano-, and
the surface adhesion forces start dominating. Nano-lubrication mechanism is dif-
ferent from the conventional lubrication mechanisms (Krauss et al. 2001). Various
nano-scale material surfaces are designed for nano-lubrication. These materials are
stronger, harder and self-repairing. Such types of materials include structural car-
bon, ceramic materials, polymer materials, multi-functional materials, nano-particle-
reinforced materials, nano-coated materials and nano-particle alloys.

2.5 Trends in Automotive Lubricants

The lubricant used in engines must protect the engine components, which are lubri-
cated. The protection of engine components is provided by the ﬂuid ﬁlm, which
forms a chemical ﬁlm on the surfaces (boundary lubrication). Lubricant protects the
engine components from corrosion by neutralizing the aids generated at hot spots.
Lubricants move the protective ﬁlm to the desired place and displace the unwanted
materials from the point of generation. These differing qualities of work unequiv-
ocally impacts the selection of physical properties and chemical composition of
lubricants. Different engine components require diverse types of protection. Engine
oil performances should not degrade with the fuel and combustion product enter-
ing the lubricant. Transmission liquids must survive high loads and temperatures.
Engine oil must not degrade or evaporate during high temperature engine operating
conditions. Different bearings need different liquid ﬁlm thickness, which separates
a spinning shaft around its axes from its bearing surface.

2.5.1 Engine Lubricants

Engine oils operate under harsh conditions, hence there is a big challenge in devel-
opment of lubricants which can survive the engine environment for longer periods.
Fuel, combustion gases, water and solid contaminant (sand, dirt and airborne mate-
rials) quicken the oil degradation and also reduce oil life hence require ﬁltration.
Properties of engine oil also inﬂuences the fuel economy and emissions from the
engine. Engine oil designation is done on the basis of their performance. American
Petroleum Institute (API), American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and
Society for Automotive Engineers (SAE, or currently SAE International) offer the
performance framework of the engine lubricants (Hsu 1995). In this framework, per-
formance and service of the engine oil is divided in two series: S and C; which stand
for 4-stroke spark ignition engines application, and compression ignition 2-stroke or
4-stroke diesel engines, respectively.

26

V. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

Oil ﬁlm may not be adequate to offer total wear protection under high pressure
and temperature conditions experienced at the cylinder-piston ring interface at the
top dead center due to the inﬂuence of combustion of fuel. Under these conditions,
lubricant should have additives, which form antiwear ﬁlm at the mating surfaces. One
of these additives is zinc di-alkyl di-thio-phosphate (ZDDP). The engine lubricant
should also have corrosion resistant additives.

2.5.2 Gear Lubricants

Gears are designed to withstand high load and temperature, which is generated at the
point of contact due to friction. Thus lubricant must provide protection from extreme
pressure and avoid material failure. Gear material functionality should be for longer
duration. Gear lubricant properties must include anti-wear, corrosion protection,
low temperature viscosity, resistant to foam formation, oxidative stability, and lowe
friction characteristics (Chapman et al. 1962).

2.5.3 Axle Lubricants

Desired properties of axle lubricant should include viscosity, thermal stability and
durability. The viscosity of lubricant should be in the range of 14–15 centistokes
at 100 °C. The Kinematic viscosity of lubricant can be measured as standard test
method (ASTM D 445). ASTM D 2983 standard test method can be used for the low
temperature (−5 to −20 °C) viscosity measurement of the lubricant (Schwartz et al.
2002; Tung et al. 2001). The performance of lubricant should be consistent through-
out the service life of the axle. The lubricant should not harm the metal components
and also metal components should not degrade the lubricant. The lubricant should
also not damage the seals.

2.5.4 Solid Lubricants

Some components of the engine have no space for liquid lubrication. These engine
parts are therefore lubricated by using solid lubricants. Generally it is coated on the
contacting surfaces by using binder or additives. Some solid lubricants are molybde-
num disulphide (MoS2), graphite and poly-tetra-ﬂuoro-ethylene (PTFE). Polymeric
solid lubricants are effective at low temperature range however metallic solid lubri-
cants degradation temperature is higher (up to 650 °C) and hence they can be used
at relatively higher temperatures (Booser 1997).

2 Tribological Aspects of Automotive Engines

27

2.6 Summary

This chapter provides a comprehensive review of tribological aspects of automotive
engine component lubrication. This chapter covers various tribological aspects of
engine, which are as follows:
(cid:129) There is great contribution of automotive lubricants in enhancing the engine efﬁ-
ciency and output from an engine powertrain. For superior power output and
efﬁciency, lubricants should form thinner lubricant ﬁlm on the mating engine
components. The issues of durability and wear are also addressed for the thin ﬁlm
lubrication.

(cid:129) Tribological requirement of newer non-ferrous automotive materials (Al, Mg) are

(cid:129) Current developments in lubricants are discussed along with future requirements.

ASTM standards for automotive engines are also discussed.

(cid:129) New lubrication methods (nano-lubrication) and their mechanisms is discussed

also discussed.

brieﬂy.
Abstract Poor quality leads to poor efﬁciency. As the research progresses, the devel-
opment in the sustainable material are also progresses. This change leads to enhance-
ment in the efﬁciency of the product. Novel sustainable material is the need of the
hour for the future development. Natural composite ﬁts the best alternative to deal
with environment problem. In the past decade natural ﬁbers applications has been
increasing as never before. These applications are aerospace, infrastructure, thermal
etc. Metal like steel, aluminum, cast iron are some of the materials which have been
dominating the industries before the introduction polymer composite. These metals
have been dominating the market but for a long time but lacking in the environmen-
tal issues. Natural ﬁbers have successfully ﬁlling that gap. Being biodegradable, it
is nature friendly and easy to dispose off. Decreased weight, nature friendly and
easy availability are the attractive characteristics that inﬂuences various industries
towards natural ﬁber composite. The current segment deals with the various natural
ﬁber composites and their applications in the industries.
Keywords Natural ﬁbre · Mechanical testing · Dynamic mechanical analysis
Research, development, and progress of natural or lignocelluloses ﬁbres are support-
ing eco-system, which leads to positive changes that can be seen in socio-economic
development for cultivation and farming. Natural and lingo-cellulosic ﬁbre has been
potentially explored in the polymer composite for long since. Plants, crops, and pods
from agricultural sources are some viable natural sources for polymer composite
industries. To increment the utilizations of renewable and biodegradable materials
for ecological safety towards a greener society, the application of natural ﬁbres in
the industries as bio-ﬁller/reinforcement materials in composites are the economic
issues and are highly preferable factors in the design of automotive parts. For the
past decade, various industries are endeavoring to replace synthetic ﬁbre with natu-
ral ﬁbre as reinforcements in polymer composite for the development of sustainable
composite. Fibres which obtained from the plant or extracted from animals are known
as natural ﬁbres. Natural ﬁbres have comprehensive mechanical and physical prop-
erties such as tensile, impact strength, stiffness and low density and good damping
(Saba et al. 2014; Peças et al. 2018). Natural ﬁbres are lightweight, low density,
economical and eco-friendly in nature and have the potential to replace synthetic
ﬁbre in many engineering applications like automobiles, furniture, packaging, and
construction. The automobile industry is the most beneﬁted among all the industries
because of the development in the natural ﬁbre composite fabricated with different
polymers like epoxy, Polypropylene (PP), polyethene (PE), and polyvinyl chloride
(PVC). The trend of utilization of natural ﬁbre stared in the 1990s in Europe and
America are shown in the Fig. 3.1.

Demand for natural ﬁbre based composite evolved from the automotive indus-
try because of the need for low cost and superior quality material in the competitive

Automobiles 

Marine

Electronic components

Consumer products

Appliances

Miscellaneous

Aerospace

4

6

8

10

13

30

%

Fig. 3.1 Contribution of natural ﬁbre in automotive and other sectors (Sherman 1999; Muessig
2002)

3 The Potential of Natural Fibers for Automotive Sector

33

world. In this way, the researcher has been trying to increase the renewable resources
of raw materials which can be recycled or biodegradable and highly emphasis to
reduce petroleum-based synthetics and increase agro-based natural ﬁbres in auto-
motive applications (Ellison et al. 2002). The agro based ﬁbre can reduce the cost of
appliances by 20% and weight by 30% (Lan Mair 2000). A market survey found that
around 20% of natural ﬁbre is consumed in the automobile sector in North America.
German and Austrian automotive industry targeting around 19% increase in the use
of natural ﬁbre in the automotive application in 2000, in which major emphasis on
the use of jute, hemp and sisal ﬁbre. Around 85% of vehicles are recyclable and
reused was targeted by European country at the end of 2015. Toward the develop-
ment and use of natural ﬁbre, many researchers are working on a combination of
matrix material and natural ﬁbre.

Natural ﬁbre composites made up of jute-PP are already in use in German auto-
mobile like Vogue to produce different components (Karus and Kaup 2002; Silva
et al. 2006). Schuh (Schuh 1999) reported that composites made of natural ﬁbre can
be successfully applied in the automotive parts like door panels, rear parcel shelf, seat
covering and several damping and insulation parts. Al-Qureshi (Al-Qureshi 1999)
fabricated the composites of banana ﬁbre, and analysis shows that they can be a
promising material for auto applications. Davoodi et al. (Davoodi et al. 2010) inves-
tigated the hybrid composite of kenaf and glass ﬁbre are suggested to be employed in
the structural applications of an automobile such as the bumper. Alves et al. (Alves
et al. 2010) reported that jute ﬁbre based composite can effectively replace glass ﬁbre
for the application of front bonnet of the car. It is found in the survey mostly used
natural ﬁbre in tones in the 20th century as shown in the Fig. 3.2.

Fig. 3.2 Use of natural ﬁbre
in the German automotive
industry in Tonnes

15000

4500

2500

1500

1000

Flux

Jute

Hemp

Kenaf

Sisal

34

S. K. Verma et al.

3.2 Applications of Natural Fibre-Reinforced Polymer

Composites (NFRC)

As environment friendly, economical and simple to process, NFRPCs have an enor-
mous application region. The automotive industry is the most prominent region of
natural ﬁbers apps. Apart from automotive applications there are other areas also
where natural ﬁbre can effectively be utilized primarily in health care, fabric pack-
aging, pulp and paper furniture restrictions, electrical equipment, pipes, helmets and
transportation. The following different natural ﬁbers and the areas where they can
be utilized are:
(cid:129) Flax use in green wall panels for construction.
(cid:129) Coir use in making boxes, trays, container for packaging.
(cid:129) Hemp for bicycles and cases musical instruments panel.
(cid:129) Balsa, wood for sports.
(cid:129) Hemp, Jute, Kenaf for automotive and shipping industry.
(cid:129) Kenaf for Mobile phone casing.
(cid:129) Wood for modular houses.

3.3 Advantages of Natural Fibre-Reinforced Polymer

Composites

The natural ﬁbres ousted synthetic ﬁbres in numerous ways such as easily available,
low density, low cost, admissible modulus-weight ratio, high acoustic damping, low
energy requirement, very less carbon footprint and biodegradable. In comparison to
conventional reinforcing ﬁbres such as kevlar and carbon the natural ﬁbres are much
cheaper and require low energy for the production. However, natural ﬁbres have
a higher variance of mechanical and physical properties, lower durability, lower
strength, higher moisture absorption, and lower processing temperature. A compar-
ison of natural and synthetic ﬁbre with respect to cost has been listed in Table 3.1.

Some more attractive properties of natural ﬁbres are their sustainability which
makes it environment-friendly. On the other hand, with a business point of view,
natural ﬁbres are cheap and keep the economy of the business intact. In addition,
some important advantages have been noticed. These are

Table 3.1 Cost of ﬁbre used in automotive (Huda et al. 2008; Zin et al. 2018)

Cost US$/Ton

Energy GJ/ton

Fibres

Natural ﬁbres

Glass ﬁber

Carbon ﬁber

200–1000

1200–1800

1250

4

30

130

3 The Potential of Natural Fibers for Automotive Sector

35

(cid:129) A low density of natural ﬁbre makes the component around 30% lighter.
(cid:129) Easily recycled and processed due to the abrasive nature of the natural ﬁbre.
(cid:129) The satisfactory mechanical property of NFPRCs makes it useful material in non-

constructional applications.

(cid:129) Eliminates the problem of disposal after being used.
(cid:129) Comparative good mechanical properties like tensile, ﬂexural and impact strength.

Good surface ﬁnish helps in the construction of better-moulded part.

(cid:129) High resistance to corrosion.

3.4 Disadvantages of Natural Fibre-Reinforced Polymer

Composites

Apart from incredible advantages they are certain drawbacks also linked with the
usage of natural ﬁbres. Despite being cheap and low weight natural ﬁbres are found
to have unstable bonding with various polymers. This instability can be made sta-
ble by various surface treatment processes. Somehow prices of composite increases
but enhancement of ﬁbre matrix increases which leads to improved physical and
mechanical properties. Thus it is worth saying that chemical treatment of ﬁbre is
beneﬁcial in the improvement of the fabricated composites. Some most common
chemical treatments are Acetylation, Alkalinization, Benzoylation, Silane treatment,
Maleated coupling, Peroxide treatment, Permanganate treatment, Isocyanate treat-
ment, Titanate treatment, Plasma treatment, Sodium chlorite treatment etc. (Zin et al.
2018; Kabir et al. 2011; Sanjay et al. 2015).

Regarding the durability, natural ﬁbres are less durable than synthetic ﬁbres with
respect to the application of construction. This is due to the chemical absorption and
high content of moisture present in the natural ﬁbre. Possibilities of cracks which
lead to the swelling and expansion in volume in case of concrete based natural ﬁbre
composite. Cementitious material forms the alkaline environment resulted in low
interfacial strength between ﬁbre and matrix. The above problem can be avoided by
the alkaline treatment of ﬁbre and some other water repelling agents.

3.5 Classiﬁcation of Natural Fibres

Being obtained naturally, natural ﬁbres are categorized in mineral, animal and plant
ﬁbres. One of the most important plant ﬁbres is vegetable ﬁbre composed of cellulose,
hemicelluloses, and lignin. The main source of vegetable ﬁbres is grass/reed, leaf,
seed, fruit, wood, stalk and bast. Plant ﬁbres are highly accepted ﬁbre all over the
industries and highly prefer for research point of view. It is due to the fact that plant
ﬁbres have a shorter period of growth, availability and renewability (Sanjay et al.
2015) (Fig. 3.3).

36

S. K. Verma et al.

Natural  

Animal 

Silk 

Wool 

Hair 

Cellulose/Lignocellulose 

Mineral 

Asbestos 

Bast 

Leaf 

Seed

Fruit 

Wood 

Stalk 

Grass 

Jute

Sisal 

Loofah 

Oil palm 

Hard Wood 

Rice 

Bamboo 

Ramie 

Banana 

Milk Weed 

Coil 

Soft    
Wood 

Wheat 

Bagasse 

Flax 

Henequen 

Kapok 

Kenaf 

Agave 

Cotton 

Roselle 

Mesta 

Hemp 

PALF 

Abaca 

Barley 

Corn 

Maize 

Sabai 

Oat 

Rye 

Rape 

Esparto 

Cancry 

Fig. 3.3 Classiﬁcation of natural ﬁbre (Sanjay et al. 2015)

3.6 Mechanical Testing of Natural-Fibre Composites

The mechanical properties of different natural ﬁber as shown in Table 3.2.

3.6.1 Tensile Strength of Composite

The main constituents of natural ﬁber are cellulose, hemicelluloses, pectin, lignin,
and waxes. The cellulose molecule in the form of the continuous chain and provide
high strength and stiffness to the natural ﬁber (Mohanty et al. 2005). Generally, the
tensile strength and Young’s modulus of natural ﬁbers depends upon cellulose con-
tent in natural ﬁber. The increase in cellulose content of the natural ﬁbers increases
the tensile strength and Young’s modulus of natural ﬁber but the increasing of hemi-
celluloses content decreases the tensile strength and Young’s modulus of natural
ﬁbers (Komuraiah et al. 2014). When the cellulose ﬁbrils are parallel oriented to the
ﬁber axis the natural ﬁber has high tensile strength, inﬂexible and high rigidity, if
the cellulose ﬁbrils are spiral oriented natural ﬁber are more ductility. In Table 3.2 is
showing the tensile strengths of natural ﬁbers like kenaf, hemp, ﬂax, jute, and sisal,

3 The Potential of Natural Fibers for Automotive Sector

37

Table 3.2 Mechanical properties of natural plant ﬁber (Mohanty et al. 2005; Mwaikambo 2006)

Fiber type

Fiber

Elongation
at break (%)

Bast

Leaf

Seed

Stalk/grass/wood Bamboo

Density
(kg/m3)

1230

1350

1200

1440

1200

1500

1350

1200

700–1500

800–1400

1200

1500

1200

Flax

Hemp

Kenaf

Ramie

Sisal

Pineapple

Banana

Cotton

Coir

Oil palm

Bagasse

Softwood
kraft pulp

Hardwood
kraft pulp

Wheat straw 1600

Rice straw

1650

Tensile
strength
(MPa)

187–773

580–1110

295–930

400–938

507–885

170–1627

529–914

175

248

391–1000

20–290

1000

950

273

449

1500–1600

287–587

1.5–3.1

1.6–4.5

2.7–6.9

2–4

1.9–3

1–3

3–10

7–8

32

14

2

1–3

N.D

N.D

2.7

2.2

Young’s
modulus
(GPa)

13–26.5

70

53

61.4–128

9.4–22

34.5–82.5

8–32

7–8

4–7

3.2

11–30

40

37.9

4.79–6.58

1.21–125

are comparatively low than the synthetic ﬁbers like glass and carbon and only bast
ﬁbers having better mechanical properties like tensile strength and Young’s modu-
lus (Mohanty et al. 2000a). The demand of biodegradable composite increases day
by day and biodegradable composite has better mechanical properties than thermo
particle polymer (Polypropylene (PP)) composites. The addition of natural ﬁber in
polymer composite affects the tensile strength and Young’s modulus of polymer com-
posite. Such as the tensile strength and Young’s modulus of Biodegradable polymers
(polylactides (PLA)) composites are 62 MPa and 2.7 GPa (Rana et al. 1999) when the
addition of 30 wt% ﬂax in PLA decreases the tensile strength from 62.9 to 53 MPa
and increases the Young’s modules from 2.7 to 8.3 GPa (Oksman et al. 2003) and
the addition of 30 wt% sisal ﬁber in PLA decreases the tensile strength from 62.9
to 14 MPa and the Young’s modules decreases from 2.7 to 0.7 GPa (Lee and Jang
1999). Therefore, the most of the natural ﬁber composite used in the automotive,
aerospace industry and other industry have a blending ratio of 50:50 wt% for nat-
ural ﬁbers because these ratios generate the optimal tensile strengths and Young’s
modules. The physical-mechanical properties of natural ﬁbers also depends upon the
production method and climatic conditions.

38

S. K. Verma et al.

3.6.2 Elongation at Break (%)

The natural ﬁbers have ability to resist against the crack formation better than the
synthetic ﬁbers. So, elongation at break is considered as an important factor in case
of polymer engineering composites. The natural ﬁbers which show weaker strength
and Young’s modulus have high elongation value. The elongation at break decreases
but an increase in Young’s modulus when the inclusion of natural ﬁbers and thermo-
plastics (Mohanty et al. 2005). For improvement in the elongation of ﬁber, NaOH
Surface chemical treatments are required, but it has not beneﬁcial for tensile strength
enhancement (Du et al. 2015; Yu et al. 2010). In similar way if we use bagasse con-
tents that improved the percentage elongation and impact strength in the composite
and addition of bagasse contents decreases the bending strength and hardness of the
material. The elongation of natural ﬁber is also inﬂuence by lignin content when use
more lignin content improve the elongation such as leaﬁran ﬁbers (with 26% lignin)
had a greater elongation than kenaf (17% lignin), jute (9% lignin), and pineapple
(8.3% lignin) ﬁbers (Agu et al. 2012; Mobasher 2011).

3.6.3 Impact Strength

Natural ﬁber resistance to impact load is described as impact strength. Tests are used
in studying the toughness of the material (Ndiyae et al. 2015). Like other mechanical
properties, the impact strength of natural ﬁber increasing with increases in ﬁber
content (Mueller and Krobjilowski 2004). The impact strength of ﬂax ﬁbers is much
higher than the other natural ﬁbers (hemp, kenaf) and E glass. Those natural ﬁbers
which have high elongation at break it also has ability to absorbed sudden impact.
Increasing of the Impact strength of natural ﬁber is depends on the number layers of
ﬁber and with increment of ﬁber length but decreases with ﬁber spacing. The impact
strength is also improvement by adequate chemical and physical treatments of natural
ﬁbers (Cho et al. 2014). A recent study the toughness of pure polymer composite (such
as PLA-based composite and PP based composite) is monotonically decreases by the
addition of natural ﬁber while the addition of natural ﬁber the presence of cellulose
ﬁber increases of stress concentrations regions that require less energy to elongate
the crack propagation potential composite failure (Rana et al. 1998). The impact
strength of pure PLA and pure PP are 25 and 29.7 J/m respectively (Fejeskozma
and Kargerkocsis 1994) while the addition of bamboo ﬁber the impact strength are
decreases to 19.5 J/m of PLA/bamboo ﬁber composite and increases to 32.4 J/m of
PP/bamboo ﬁber composite. In study see that when the chemical treated natural ﬁber
is uses the impact strength are improved by 33% (Mueller and Krobjilowski 2003).

3 The Potential of Natural Fibers for Automotive Sector

39

Table 3.3 Stiffness and
ultimate stress of different
natural ﬁbers (Mohanty et al.
2000; Lilholt and Lawther
2000)

Natural ﬁber

Fiber type

Stiffness (GPa) Ultimate stress

Hemp

Flax

Jute

Sisal

Softwood

Bast

Leaf

Stem

30–60

50–70

20–55

9–22

10–50

(MPa)

300–800

500–900

200–500

100–800

100–170

3.6.4 Flexural Strength

The ﬂexural strength and modulus is also show similar trend as impact strength.
The ﬂexural strength and modulus is also depends on ﬁber length, loading and con-
tent. Bast and leaf ﬁbers have the highest ﬂexural strength among all natural ﬁbers,
similarly kenaf bast ﬁbers have also higher ﬂexural strength than kenaf core ﬁber
composites (Ishak et al. 2010). The composites whose surfaces are smoother and
more homogeneous show the greatest ﬂexural modulus therefore the bleached ﬁber
composites exhibit high ﬂexural properties compared to the untreated bleached ﬁber
composites (Dash et al. 2000). The ﬂexural strength of coir ﬁbers has better than syn-
thetic ﬁbers. The coconut ﬁber is an excellent reinforcement for polymer concrete,
it increasing the fracture and ﬂexural strength. In polymer concrete an increment of
25.1% of coconut ﬁber and 3.5% bagasse and a decrease of 21% of banana pseudo
stem reinforcement have batter ﬂexural strength compared to unreinforced polymer
concrete (Reis 2006). The ﬂexural strength and modulus of neat PLA has 98 MPa
and 2.6 GPa respectively while the addition of bamboo ﬁber at 30 wt% the ﬂexural
strength decreases to 57 MPa and modulus of elasticity increases to 4 GPa (Mohanty
et al. 2002). After addition of wood ﬁbers, there is a growing trend in ﬂexural strength
for all the composites. With addition of 30 wt% surface treated ﬁbers, the ﬂexural
modulus improves considerably (Mohanty et al. 2000b; Lilholt and Lawther 2000).
Stiffness and Ultimate Stress of different natural ﬁbers is shown in Table 3.3.

3.6.5 Stiffness

The research in natural ﬁber proves that lignocellulosic ﬁbers are outstanding in
nature of stiffness and strength. Similar to the tensile strength and stiffness of natural
ﬁbers is also depending on the cellulose content and spiral angle. Natural Fibers those
have high cellulose quantity have been found outstanding mechanical properties.
Lignin contents also affects the stiffness properties of natural ﬁbers and how it is
implanted in cell structure. Due to excellent stiffness properties of natural are used
as ﬁller it’s improved the stiffness of the composites (Faruk and Sain 2015). Due
to low density of natural plant ﬁbers, the speciﬁc properties, strength, and stiffness

40

S. K. Verma et al.

of natural ﬁbers are comparable to the values for glass ﬁbers. The Microﬁbrillar
angle is a important factor for stiffness of the natural ﬁbers. The stiffness is directly
proportional to Microﬁbrillar angle. At small Microﬁbrillar angle (<5°), stiffness is
50–80 GPa, and at large Microﬁbrillar angle (40°–50°), stiffness is reduced up to
20 GPa (Page et al. 1977). Strong interactions between the coupling agent and the
natural ﬁber hydroxyl groups are needed to overcome the problem incompatibility
problem to increase impact, tensile, and ﬂexural strengths of natural-ﬁber reinforced
composites.

3.6.6 Dynamic Mechanical Analysis

Study of response of material to sinusoidal stress is called as Dynamic mechanical
analysis (DMA). DMA characteristics of polymer composites are fairly comparable
to metals like steel, aluminum and other composite materials (Gupta and Bharti 2017).
Thermo Gravimetric Analysis (TGA), Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) and
Thermal Mechanical Analysis (TMA) are some of the analysis that can be carried
out using DMA. Storage modulus, damping and tan δ are some of the characteristics
that can be calculated using DMA. Incorporation of 30% natural ﬁber to polymer
matrix lead to increase in the storage modulus and damping characteristics of the
polypropylene composite (Rana et al. 1999; Tajvidi et al. 2006). Modulus decreases
only in the case of softening of composite at higher temperature.

The dynamic mechanical properties of neat Polypropylene and the composites
with different natural ﬁbers (Wood, Kenaf, Rice Hulls and Newsprint) of 25% shown
in Table 3.4 and compared with the pure plastic. As seen in the table all different com-
posites had higher storage and loss modulus values compared with pure Polypropy-
lene, whereas their damping was lower. Therefore, Polypropylenes/natural ﬁber com-
posite behave more elastically than their pure Polypropylene. Polypropylenes/Kenaf
ﬁber composite show highest storage modulus values and lowest mechanical loss
factor and Polypropylenes/Rice Hull composite show lowest storage modulus values
and highest mechanical loss factor which indicating better reinforcement efﬁciency
all over the all temperature range (−60 °C, −20 °C, 0 °C, +20 °C, +60 °C). As like
all mechanical properties DMA is also improved by increasing ﬁber content (Tajvidi
et al. 2006).

Table 3.4 Dynamic mechanical analysis of natural ﬁber (Rana et al. 1999; Tajvidi et al. 2006)

S. No.

Composite

Storage modulus

Loss modulus

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Neat PP

PP/wood ﬂour

PP/kenaf ﬁber

PP/rice hulls

PP/newsprint

2.9

3.126

3.002

2.595

3.046

0.163

0.189

0.173

0.166

0.180

tan λ

0.055

0.060

0.058

0.064

0.060

3 The Potential of Natural Fibers for Automotive Sector

41

3.7 Applications in the Automobile Sector

3.7.1 Interior Components

Interior and an exterior component can be easily manufactured by natural ﬁbre com-
posite (Dash et al. 2000). These are door cladding, seatback lining and in making the
space at the back of the rear seat in the sedan i.e. package shelves. Coconut ﬁbre is
employed in making of the bottom of seats, cushions and cushion for head support.
In automobiles approximately 10–15 kg of natural ﬁbre is used. Figure 3.4 shows
the integration of the natural ﬁbre for the automobile application.

Press moulded panels are used to reduce the weight and the cost by using some
natural ﬁbres such as hemp, sisal and ﬂax. These are used for an interior application
like trimming the door, hear lining, trunk lining etc. Mainly all over the world,
manufacturers are using natural ﬁbre in the application of automobiles. Henry Ford
ﬁrst started the manufacturing of hemp ﬁbre composite for the automobile parts in
1940. On the perspective of the automobile industry, the hemp ﬁbres have signiﬁcant
advantages such as lower fuel consumption, lightweight, reduction in waste disposal,

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

)
g
k
(
 
s
e
r
b

i
f
 
l

a
r
u
a
n

t

 
f

o

 
t

i

h
g
e
w

i

 
l
a
c
p
y
t
 
e
h
T

S eatbacks

Front door-liners
H eadrests

P arcel shelves

R ear door-liners

N oise, vibration and harshness m aterials
S unroof interior shields
B oot-liners

Fig. 3.4 Inclusion of the weight of natural ﬁbre in automotive components

Automotive components

42

S. K. Verma et al.

good recycling possibilities and greenhouse emissions. The use of hemp ﬁbre reduces
the cost of the automotive part by 20% and a weight reduction of 30% is achieved.
Hemp ﬁbre composites are mostly being used for interior parts such as door panels,
dashboards, parcel shelves, backrest, seat cushions and cabin linings. Hemp ﬁbre also
helps to produce biofuel as an alternative to petroleum-based fuel for the automobile.
The stalk and leaves of the hemp plant can be used to produce a cheap and renewable
biofuel (Reis 2006) (Fig. 3.5).

Automotive manufacturers have adopted in their new models Natural Fiber Rein-
forced Polymer Composites NFRPC for interior and exterior vehicle parts such door
panels, package trays, trunk liners, seat backs, boot lining, hat rack, spare tyre lin-
ing, headliner panel, boot lining, noise insulation panels, molded foot well linings,
door trim, Interior door paneling, windshield, dashboard, back cushions, parcel shelf,
insulation, rear storage shed, door trim panels (PP matrix with NF), engine or trans-
mission cover side and back, spare wheel compartment cover (Suddell and Evans
2005) (Figs. 3.6 and 3.7).

Fig. 3.5 Interior door
ﬁnishing by Hemp ﬁbre
(Reis 2006; Dash et al. 2000)

Fig. 3.6 Coconut coir
reinforced PP use for stirring
wheel (Witayakran et al.
2017)

3 The Potential of Natural Fibers for Automotive Sector

43

Fig. 3.7 NFRPC use as Seat
cover (Witayakran et al.
2017)

NFRPC are a composite material fabricated by a polymer matrix embedded with
high-strength natural ﬁbres, like jute, oil palm, sisal, kenaf and ﬂax. NFRPC occupy
several industrial areas that prove the perspective of natural ﬁbres as replacements for
their synthetic part (Fogorasi and Barbu 2017). Daimler Benz in Germany has also
been using natural ﬁbres based composite since 1994. 50 components of Mercedes-
Benz E-class are now been made by using various natural ﬁbres such as sisal, ﬂax,
hemp, wool and many more. Daimler Benz is also replacing glass ﬁbre with the wide
range of natural ﬁbres as European hemp, sisal, ﬂax by using them as reinforcing
ﬁbre in polypropylene components. By using the natural ﬁbres like abaca and hemp,
Daimler Chrysler increased the use of renewable materials in many vehicles. 27
components have been made by natural ﬁbre composites which are now been used
in newest Mercedes S-class vehicle weighing 43 kg.

BMW uses a large number of renewal resources along with 1000 tonnes of the
natural ﬁbre. Each BMW 7-series car consists of 24 kg of renewable material with
various natural ﬁbres such as hemp, sisal, ﬂax and wool. The mixture of ﬂax and
kenaf is used in door panels inserts and package trays for Saturn L300s.

Biodegradable plastic is furnished by Toyota mainly consist of starch obtained
from sweet potatoes and other plants. These plastics along with the natural ﬁbre
used for garnishing the ES3 concept car’s pillars. Lexus package shelves are being
made by Kenaf ﬁbre. It is also induced into the body structure of Toyota including I
unit concept vehicles. Kenaf ﬁbre imported from Bangladesh obtained from Kenaf
reinforced PP composite is used in door panels of the Mondeo model by Ford Motors
(Bledzki et al. 2006).

Flex form of ﬁbre which provides better mechanical properties and obtained from
natural ﬁbre such as jute, hemp, ﬂax and thermoplastic matrix materials such as PP
& PE is used over wool ﬁbres reinforced thermoplastic as they cause 25% strength
improvement. Companies named MN, Winona and composite product Inc (CPI)
produce composites of ﬂax & PP, as used for Pickups and SUV’s ﬁeld testing was
done for instrument panels, door panels and package shelves. For the door panels,

44

S. K. Verma et al.

Findlay Industries got 4-star dynamic rating as door panels are made up from LoPref
in PP/PET/natural ﬁbre composite. First natural ﬁbre to meet stringent speciﬁcation
was the panels appeared in 9S and 99 Saab. VolcaLite is manufactured by reinforced
natural ﬁbre.GMT lite products are made with PP reinforced long chopped basalt
ﬁbre (Figs. 3.8 and 3.9).

It provides better chemical resistance, high modulus and more service temperature
than glass ﬁbres. It is widely encouraged to replace carbon ﬁbre and glass ﬁbre in
composites. VolcaLite causesa50% reduction compared to GMT product and lowers
down ultra thin proﬁle to 3 mm. currently, it is being utilized by Tier-1 Automotive
suppliers. Cambridge industries are producing ﬂax/PP composite for Freightliner
century COE C-2 heavy trucks.

Fig. 3.8 Interior applications of natural ﬁber composites products by FlexForm Technologies
(above) and Johnson controls (below) (Witayakran et al. 2017)

3 The Potential of Natural Fibers for Automotive Sector

45

)
7
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

n
a
r
k
a
y
a
t
i

W

(

r
o
t
c
e
s

e
l
i
b
o
m
o
t
u
a
n
i

e
s
u
r
i
e
h
t

d
n
a

r
e
b
ﬁ
l
a
r
u
t
a
N

9
3

.

.

g
i
F

46

S. K. Verma et al.

3.7.2 Exterior Components

To meet the standard of performance of automotive such as door and trim components,
bumpers etc., high-performances in along with natural ﬁbre with suitable additives
are used. But due to moisture absorbing capacity, their use as the exterior component
is restricted. For the application of seat cushions only, the property of water absorption
should be taken into account. Due to this reason, the use of these ﬁbres are restricted to
inner parts only (Promper 2010; Thomas 2008; Hintermann 2005). However research
is under process to use natural ﬁbres as exterior components.

In Mercedes A class an application of Abaca ﬁbres developed by Daimler Chrysler
is used for under ﬂoor paneling. These ﬁbres are extremely elastic with better tensile
strength. Similarly, Mercedes Benz is using ﬂax ﬁbres for the manufacturing the
component of Travego (Suddell 2003).

3.8 Limitations

Change in the property of natural ﬁbre has been the major drawback of natural ﬁbre
reinforced polymer composites. Due to the production of these ﬁbres throughout the
world, they have different geographical, different historical and different routes for
production and processing, moisture absorbing capacity to a large extent. This limits
their applications as exterior components in automobiles (Puglia et al. 2004). Dete-
rioration and dimension stability due to the ingress of moisture is a major drawback
of natural ﬁbres. The lower temperature required for processing of natural ﬁbre is
one of the major limitations of natural ﬁbre composites because of volatile emission
and ﬁbre degradation that may affect composite properties. So the working temper-
ature of natural ﬁbre is limit to 200 °C. Another drawback of natural ﬁbre includes
low microbial resistance and high moisture absorption. However, the fair amount of
adhesion lowers the amount and rate of water absorption in the interface region of the
composite. By encapsulation and good ﬁbre-matrix bonding, the moisture absorption
could be reduced. By the acetylating process of hydroxyl group present in ﬁbre, its
moisture absorption can also be reduced [57]. Another demerit is the variable range
of prices as compared to synthetic ﬁbres such as glass ﬁbres. The cost of ﬂax is
increasing consistently but the price of glass ﬁbre is stable for last many years. So
cost analysis must be made to avoid this problem.

3.9 Conclusions

Most of the bulk material used in the automotive sector has its harmful impacts on
the environment and human beings. The new technology and composite are seen as a
viable solution to reduce the environmental effects as well as increase the efﬁciency

3 The Potential of Natural Fibers for Automotive Sector

47

of the automobile. The green composites used in the automotive industry largely
focus on reducing the fuel consumption, production of lighter equipments and use
of low-polluting vehicles. The advancements in the areas of these nanotechnolo-
gies have been diverse and manifold. They show diversity from pollution-sensing,
and reduction, energy conservation, interior cooling, power train, lightweight con-
struction, surveillance control up to recycle potential, wear reduction and driving
dynamics, etc. They also add novel and eco-efﬁcient functionalities to the traditional
construction materials.

Natural ﬁbres polymeric composites emerge as a fruitful way to enhance the
quality of components of automobile with respect to the economic and technical
feasibility safety and environment. Owing to their qualities that include being eco-
friendly, light weight, low-cost, resistance to corrosion and being biodegradable
among others. Natural ﬁbres polymeric composites is being extensively used in
automobile parts such as door panels, seat back panels, door bolsters, side and back
walls, headliners, seat backs, car seat covers and mattresses, wrapping paper, rugs,
doormats, and many more areas. Also, it not only reduces the automobile cost by
around 20–30% but also increases the fuel efﬁciency by around 20%.
Abstract With the growing industrial development and reliance on fossil fuels,
green house gas emission has become a major problem. Transportation plays a mas-
sive role in producing CO2 gas emission with personal vehicles producing the largest
share. Light weighting is a possible solution of reducing the CO2 gas emissions. On
an average, 100 kg of mass reduction achieved on a passenger car saves about 9 g of
CO2 per km at the car exhaust. Some lightweight materials are already being used in
automobile sector such as aluminum, magnesium, their alloys, composite materials,
etc. A novel category is metal foams, which are one of the metal matrix composites,
having uniformly distributed gaseous pores as reinforcement embedded in the metal
matrix. A high porosity in metal foams makes them potential candidates to absorb
the large amount of mechanical energy, damping vibrations and ability of sound
absorption which can be well exploited in automotive industry. As per requirement
in different sectors, metal foam of different metals has been developed like Al, Mg,
Fe, etc. Based on the porosity of metal foams, they have found their applications in
the functional and structural ﬁeld. This book chapter emphasizes on the recent devel-
opment in the ﬁeld of metal foams, mechanical properties, which can be exploited in
the automotive industry, processing method and also gives the overview of existing
and as well as the potential ﬁeld where these novel material can be utilized.
Keywords Metal foam · Structural application · Energy absorption characteristic
Metal foams are the cellular solids in which the gaseous pores are integrated uni-
formly in their structures. Metal foam is one of the hottest developing topics among
the researchers due to their interesting combinations of physical and mechanical
properties, such as high stiffness to weight ratio or high gas permeability combined
along with high thermal conductivity. Though, the development of metal foam as
engineering application started in near the beginning of 20th century when ﬁlters,
batteries and self lubricated bearings were manufactured by sintered powder and
meshes but the ﬁrst patent on metal foam was registered by a French in 1925 (Nils-
son 2007; Meller 1925). The commercialization started three decades later in USA,
where some quality research was obtained for about 10 years as a recent develop-
ment on metal foams. But the great surge of research and development started from
1996 when USA launched Multidisciplinary Research Initiative on Ultralight Metals
(MURI) which helped in funding the projects focused on cellular metals (Banhart
and Weaire 2002).

Nature has also developed cellular material like wood, bones etc. Man made
cellular materials which is frequently used are polymeric foams having great variety
of applications. Metals and alloys are also being converted in foam are less known
(compare to polymer foams), which can produce interesting structural and functional
applications in the near future. The need behind the development of metal foam is their
unique set of physical and mechanical properties such as high strength to weight ratio,
low thermal conductivity, good electric insulating properties, non inﬂammability,
high gas permeability, high impact energy absorption, sound absorbing capacity etc.
The produced metal foam can ﬁnd suitable application as light weight construction
material in automotive, naval and aerospace ﬁeld. Moreover, it can be suitable in
producing heat exchanger, silencers, ﬁre arresters, ﬁlters, bullet proof jackets, heat
radiators, structured templates and supports, electrode mufﬂing devices etc. (Banhart
2001, 2003, 2005; Davis and Zhen 1983; Stöbener et al. 2005; Chen et al. 2011;
Sanz et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2011; Xu et al. 2008; Hong and Herling 2006; Gomez
Alvarez-Arenas and Gonzalez Gomez 2007).

On the basis of structure, metal foam can be divided in three categories closed
cell, open cell, combination of both and lotus type. As the name suggests close cell
metal foam are such type of structures in which the pores are completely enclosed
by thin layer of metallic wall, while open cell structures have uniﬁed pores. The
third type is a novel development in which there are long cylindrical pores aligned
in one direction (Hyun et al. 2001; Hyun and Nakajima 2003; Simone and Gibson
1997). The close cell metal foam ﬁnds suitable application in structural load-bearing
applications, while open porosity is used in functional ﬁeld where load bearing is
not a primary goal. In last three decades different metals and alloys foams have been
developed like Al, Al–Zn (Bisht and Gangil 2018; Bisht et al. 2019), Al–Mn (Xia
et al. 2013), Zn (Banhart et al. 2001),Cu (Zhao et al. 2005; Irretier and Banhart 2005;
Park and Nutt 2001), Pb (Park and Nutt 2000), Fe, Steels (Park and Nutt 2001; Ikeda
et al. 2005), Mg, Ti (Wuebben et al. 2000), Ti–5W alloy foams (Hyelim et al. 2017),

4 Future of Metal Foam Materials in Automotive Industry

53

Al–Si, Ni3Al (Bart-Smith et al. 1998), Al–Cu, MMCs, open-cell Al–Mg/Al2O3 and
Al–Mg/SiC–Al2O3 composite prefoams (Shariﬁ et al. 2017), foamed-copper rein-
forced composites (Ji et al. 2014) etc. Among these wide varieties of metal foam
Al has gained tremendous interest and is being developed by different industries
through different trade name like Alporas, Alulight, Cymat, Duocel etc.

Being a multifunctional property material, the research in all directions cover-
ing, material processing, mechanism of foam development, enhancing the desired
properties, searching suitability in different applications and the development of pre-
dictive models for foaming process are being conducted by researchers. This article
is devoted towards the development in the ﬁeld of processing techniques, character-
ization and applications of close cell Aluminum metal foam.

4.2 Production Methods of Close Cell Metal Foams

There are several techniques to manufacture the metal foam. The fundamental idea
for foam production is to produce uniform pores throughout the metal matrix. In
this article classiﬁcation is based on gas source used for foams production. Different
processing methods are summarized in Fig. 4.1.

In this article the focus will be given on the techniques which are used worldwide

commercially.

Fig. 4.1 Processing method of metal foam based on gas source used

54

A. Bisht et al.

4.2.1 Blowing Agent Techniques

A blowing agent is a substance which is capable of producing a cellular structure via
a foaming process for variety of material that undergo hardening or phase transition.
They are typically applied when the blown material is in a liquid stage. Generally
the foaming agents must undergo thermal decomposition and generate gas pres-
sure in the matrix sufﬁcient to overcome atmospheric pressure and cause foaming
(Li et al. 2012). Blowing agents preferably decomposes with liberation of gases,
these generated gases should be virtually insoluble in the matrix and the corrosive
gases should be avoided from the decomposition products. Blowing agents have dif-
ferent decomposition temperature. The temperature required for the foaming has to
be slightly above the liquids temperature of the used alloy. Generally hydrides and
carbonates are used as blowing agents. TiH2, ZrH2, MgH2 etc. are hydrides, gener-
ally used in low melting point metals. On the other hand CaCO3, SrCO3, MgCO3 etc.
are used in high melting point base metals. The melting behavior and decomposition
characteristic of the blowing agent must be coordinated to obtain good quality foam.
If the general conditions are met and heating and cooling are properly controlled,
the foam with acceptable porosity can be produced. The processes based on blowing
agent are melt route and powder metallurgy method.

4.2.2 Powder Metallurgy Technique (Trade Name—Alulight)

The fundamental idea is to use the metal in powder form so called as powder met-
allurgy technique but the ﬁnal expansion occurs in liquid state. In the process metal
powders or alloy powders with blowing agent are uniformly mixed which are then
compacted to get a yield semi-ﬁnished product. Compaction is completed generally
by iso-static compression, rod extrusion or powder rolling method (Baumeister 1990;
Baumeister and Schrader 1991; Weber et al. 1997; Yu et al. 1998). The care has to be
taken to produce semi ﬁnished precursor in which blowing agent is uniformly embed-
ded without any residual porosity. Now in which form the ﬁnal shape is needed, semi
ﬁnished precursors are converted through rolling process. Heat treatment process
near the melting point of matrix material is the last step, where the blowing agent
which is distributed uniformly in matrix decomposes and releases gas which applies
the force on the compressed precursor to form highly porous structure (Fig. 4.2).

Aluminium alloys foams. For steels, carbonates are well suited due to their high
decomposing temperature (Irretier and Banhart 2005; Park and Nutt 2000, 2001).
SrCO3 is most frequently used as blowing agent in production of such foams. (Park
and Nutt 2001, 2002). A content of less than 1% is sufﬁcient for using metal hydrides
as blowing agent. The method is generally used for producing foam of tin, zinc, brass,
lead, gold and some other metals and alloys by selecting correct blowing agents
with appropriate process parameters (Banhart 2001). Fraunhofer-Institute in Bremen
(Germany) developed this technique for producing PM precursor with blowing agent

4 Future of Metal Foam Materials in Automotive Industry

55

Fig. 4.2 Powder metallurgy
process

or sintering of hollow spheres. So ‘Foaminal’ is other trade name for such products.
Foaminal are integral metal foams with a closed cell structure and a closed surface.
(Baumeister 1992, 1996; Baumeister et al. 1996, 1997; Fraunhofer-Institute Bremen
1999).

4.2.3 Melt Route Method (Trade Name—Alporas)

This method is also known as casting method, in which metal or metal alloy is
melted in crucible where viscosity enhancer is added at 680 °C between 2 and 3%.
The viscosity enhancer generally used are liquid metal matrix composites (MMCs)
containing 10–20 vol% particles (typically 10 μm silicon carbide or alumina parti-
cles), 5% of 70 nm SiC, 4 wt% of TiC particles (200–1000 nm), Ca metal between 2
and 3%. Viscosity enhancer is used to enhance the viscosity which adhere on metal
interface and prevent pore coalescence. In most of the cases Ca granules are added as
viscosity enhancer at 680 °C and stirred up to several minutes which helps in enhanc-
ing the viscosity by a factor up to 5 due to the formation of calcium oxide (CaO),
calcium–aluminium oxide (CaAl2O4) or perhaps even Al4Ca intermetallics which
thicken the liquid metal (Simone and Gibson 1998; Miyoshi et al. 2000). Stirring
time shows increasing effect on the viscosity as well as also increases with increase in
percentage of viscosity enhancer (Banhart 2001). After this process blowing agents
are introduced in viscous melt at 680–730 °C which is again stirred for few minutes.
At constant pressure due to reaction, molten metal starts to expand slowly and grad-
ually and ﬁlls the foaming vessel. After cooling solid metal foam is released and cut
into desired shape for further processing (Fig. 4.3).

56

A. Bisht et al.

Fig. 4.3 Melt route process for metal foam

4.2.4 Foaming by Gas Injection (Trade Name—Alcan

or Cymat)

In this process shown in Fig. 4.4 viscosity enhancer like silicon carbide, aluminium
oxide or magnesium oxide particles are added in the melt. The viscosity enhancer or
reinforcing agent is added from 10 to 20% having moderate particle size from 5 to
20 μm (Banhart 2001). These particles help in stabilizing the foam by accumulating
on the cell walls which depends on the wetting angle. So the proper selection of rein-
forcement particle is needed whose wetting angle with respect to melt must provide
optimum stabilizing effect. In the next step gas (air, nitrogen, argon) is injected in
viscous melt, where it is stirred by rotating impeller or vibrating nozzle to produce
uniformly distributed ﬁne gas bubbles. The foam in semi liquid state is pulled out
by the help of conveyor belt and then allowed to cool down in normal air. Canadian
company Cymat is the large producer of Al metal foam through this method. Same
process is patented originally by Hydro Aluminium in Norway named as Alcan Inter-
national. (Jin et al. 1990, 1992; Ruch and Kirkevag 1991; Thomas et al. 1994; Sang

Fig. 4.4 Schematic diagram of gas injection foaming process (Liu et al. 2015). Copyright: ©
materials research society 2015

4 Future of Metal Foam Materials in Automotive Industry

57

et al. 1992; Sholt et al. 1997). The problem associated in such foam is brittleness
caused due to the reinforcement particles. The main feature of reinforcement parti-
cles is to enhance viscosity of melt. To avoid brittleness caused from reinforcement
particles an alternate way is used, in which pure metal is foamed at lower temperature
near the melting point of parent metal without using reinforcement particles (Wood
1998).

4.3 Properties of Some of the Commercially Available Al

Foams

Figure 4.5 shows the compressive stress strain curve of different commercially pro-
duced metal foam. The curve shows three regions namely elastic, plastic and densi-
ﬁcation region.

First region shows the stiffness of particular foam which depends on the density,
chemical composition, distribution, shape and curvature of cell walls. The next region
is plateau region which is caused by homogeneous plastic deformation of uniformly
distributed pores. ERG and Alporas foams have a ﬂat plateau region which is helpful
in increasing the energy absorption capacity of metal foam. In Alcan foam serrations
is observed caused by fracture of cell walls. The last region is densiﬁcation region

Fig. 4.5 Stress–strain curve of different metal foam (Andrews et al. 1999). Copyright © 1999
Elsevier science S.A

58

A. Bisht et al.

Table 4.1 Commercially available foams mechanical properties (Guner et al. 2015; Ashby et al.
2000; FOAMINAL)

Materials

Al–SiC

Al–Mg–Si

AlSi12

Al–5Ca–Ti

Al 6061 T6

Trade Name

Cymat, Alcan Mepura,
Alulight

Foaminal

Shinko Wire,
Alporas

ERG, Duocel

0.02–0.2

0.1–0.35

0.5–0.8

0.08–0.1

0.05–0.1

Relative
density

Structure

Young’s
Modulus
(MPa)

Poisson’s
ratio, ν
Compression
strength
(MPa)

Tensile
strength
(MPa)

Fracture
toughness
(MPa m1/2)
Thermal
conductivity
(W/m K)

Closed cell

Closed cell

Closed cell Closed cell

Open cell

0.02–2.0

1.7–12

3.5–8.4

0.4–1.0

0.06–0.3

0.31–0.34

0.31–0.35

0.31–0.36

0.31–0.37

0.04–7.0

1.9–14.0

7.9–22.8

1.3–1.7

0.9–3.0

0.05–8.5

2.2–30

2.76–5.99

1.6–1.9

1.9–3.5

0.03–0.5

0.3–1.6

0.03–1.19

0.1–0.9

0.1–0.2

0.3–10

3.0–3.5

16.7

3.5–4.5

6.0–11

where cell wall collapses and a steep rise is seen in stress corresponding to strain
(Andrews et al. 1999) (Table 4.1).

4.4 Applications and Commercialization of Close-Cell

Metal Foam

Due to multifunctional properties of metal foam it is attracting different industrial
sectors like automobile, naval, aerospace etc. towards itself. Reliance on fossil fuels
and adverse green house effect is inspiring different sectors to use metal foam. A
survey shows that in future major application about 32% by using metal foam will
be in automotive and aerospace sector. Among them 26% will be used in automo-
bile industry. Moving further it is necessary to know essential properties helpful in
automotive sector (Srivastava and Sahoo 2006; Banhart 2009).

Figure 4.6. shows the important properties of Aluminum metal foam which can
be utilized in transportation ﬁeld. Low density and high strength to weight ratio
can help it in using as light weight construction material. The long and ﬂat plateau
region in compressive stress–strain curve helps in providing high energy absorption

4 Future of Metal Foam Materials in Automotive Industry

59

Fig. 4.6 Possible application ﬁeld for metal foam (Li et al. 2012)

capacity so can be used as energy absorption material. Due to uniform distribution
of pores throughout the matrix, metal foams are useful as damper insulator and noise
absorber. Exploitation of two or more properties can make them an effective material
to be used in automobile ﬁeld. Many products had been successfully prepared and
some are under prototype stages.

4.4.1 Light Weight Construction and Energy Absorption

Applications

Lightweight construction applications depend on two properties of metallic foams:
reversible quasi-elastic deformation and high stiffness to mass ratio. By using alu-
minum sandwich structures on the vehicle body frame where weight and stiffness are
a primary concern, the number of components needed in the car can be signiﬁcantly
reduced, decreasing fabrication cost (Duarte and Oliveira 2009; Simanˇcík 2015).
Foamed panels could also be very helpful in reducing the energy consumption of
elevators; light weight construction is an important issue because of the high fre-
quency. Another possible application can be the car wheel. The cast wheel having
metal foam inserted as core can reduce the weight of the wheel by 2 kg.

60

Fig. 4.7 Gear-wheel with an
anti-vibration layer of
aluminium foam

A. Bisht et al.

4.4.2 Light Weight Construction with Damping Insulation

Gear wheel with anti vibrating layer of Aluminum foam can be used in future. This
product can help in reducing the weight as well as provide sound proof mating of
wheel and reducing the value of thrust force (Fig. 4.7).

4.4.3 Multi-functional Application

These applications can play a vital role in automobile industry. In Fig. 4.8a engine
brackets are shown which are currently being used by BMW. These engine brackets
helps in reducing the weight, noise and prevents engine from shock. Figure 4.8b
represents the prototype of engine carrier having bulk aluminum shell with aluminum
foam core.

Fig. 4.8 a Engine bracket, b engine carrier, c car front safety bar

4 Future of Metal Foam Materials in Automotive Industry

61

Latest study is being carrying out on engine carrier, the requirement for good
engine carrier must be high strength, better performance, no change in outer shape
and low cost. These engine carriers can provide safety from the crashing as well as
will increase the performance of vehicle by reducing the noise. Figure 4.8c shows the
car front safety bar prototype which are used for absorbing energy while crash. They
can be stiff, able to absorb deformation energy and increase damping properties.

4.5 Conclusion

Recently many works had been carried out on processing techniques of close cell
metal foam. It is clear that close cell foam will be new futuristic structural material
in automotive sector. Some improvement is further needed to develop techniques
for super alloys. The main issue is to produce similar density of foam maintaining
the uniformity in pores. This is due to the lack of understanding of physics foam-
ing. It seeks improvement in material development technique, characterization and
understanding the foaming physics afterward searching the applications in various
engineering ﬁelds. Their multi functional properties can be well utilized by devel-
oping versatile models for processing and properties. The future of metal foam in
innovative engineering applications look bright and it is anticipated that the growth
on various scenario of metal foam keep on going on faster rates.
Abstract Research on composite materials has got much attention for the develop-
ment of social and economic growth. The Polymer composite is a material which is
highly advantageous in the area of construction, packaging and automotive applica-
tion due to its high strength to the weight ratio, self-lubrication properties, improved
fatigue resistance, higher resistance to thermal expansion, wear, and corrosion resis-
tance. Tribo-performance of polymer composite indicates the behaviour of friction
and wear of polymer composite which is basically decided by amount and types of
polymer matrix and reinforcement. In the past decade, a large number of studies have
been carried out the feasibility of the application of polymer composite in tribologi-
cal applications. However, a very few study has been conducted on the tribological
performance of composite material in an automotive application. Here attempts have
been to provide a review on tribological performance of polymer and its composites
which deals with the application of polymer composite in automotive application and
recent developments of polymer composite in tribo-performance. It also deals with
the effects of different process and material parameters on tribological properties of
the polymer composite.
Keywords Polymer · Composites · Tribology · Reinforcement · Matrix

5.1 Introduction

Polymers and their composites are being increasingly used in the automobile and
aircraft industries. It is mainly due to their good strengths, low densities, ease of
manufacturing and ability to be tailored to achieve any combination of strength and
stiffness (ASM Handbook 1992). The composite material is deﬁned as a material
is composed of at least two constituent materials. The combination of materials are
superior properties to those of the individual constituents. Composites are of two
phases in which one of the phases is in the form of ﬁbre, particles or sheets which
is known as reinforcing phase and the other phase is called the matrix phase. The
matrix phase binds the ﬁbre into the proper place and protects from external damage,
whereas the ﬁbres help to improve the stiffness and strength of the matrix and resist
cracks and fractures. The common synthetic ﬁbres such as carbon, glass are widely
used in engineering and other applications while the matrix materials are used in
the form of plastic, ceramic, or metals. The density and mechanical property of
composites over conventional metals are better than the metals (Jang 1994). The
properties of the composites depend upon the following factors:

(1) The bonding strength between ﬁbre and matrix
(2) The basic structure of the reinforcing material (shape and size)
(3) The concentration and congregational diffusion (volume fraction of the rein-

forcement)

(4) The geometric conﬁguration of the reinforcing phase (random or preferred).

The property of the constituent materials greatly inﬂuences the property of the
composites. The distribution of the materials and the interaction among them also
inﬂuence the property of a composite (Aggarval et al. 2006; Jones 1999). The most
commonly used ﬁbres in polymer matrix composites in tribo-applications in automo-
tive are glass, carbon, graphite, aramid ﬁbres and natural ﬁbres etc (Bijwe 2002; Suh
1986). The basalt ﬁbres are also an important ﬁbre which is obtained from melting
basalt rock.

5.2 Tribology

Tribology deals with friction, wear and lubrication where surfaces are interacting
under relative motion. The word “Tribology” is originated from the Greek word
tribos means “rubbing”. It is mandatory to know the wear property of any engineering
materials, where materials used in the wear related application in particular industry
and automotive application. Many studies reported on the wear resistance of polymer
and its composite (Ray and Gnanamoorthy 2007; Cirino et al. 1988). The study
of tribology helps to improve service life, reliability, safety of the spacecraft to
household components and also increase the economic growth. Friction and wear
are two important terms used in tribology. Friction is an opposing force when a body
slide against a surface and it is known as surface resistance of an object. Friction
causes various types of wear. As per Gahr, wear is deﬁned as the “progressive loss
of substance from the operating surface of a body occurring as a result of relative
motion at the surface” (Zum Gahr 1987).

Wear is classiﬁed into six types. These are mainly (Burwell 1957; Sharma et al.

2011):

(1) Abrasive: Abrasive wear can be deﬁned as a cutting or loss of mass when a hard
surface slides or roll under pressure on another surface. In abrasion wear test, the
sample can be slide against a rough counter face or abrasion by hard particles
Abrasion may be two bodies or three bodies depending upon the number of
the interacting surfaces. Figure 5.1 shows the schematic representations of the
abrasion wear.

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

67

Rotation

Abrasive Wear

Sliding

Fig. 5.1 Schematic representations of the abrasion wear

Fig. 5.2 Schematic representations of the adhesive wear

(2) Adhesive: Adhesive wear can be deﬁned as mutual afﬁnity between the mate-
rials which causes material exchange between the two mating surfaces or the
loss from either surface. Figure 5.2 shows the schematic representations of the
adhesive wear.

(3) Erosive: Erosive wear is a material removal process when a solid particles impact
on a surface. This material removal process may be occurred by gas or liquid
which ﬂow with and without carrying solid particles. Figure 5.3 shows the
schematic representations of the erosive wear.

68

Fig. 5.3 Schematic
representations of the erosive
wear

H. Jena

Fig. 5.4 Schematic
representations of the
fretting wear

(4) Surface fatigue: Fatigue wear of a solid surface is a process by which the surface
of the material gets fractured by cyclic loading. Due to the loading and unloading
which involves tension and compression, propagates pre-existing microcrack.
After reaching the critical limit, the materials get removed out from the parent
metal.

(5) Corrosive: Corrosive wear is deﬁned as a material removal process due to a
chemical reaction between the material and a medium which can be a chemical
reagent (acid, gas, alkalis etc.), reactive lubricant or atmosphere. The combina-
tion of mechanical and chemical give rise to corrosion wear.

(6) Fretting: Fretting wear occurs when a mechanical assembly parts undergo a
small oscillation. The materials get removed from the one or both surfaces in
contact when the sliding between two mating parts is at the micron level. It
is inevitable in joints, bearing, ﬂanges, gears, seals etc. Figure 5.4 shows the
contact between two bodies which undergoes in a short amplitude reciprocating
sliding for a large number of cycles. In fretting wear for most of the machin-
ery equipment, the centre of the contact may remain stationary and the edges
reciprocate. Due to this wear debris form and this retain in between the mating
surface which further causes the wear damage.

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

69

These wears have different wear mechanism and carried out by different tribo test-
ing machine. Following section describe the different type of tribo-testing machines
and its relevance.

5.2.1 Tribo-Testing Machines

Tribo-testing is required to evaluate the tribological property of the products. Vari-
ous tribo-elements decide the design and manufacturing of tribo-testing machine and
based on these elements tribo-testing machines are classiﬁed. These elements are:
materials, contact geometry (point, line, area), between test sample and counterface,
loading, motion (rotating, sliding), environment (Dry, or wet with water or con-
taminants). The main differences between various tribo-test is based on the contact
geometry of the tested material with the counterface (Yousif 2013).

5.3 Tribological Properties of Polymer

Polymer tribology is an important parameter to decide the friction and wear property
of polymers and polymer-based composites. Polymers are blended with various ﬁllers
and ﬁbres and the ability to change the tribological property of the polymer composite.
So it is important to know the tribological property of polymers before deciding
the property of polymer based composites. Polymers and polymer composites are
extensively used in the ﬁeld of self lubricating material. From a tribological point of
view, addition of graphite in polymer is most suitable for storage of hydrogen at room
temperature and liquid hydrogen (Theiler and Gradt 2007). This is the reason why
composite materials replaced may conventional metallic materials for the tribological
application. The overview of various polymers used in tribology and their properties
are given in Table 5.1 (Myshkin et al. 2015).

Polymers are classiﬁed as thermoplastic, thermosetting, and elastomers. Ther-
mosetting polymers as matrices materials are widely used for brakes, clutches, and
other frictional units. Antifriction composites are made of thermosetting polymer
with incorporation of graphite or molybdenum disulﬁde as ﬁller material which is
used in linings of machine guides (Kong et al. 1998). Addition of ﬁller like graphene
and liquid lubricants (such as base oil SN150) in epoxy matrix can improve its
performance with low coefﬁcient of friction and high wear resistance. A tribologi-
cal coating made epoxy and SU-8 (an epoxy-based polymer) is used to protect the
machine components (Samad and Sinha 2010). Various studies have been carried
out on addition of micro/nano-ﬁller in epoxy and also other thermosetting polymers
for tribological performance enhancement (Prabakaran et al. 2013; Lau et al. 2009;
Khun et al. 2012). It is observed that epoxy-based composite shows higher wear
resistance than polyester-based composite (Chand et al. 1993) (Table 5.2).

70

H. Jena

Table 5.1 Tribo-testing equipment and its relevance

(i) Rubber wheel test (Stevenson
and Hutchings 1996; Namdeo et al.
2015)
(i) Dry Sand Rubber Wheel (DSRW)
follows ASTM-G65
(ii) Wet Sand Rubber Wheel
(WSRW) follows ASTM-G105
(iii) Sand/Steel wheel (SSW) test in
wet/dry conditions follows ASTM-B
611
(cid:129) Abrasive wear behaviour of
materials under three-body
conditions

(cid:129) Dimension of the specimen is
70 mm × 20 mm × 7 mm
(cid:129) The rubber wheel get in touch
with the specimen under a load

(cid:129) Silica sand particles (i.e. ﬁne,
grain or coarse) are then
introduced between the specimen
and a rotating rubber wheel
(cid:129) Used also for adhesive testing
(cid:129) Operating parameters: applied
load, rubber hardness, sliding
speed

(cid:129) Applications: tyres, bushes,

bearings and rollers

(ii) Pin-on-disk test (Ahmed et al.
2012; Olofsson et al. 2018)
(cid:129) Abrasion test follows ASTM

G99-05

(cid:129) Dimension of the specimen is
10 mm × 10 mm × 20 mm

(cid:129) The test specimen is set

perpendicular under loading
against rotating counterface
(cid:129) Contact area is not varying with

respect to sliding time

(cid:129) Operating parameters: sliding

velocity, sliding distance, normal
load, wet or dry sliding, abrasive
or adhesive contact condition
(cid:129) Application: sliding wear of

various materials where constant
contact area of interest

(continued)

Rubber wheel abrasion test

Pin-on-disk abrasion test

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

71

Table 5.1 (continued)

Block on disc test

Linear reciprocating abrasion testing

(iii) Block on disc test (Yousif et al.
2010)
(cid:129) Block on disc test follows

ASTMG99

(cid:129) Dimension of the specimen is
10 mm × 10 mm × 20 mm
(cid:129) The test specimen is placed

vertically to the counterface which
is rotating

(cid:129) An infrared thermometer can be
used for the measuring interfaces
temperatures during the
interaction of sample and
counterface

(cid:129) Contact area is not varying with

respect to sliding time

(cid:129) Test can be adhesive and abrasive
(cid:129) Operating parameters: sliding

velocity, sliding distance, normal
load, wet or dry sliding, abrasive
or adhesive contact condition
(cid:129) Applications: sliding wear of

various materials where constant
contact area of interest

(iv) Linear reciprocating test
(Yousif et al. 2010; Tyagi 2015)
(cid:129) Linear reciprocating abrasion test

follows ASTM G133-05e1
(cid:129) Abrasive wear behaviour of
materials under three-body
conditions

(cid:129) It has space for a variety of sample
geometries to form point, line and
area contacts

(cid:129) Stainless steel container ﬁlled with
abrasive moves linearly with the
help of the power screw which is
directly coupled to the motor and
the specimen slides in the abrasive
particles ﬁlled container

(cid:129) Test is abrasive in the presence of
abrasive particles in the stainless
steel container, otherwise the test
is purely adhesive

(cid:129) Operating parameters: sliding
velocity, wet or dry sliding,
abrasive types, applied load
(cid:129) Application: linear sliding of

window panels, door handles, lock
mechanisms

(continued)

72

Table 5.1 (continued)

Block on ring test

Pin on drum test

Low-amplitude oscillating test

H. Jena

(v) Block on ring test (Nirmal et al.
2011)
(cid:129) Block on ring test follows ASTM

G77, G137-95 standards
(cid:129) Dimension of the specimen is
10 mm × 20 mm × 50 mm
(cid:129) Test sample place parallel to the

side of the counterface and contact
surface varies with the sliding time

(cid:129) Operating parameter: sliding

velocity, sliding distance, applied
load, temperature, wet or dry
sliding

(cid:129) Applications: crankshafts,

camshafts, piston pins, connecting
rods, suspensions, lubricants

(vi) Pin on drum test (Nirmal et al.
2011, 2015)
(cid:129) Pin on drum test follows ASTM

A514

(cid:129) Specimen travels linearly which is

placed horizontally against a
rotating drum

(cid:129) The drum is covered with abrasive
paper. Without abrasive paper, test
is simply adhesive

(cid:129) Operating parameters: sliding

distance, sliding velocity, applied
load, wet or dry sliding, abrasive
or adhesive contact condition
(cid:129) Applications: conveyor belts,

rotating rollers etc.

(vii) Low-amplitude oscillating test
(Sharma and Bijwe 2011)
(cid:129) Known as fretting wear 10 mm ×

10 mm × 3–4 mm

(cid:129) A polished chromium steel ball of
having surface roughness values in
the range 0.01–0.015 μm
oscillates against the specimen.
The diameter of the ball is 10 mm
(cid:129) Operating parameter: load, sliding
velocity, number of cycles, slip
amplitude, slip, frequency, contact
geometry, material properties,
environment

(cid:129) Application: bearings, gears,

bushes, ﬂanges, multilayer leaf
springs, palliatives

(continued)

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

73

Table 5.1 (continued)

(viii) Erosion test (Jena et al. 2016)
(cid:129) Erosion test follows ASTM:

G76–07

(cid:129) Dimension of the specimen

20 mm × 20 mm

(cid:129) The dry and compressed air with
the solid sand particles hit on the
test sample at various speeds and
angle at constant feed rate through
converging nozzle

(cid:129) Stand of distance is 10 mm
(cid:129) Operating parameters:

impingement angle, impact
velocity, erodent type

(cid:129) Application: rotor blade, convener

belt

Erosion test

Table 5.2 Tribological properties of polymers (Myshkin et al. 2015)

Material

Aliphatic
polyamides

Aromatic
polyamides

Friction
coefﬁcient

0.2–0.5

Operating
parameter
−40 to +85

0.1–0.3

−100 to +200

Fluoroplastics

0.01–0.05

−269 to +260

Polycarbonate

0.2–0.5

−60 to +125

Polyacetals

0.1–0.3

−50 to +120

Polyoleﬁns

0.1–0.3

−100 to +100

0.1–0.3

−20 to +115

0.3–0.6

−60 to +120

0.2–0.4

−30 to +250

Polyalkylene
terephthalate

Thermoplastic
elastomers

Polyetherether
ketone

Polyphenylene
sulﬁde

Advantage

Disadvantage

Low wear and high
fatigue resistance

Water sorption, high
coefﬁcient of friction

High cost, water
sorption

Creep and low
mechanical strength

Low fatigue strength

Abrasive effect due
to high rigidity

Low mechanical
strength

Sensitivity to hot
water

High friction and
low mechanical
strength

High cost

Low wear, high
fatigue resistance
and heat stability

Low friction,
resistance to
aggressive media

Rigidity and
resistance to
aggressive media

High wear and
fatigue resistance

High resistance to
aggressive media

Resistance to
aggressive media
and heat resistance

High elasticity and
resistance to
ambience

High heat and
ambient resistance,
and γ-radiation
High wear and
fatigue resistance

0.2–0.5

−30 to +220

High cost

74

H. Jena

Polyetheretherketone (PEEK) is an important polymer in engineering materials.
PEEK is a high performance composites which has good mechanical strength, high
melting temperature, low wear rate at high temperature, chemical inertness, bio-
resistance and easy to process (Patel et al. 2011). A large number of investigations
have been carried out on tribological behaviour of PEEK and its composite. And
found that incorporation of ﬁbre into PEEK has improved the wear property of the
PEEK polymer (Karandikar et al. 2014; Ovaert and Cheng 1991).

Polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE) is a thermoplastic polymer which has a self-
lubricating property, high resistance to temperature, low friction, quasi-absence of
sticking effect, corrosion resistance and chemical inertness, outstanding anti-ageing
performance (Myshkin et al. 2015). PTFE gives a pollution free lubrication and used
as a solid lubricant both as a ﬁller and matrix (Chaudhari and Shekhawat 2013). It is
one of the most promising polymers used in shaft seals, sliding bearing, piston rings
etc. The drawback (poor mechanical property and unsuitability as lubricants at UV
condition) of PTFE can be overcome by adding some ﬁller and solid lubricants (Song
et al. 2016). It is observed that neat PTFE has lower wear property compared to ﬁller
(Glass ﬁbre, MoS2, polyether ether ketone (PEEK) particles, carbon) ﬁlled PTFE
composite (Desale and Pawar 2018). Similarly, in another study the wear resistance
of PTFE with ﬁllers such as bronze, carbon, graphite, glass ﬁbre, carbon ﬁbre, and
polymer is enhanced (Ye and Xingrong 2014). Tribological property of the PTFE
with ﬁller addition is largely inﬂuenced by ﬁller content, type, shape and size. Both
organic and inorganic ﬁller are also used to enhance the tribological property of the
composite.

Polybutylene terephthalate (PBT) is another thermoplastic polymer which is
semicrystalline in nature. It is widely used in automotive sector, electrical industry
and building sectors. It has good mechanical strength, water absorption resistance,
chemical inertness, good dimensional stability (Carrión-Vilches et al. 2015). The
main problem associated with PBT is low surface resistance under sliding wear and
abrasion conditions. In order to improve the tribological property of the PBT, dif-
ferent ﬁllers, ﬁbres are added and also surface coating is applied (Georgescu et al.
2014; Lugscheider et al. 2004).

Polyamides are thermoplastic polymers which have low wear and high fatigue
resistance. It can be natural (wool, silk) or produce by artiﬁcially (nylons, aramids).
It is reinforced with glass ﬁbre is used in the manufacture of parts under engine hood
of the automobile to improve their friction and wear performances (Strumberger et al.
2005; Li et al. 2013). Filler ﬁlled Polyamides are also used to make sliding bearings,
gears and thin polymer coatings. Thermoplastic polymer like polyformaldehyde,
polycarbonate, and polyarylate are also used in gears, bushings, and sliding bearings.
Polyetherimide (PEI) is another important high temperature thermoplastic poly-
mer which is amorphous in nature. It is also known for ductile polymer and hard
(Bijwe et al. 2001). It has potential in ﬂuoropolymer coatings applications, good
mechanical, electrical and thermal properties and most important thing is that it has
resistance to chemical solvents, radiation, etc. (Serfaty 1984). Hanchi and Eiss (1994)
have conducted tribological test on blends of PEI and PEEK. This blend gives better
wear resistance to its neat polymer. PEI has similar characteristics to PEEK in the

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

75

aspect of amorphous, transparent, and thermoplastic. But it is different with PEEK
with respect to lower heat resistant, cost, and in impact strength (McKeen 2006)

Rubbers and polyurethanes are examples of elastomers which are widely used in
automotive tires. Another important application of elastomers is in reciprocating and
rotary seals materials for the automotive. They have low modulus of elasticity and
high elongation-to-brake; high Poisson’s ratio (close to 0.5) and low shear modulus
(Zhang 2004). Anti-abrasion lining of metal surfaces is also an example of application
of elastomers.

5.4 Tribological Properties of Fibre Reinforced Polymer

Composite Materials

Fibre as reinforcement in polymer matrix plays as an important role to decide its
mechanical, tribological, electrical and thermal property of the composite. Fibre
may be continuous or discontinuous. Continuous ﬁbre is divided into:

(i) Unidirectional long ﬁbre
(ii) Woven (cross-ply or multidirectional).

Discontinuous ﬁbre is divided into:

(i) Unidirectional short ﬁbre
(ii) Randomly oriented ﬁbre.

Again ﬁbre is classiﬁed into two groups depending upon its occurrence. One
is synthetic ﬁbre (man-made) and another one is natural ﬁbre (non-man made).
Synthetic ﬁbres like glass and carbon ﬁbres are most important ﬁbre in the polymer
composite. They are well known for its research and application. But due to its non-
recyclability, non-degradability, high cost and CO2 emission during its synthesis,
researchers are bound to search an eco-friendly material. And found the possibility
to replace the synthetic ﬁbre with natural ﬁbre. Natural ﬁbres are not man-made
ﬁbres which are suitable as reinforcement in polymer matrix. Table 5.3 shows the
different type of natural ﬁbres. In present study focuses on plant ﬁbre which is
basically divided into two; one is non-wood ﬁbre and another is wood ﬁbre. These
plant ﬁbres are composed of cellulose, hemicelluloses, lignin, wax, oil and other
impurities. The presence of lignin, wax and other impurities make the natural ﬁbre
incompatibility with polymer which in turn give improper adhesion between ﬁbre
and matrix. Fibre and matrix adhesion is a very important aspect for mechanical,
tribological property of the composites. Different surface treatments are available
for improving the surface roughness and mechanical inter-locking between ﬁbre and
matrix. These chemical treatments are: Alkaline, Acetylation, Acrylation, Bleeching,
Permanganate, Isocynate, Peroxide, Maleated Coupling agent, Benzolyation (Li et al.
2007). The chemical treatments are improved the wear property, mechanical property
of the composite. On the other hand, certain behaviour of natural ﬁbre reinforced

76

H. Jena

Table 5.3 Classiﬁcation of natural ﬁbre (Faruk et al. 2012; Mohanty et al. 2005)

Non wood ﬁbre

Bast
ﬁbre

Jute

Leaf
ﬁbre

Sisal

Seed
ﬁbre

Fruit
ﬁbre

Coir

Stalk
ﬁbre

Barley

Wood
ﬁbre

Animal
ﬁbre

Mineral
ﬁbre

Wool

Asbestos

Bamboo

Banana

Betel nut Wheat

Hair

Soft
wood

Hard
wood

Rice

Grass

Corn

Sawdust

Silk

Feather

Hemp

Rattan

Flax

Palm

Abaca

Alfalfa

Pineapple Kapok

Sugarcane Date
Palm

Oil palm
seed

Manila

Cotton

Kenaf

Banana

composite still make it difﬁcult to use in structural application like hydrophilic in
nature, dimensional instability, variation of properties depending upon growth in
soil, viscoelastic, viscoplastic or time-dependent behaviour due to creep and fatigue
loading (Gassan 2002).

It is observed that short ﬁbre reinforced composites are better tribological proper-
ties as compared to long or non-woven ﬁbres (Almajid et al. 2011). It may be due to
improved cross-linking of thermosetting polymers. The further advantage of using
short ﬁbre is low cost of making short ﬁbre as compared to make ﬁbre mat and no
problem of directionality (El-Tayeb 2008).

For structural application, polymer composites are encountered with friction and
wear. Hence calculating the coefﬁcient of friction, mechanical load carrying capacity
and wear resistance are important factor to decide its application. Different modes of
wear including abrasive, adhesive and erosive are available in the literature. Cirino
et al. (1988) have studied the abrasive wear in unidirectional composite where surface
is worn in three principal directions like normal, parallel and anti-parallel with respect
to the ﬁbre orientation. Parallel and antiparallel wear direction are considered as
in-plane and normal wear direction is considered as out-of-plane. In the case of
woven fabric, the weave types respond differently in different wear mode and wear
mechanism. Bijwe and Rattan (2007) have studied on different type of weave (plain,
twill and satin 4-H) of ﬁbre to analyse its tribological properties at different wear
modes. It is found that the role of wear modes varied with different weaves.

Compared to unidirectional, bidirectional is more advantageous due to its ease
of handling and imparting strength in two directions. Friction and wear rate of the
composites depends on reinforcement (types, size, orientation, volume fraction etc),
matrix and manufacturing process of the composites. The performance of the com-
posite also depends on ﬁbre-matrix adhesion which can be improved by treating the
ﬁbre with some functional groups. Beside the ﬁbre-matrix adhesion, tribo-properties

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

77

of the composites also depend on different operating conditions. Parikh and Gohil
(2015) have done a literature review on effect of ﬁller, ﬁbre type, ﬁbre orientation
and the operating parameters such as load, sliding distance for different synthetic
and natural ﬁbre composites.

5.4.1 Glass Fibre Composite

Glass ﬁbre reinforced polymer (GFRP) composite is extensively used as tribo-
materials. It has excellent corrosion resistance, low weight, and high strength. It is
widely used in aircraft, automobile, sports utility and many others. The wear mech-
anism of GRFP is a complex nature due to the anisotropic behaviour of composite.
Any wear application, it is essentially required to avoid the damage propagation dur-
ing wear. Various studies have been carried out to reduce the wear rate in the glass
ﬁbre composite. Incorporation of ﬁllers, tested on various kinds of polymer matrix in
glass ﬁbre, ﬁbre content, its orientation and selecting the appropriate testing param-
eters are different techniques to avoid the wear damage at minimal in glass ﬁbre
composite. Glass ﬁbre is available in the form of unidirectional ﬁbre, chopped and
woven ﬁbre mat. It is found that the wear rate of chopped glass ﬁbre reinforced poly-
mer composite is better than bidirectional glass ﬁbre reinforced polymer composite
(Siddhartha and Gupta 2012)

Glass ﬁbre-reinforced in polymer resin is a desirable material for tribological
property. Various studies have reported that the wear rate has been reduced when the
polymers are reinforced with glass ﬁbre. Carrion-Vilches et al. (2015) have conducted
scratch test according to ASTM D7027-05 on 20 and 30 wt% of glass ﬁbre in PBT
polymer and found that friction coefﬁcients increase with the increasing ﬁbre content
and 20 wt% of ﬁbre loading gives higher scratch resistance then that of neat polymer.
Further improvement of wear resistance of glass ﬁbre reinforced polymer compos-
ite, various metallic, nonmetallic, conventional and nonconventional ﬁllers have been
added. Shivamurthy et al. (2009) have observed that 6 wt% of SiO2 ﬁller addition
gives better wear resistance and further increase of ﬁller content is not beneﬁcial to
the composite. Addition of SiC and graphite ﬁller addition to the glass ﬁbre compos-
ite improve the wear property of the composite (Shivamurthy et al. 2009). Addition of
20 wt% of chopped carbon, 5 wt% glass ﬁbre and 5 wt% of MoS2 in PTFE polymer
have improved the wear property of the composite (Song et al. 2016). Suresha et al.
(2007) have investigated that incorporation of graphite ﬁller into glass ﬁbre epoxy
reduces the wear rate as compared to neat epoxy. Similarly, incorporation aluminium
nitride in E-glass ﬁbre reinforced improves the wear resistance (Panda et al. 2014).
Bijwe et al. (2001) have examined the different wear test like adhesive, abra-
sive (abrading in single pass and multi-pass against silicon carbide abrasive paper
and three-body abrasion), erosive and fretting wear test on three materials viz. neat
polyetherimide (PEI), PEI with 20% short glass ﬁbre and PEI with 25% short glass
ﬁbre, 15% PTFE and 15% MoS2 and graphite. Wear performance of different mate-
rial is different in different wear mode. Operating parameters such as load, speed,

78

H. Jena

temperature etc. affect the wear mode of the materials. Pihtili and Tosun (2002) have
concluded that sliding load is more predominant over the sliding speed of the glass
ﬁbre and aramid ﬁbre composite and also found that wear resistance of glass ﬁbre
is less as compared to the aramid ﬁbre. Table 5.4 shows the tribological analysis of
glass ﬁbre composite with operating parameters. From the table, it is found that the
wear resistance of the polymers have been improved when it is reinforced with glass
ﬁbre. The performance of the glass ﬁbre reinforced polymer composite is inﬂuenced
by experimental parameters such as speed of sliding, load and environment etc.

5.4.2 Carbon Fibre Composite

Among all synthetic ﬁbre, Carbon ﬁbre has maximum strength, modulus, self lubri-
cating, chemical inertness and offers good thermal conductivity which is very essen-
tial for tribological application. Furthermore, due to the layer lattice structure of
graphite, it gives self-lubricity in the structure (Lancaster 1972). It is also a good
candidate for the brake friction material with good performance. Hence it is very
important to optimise the content of carbon ﬁbre in friction materials due to its
high cost. The composite at 15 wt% of ﬁbre content gives highest friction and wear
property (He et al. 2019).

Various studies have been carried out on the incorporation of carbon ﬁbre in poly-
mer matrix where the wear property of the composite has been improved. Table 5.5
shows the effect of carbon ﬁbre on the tribological property of the polymer matrix
composite. Researchers have found that addition of carbon ﬁbre in polymer results
into low wear rate and no damage to the worn pair and the friction coefﬁcient is less
affected by outside conditions (Bijwe and Rattan 2007). Polymer matrix degrada-
tion can be avoided by incorporation of carbon ﬁbre which is quickly dissipated the
frictional heat. Gopal et al. (1995) have studied the effect on wear rate and friction
coefﬁcient by addition of carbon ﬁbre in phenolic resin and various operating con-
ditions like different loadings and sliding speeds. It is found that at 34.5 vol% of
ﬁbre, the friction coefﬁcient and wear rate are reduced with an increase in normal
load sliding speed is increasing. Guan et al. (2004) have found that with an increase
in wt% of carbon ﬁbre (12, 15 and 18 wt%) is increased both friction coefﬁcient and
wear resistance. Under the dry and wet working condition, carbon-epoxy composite
performs well in wet condition where maximum percentage reduction in wear rate
is 30% and for dry working conditions is 18.5% when compared with the neat epoxy
(Algbory 2011). Zhao et al. (2018) have added polyethersulfone (PES) in short car-
bon ﬁbre and found that it reduces the friction coefﬁcient and wear rate at 20 vol%
of carbon ﬁbre. Maximum reduction of speciﬁc wear rate is 95.7% achieved with
the addition of 20 vol% ﬁbre.

The carbon ﬁbre is required to be treated before use in the composite Untreated
carbon ﬁbres are inherently inert toward the matrix, and hence treated carbon ﬁbre
is essential to improve the ﬁbre matrix adhesion including tribological in adhesive
and abrasive wears (Tiwari et al. 2011a, b). The treatment of carbon ﬁbre increases

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

79

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

f
o

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

g
n
i
d
i
l
s

y
r
D

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

r
a
e
w
e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

r
a
e
w
g
n
i
t
t
e
r
F

e
d
o
m

e
d
o
m

e
d
o
m

r
a
e
w
e
v
i
s
o
r
E

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

)
3
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

i

L
(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

–

r
a
e
w
e
v
i
s
e
h
d
A

:
s
t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

d
i
l
o
S

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

—

c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

e
d
o
m

)

t

%
w
5
1
(
E
F
T
P

,
2
S
o
M

,
e
t
i
h
p
a
r
G

e
r
b
ﬁ
/
e
p
y
t

e
r
b
i
F

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
/
h
t
g
n
e
l

n
i
a
l
p

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
B

t

%
w
5
2

,
0
2
/
n
e
v
o
w

x
i
r
t
a

M

I
E
P

.
s
f
e
R

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
r

r
a
e

W

e
p
y
t

r
a
e

W

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

s
s
e
c
o
r
P

t
s
e
t
-
o
b
i
r
T

e
t
i
s
o
p
m
o
c

r
e
m
y
l
o
p

d
e
c
r
o
f
n
i
e
r

e
r
b
ﬁ
s
s
a
l
g

f
o
s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

l
a
c
i
g
o
l
o
b
i
r
T

4
5

.

e
l
b
a
T

5
8
.
7
1

,
5
3
.
3
1

,
0
9
.
8

,
5
4
.
4

:
d
a
o
L

N
2
1

,
0
1

,
8

,
6

,
4

,
2

:
d
a
o
L

:

n
o
i
s
a
r
b
a
y
d
o
b
d
r
i
h
T

:

n
o
i
s
o
r
E

°
0
9

,
0
6

,
5
4

,
0
3

,
5
1

:
e
l
g
n
a

t
c
p
a
m

I

,
2
1
,
9

,
6

,
3

:
t
n
e
d
o
r
e

f
o

t
n
u
o
m
A

N
0
0
1

,
0
9

,
0
8

,
0
7

:
d
a
o
L

r
a
e
w
g
n
i
t
t
e
r
F

g
k
5
1

e
h
t

o
t

t
c
e
p
s
e
r

h
t
i

w

l
e
l
l
a
r
a
p
-
i
t
n
a

n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d

g
n
i
d
i
l
s

,
l
e
l
l
a
r
a
p

:
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
i
r
o

e
r
b
i
F

m
m
0
1

,
5

,
1
-
h
t
g
n
e
l

e
r
b
i
F

N
0
8

,
0
6

,
0
4

,
0
2

:
d
a
o
L

N
3
4

,

L

:
d
a
o
L

s
/

m
1
.
2

,
d
e
e
p
S

:

n
o
i
s
a
r
b
A

:

n
o
i
s
e
h
d
A

e
v
i
s
e
h
d
A

r
o
f

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
a

d
n
a

l
e
e
h
w

r
e
b
b
u
R

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
a

y
d
o
b

r
a
e
w
e
v
i
s
o
r
E

d
r
i
h
t

-
r
e
t
s
e
t

l
o
m

i
t
p
o
V
R
S

r
o
f
-
r
e
t
s
e
t

r
a
e
w
g
n
i
t
t
e
r
F

g
i
r

t
s
e
t

n
o
i
s
a
r
b
a

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

)
7
0
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

i

L
(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
s
a
e
r
c
e
D

e
v
i
s
e
h
d
A

D
N

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

t
s
e
t

,
5

,
1
/
s
e
r
b
ﬁ
d
e
p
p
o
h
C

t

%
w
4
–
3
/
m
m
0
1
d
n
a

e
r
b
ﬁ

,
l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
n
U

×
m
m
0
8
/
s
e
t
a
m

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

t

%
w
0
4
–
0
3
/
t
a
m
m
g

/

8
–
7

,

m
m
0
8

d
e
t
a
r
u
t
a
s
n
U

r
e
t
s
e
y
l
o
p

80

H. Jena

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

)
2
0
0
2

n
u
s
o
T

d
n
a

i
l
i
t
h
i
P
(

s
a
h

e
r
b
ﬁ
d
i
m
a
r
A

n
a
h
t

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
r

r
a
e
w

r
e
t
t
e
b

e
r
b
ﬁ
s
s
a
l
g

e
t
i
s
o
p
m
o
c

–

–

y
h
t
r
u
m
a
v
i
h
S
(

)
9
0
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

a
p
p
a
j
a
r
a
v
a
s
a
B

(

)
9
0
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
s
a
e
r
c
e
D

e
v
i
s
e
h
d
A

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

–

C
S

i

,
)

t

%
w
0
1
(

e
t
i
h
p
a
r
G

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

t
s
e
t

c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

t

%
w
0
5
/

2
m
/
g

0
0
2
/
n
e
v
o
w

n
i
a
l
p

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
b

8
/
e
r
b
ﬁ
n
e
v
o
W
n
e
v
o
w

%
l
o
v

0
6

,
0
5

,
0
4
/
l
i

m

n
i
a
l
p

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
B

f
o

t
n
e
m
h
c
a
t
e
D

e
r
b
i
F

,
x
i
r
t
a
m

,
e
g
a
k
a
e
r
b

,
0
.
3
1
4
1

,
5
.
7
7
1
1

,
0
.
2
4
9

,
5
.
6
0
7

,
0
.
1
7
4

,
5
.
5
3
2

:
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

D
N

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

t
f
a
h
s
-
n
o
-
k
c
o
l
B

r
e
t
s
e
y
l
o
P

,
0
0
3
−
/
e
r
b
ﬁ
n
e
v
o
W

%
l
o
v

0
3
/

2
m
/
g

0
0
5

,
6
9
.
0

,
2
7
.
0

,
8
4
.
0

:
d
e
e
p
s

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

,
0
1

,
5
.
7

,
5

,
5
.
2

:
d
a
o
l

l
a
m
r
o
N

s
/

m
4
4
.
1

,
0
2
.
1

,
0
8

,
0
7

,
0
6

,
0
5

:
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

f
g
k

5
.
2
1

m
0
9

,
5
5
3

,
0
1
2

,
5
2
1

:
e
z
i
s

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

N
0
9

,
0
6

,
0
3

:
d
a
o
L

)

t

%
w
9

,
6

,
3

,
0
(

2
O
S

i

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

m
μ

l

0
0
6

,
0
2
4

,
0
0
0
2

,
0
0
0
1

:
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
D
g
n
i
d
i
l

S

s
/

m
5

,
4

,
3

:
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
V
g
n
i
d
i
l

S

,
)

N
0
6

,
0
4

,
0
2
(

:
d
a
o
L

,
)

t

%
w
0
1
(

m
0
0
0
3

m
p
r

0
1
7

,
0
0
5

:
d
e
e
p
s

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

g

0
0
0
1

,
0
0
5

:
d
a
o
L

0
.
4
8
8
1

,
5
.
8
4
6
1

a
h
t
r
a
h
d
d
i
S
(

)
2
1
0
2

s
s
a
l
g

d
e
p
p
o
h
C

d
e
c
r
o
f
n
i
e
r

e
r
b
ﬁ

>
s
e
t
i
s
o
p
m
o
c

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
-
i
b

e
r
b
ﬁ
s
s
a
l
g

f
o

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

g
n
i
d
i
l
s

y
r
D

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

.
s
f
e
R

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
r

r
a
e

W

e
p
y
t

r
a
e

W

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

s
s
e
c
o
r
P

t
s
e
t
-
o
b
i
r
T

–

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

D
N

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

l
e
e
h
w

r
e
b
b
u
R

t
s
e
t

n
o
i
s
a
r
b
a

s
s
a
l
g

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
B

0
3
5
2

0
2

5
1
/
–
/
e
r
b
ﬁ

t

%
w
5
3

5
2
0
2

5
1
/
–
/
d
e
p
p
o
h
C

t

%
w
5
3
0
3

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

e
r
b
ﬁ
/
e
p
y
t

e
r
b
i
F

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
/
h
t
g
n
e
l

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

4
5

.

e
l
b
a
T

x
i
r
t
a

M

y
x
o
p
E

y
x
o
p
E

y
x
o
p
E

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

81

.
l
a

t
e

n
a
h
o
M

(

)
3
1
0
2

a
v
l
e
s
r
e
e
n
n
a
P

d
n
a

r
a
m
u
K

(

)
6
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e
d
n
a
h
C

(

)
0
0
0
2

f
o

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

g
n
i
d
i
l
s

y
r
D

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

.
s
f
e
R

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
r

r
a
e

W

e
p
y
t

r
a
e

W

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

s
s
e
c
o
r
P

t
s
e
t
-
o
b
i
r
T

)
6
1
0
2

l
i

O

N
0
2
1

,
0
8

,
0
4

:
d
a
o
L

e
n
i
h
c
a
m

.
l
a

t
e

l
a
w
a
r
g
A

(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

>
y
r
D
>
n
o
g
r
A

r
a
e
w
e
v
i
s
e
h
d
A

D
N

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
p
A

n
i
a
l
p

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
B

y
x
o
p
E

0
0
6
/
n
e
v
o
w

-
/

M
S
G

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
s
a
e
r
c
e
D

n
o
i
s
o
r
E

)

t

%
w
4
(

e
d
i
b
r
a
C
n
e
t
s
g
n
u
T

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

t
s
e
t

r
a
e
w
n
o
i
s
o
r
E

n
i
a
l
p

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
B

y
x
o
p
E

°
0
9
,
°
0
6
,
°
0
3
:
e
l
g
n
a

t
n
e
m
e
g
n
i
p
m

I

s
/

m
0
8

,
0
4

:
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v
t
c
a
p
m

I

g
i
r

t

%
w
0
5
/

2
m
/
g

0
6
3
/
n
e
v
o
w

e
r
b
ﬁ
/
e
p
y
t

e
r
b
i
F

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
/
h
t
g
n
e
l

x
i
r
t
a

M

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

4
5

.

e
l
b
a
T

–

–

m
k
7
2
8
.
2
,
7
0
5
.
1
:
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d
g
n
i
d
i
l

S

n
o
g
r
a
d
n
a

l
i
o

,
y
r
d

:
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
L

s
a
g

:
d
e
e
p
s

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

s
/

m
4
1
.
3

,
1
5
.
2

n
i
m
0
2
1

,
0
1
1

,
0
0
1

,
0
9

,
0
8

,
0
7

,
0
6

,
0
5

,
0
4

,
0
3

,
0
2

,
0
1

:
e
m

i
t

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

N
0
0
4

,
0
0
3

,
0
0
2

,
0
0
1

:
d
a
o
L

,
5
.
2

,
6
6
.
1

,
3
8
.
0

:
d
e
e
p
s

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

N
5
.
7

d
n
a
6

,
5
.
4

,
3

:
d
a
o
L

s
/

m
6
1
.
4

,
4
3
.
3

,
0
0
3

,
0
0
2

,
0
0
1

:
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

m
0
0
8

,
0
0
7

,
0
0
6

,
0
0
5

,
0
0
4

)
3
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

i

L
(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
s
a
e
r
c
n
I

n
o
i
s
e
h
d
A

D
N

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
l
l
a
B

t

%
w
0
3
/
–
/
s
e
r
b
ﬁ
t
r
o
h
S

K
E
E
P

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

D
N

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

c
s
i
d

n
o
n
i
P

s
s
a
l
g

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
B

6
n
o
l
y
N

N
0
2

,
5
1

,
0
1

,
5

:
d
a
o
L

t

%
w
0
3

,
0
2

,
0
1

,
0
/
–
/
e
r
b
ﬁ

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

O
C
a
C

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

)

t

%
w
5
(

l
e
e
h
w

r
e
b
b
u
R

t
s
e
t

n
o
i
s
a
r
b
a

/

,
0
4
−
m
m
0
3
/
e
r
b
i
F
t
r
o
h
S

t

%
w
5
4

d
e
t
a
r
u
t
a
s
n
U

r
e
t
s
e
y
l
o
P

e
n
o
D

t
o
N
—
D
N

H. Jena

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

n
a
t
t
a
R
d
n
a

e
w

j
i

B

(

)
7
0
0
2

:
e
v
i
s
e
h
d
A

S
C
>
P
C
>
T
C

:
r
a
e
w
g
n
i
t
a
l
l
i
c
s
o

e
d
u
t
i
l
p
m
a
w
o
L

S
C
>
T
C
>
P
C

:
e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

P
C
>
T
C
>
S
C

e
v
i
s
o
r
E

T
C
>
S
C
>
P
C

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

f
o

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

g
n
i
d
i
l
s

y
r
D

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

82

e
t
i
s
o
p
m
o
c

r
e
m
y
l
o
p

d
e
c
r
o
f
n
i
e
r

e
r
b
ﬁ
n
o
b
r
a
c

f
o
s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

l
a
c
i
g
o
l
o
b
i
r
T

5
5

.

e
l
b
a
T

.
s
f
e
R

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
R

r
a
e

W

e
p
y
t

r
a
e

W

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
V

t
s
e
t
-
o
b
i
r
T

x
i
r
t
a

M

)
1
1
0
2

e
w

j
i

B
d
n
a

a
m
r
a
h
S
(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
s
a
e
r
c
e
D

r
a
e
w
g
n
i
t
t
e
r
F

e
d
u
t
i
l
p
m
a
-
w
o
L

t
s
e
T
g
n
i
t
a
l
l
i
c
s
o

l
l
i

w

t

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
B

e
n
o
f
l
u
s
r
e
h
t
e
y
l
o
P

e
v
a
e
w

)
S
E
P
(

–

e
v
i
s
o
r
E

,
e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

r
a
e
w
g
n
i
t
a
l
l
i
c
s
o

w
o
l

,
e
v
i
s
e
h
d
A

e
d
u
t
i
l
p
m
a

t
s
e
t

r
a
e
w
n
o
i
s
o
r
E

;
c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

n
e
v
o
w

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
B

e
d
i
m

i
r
e
h
t
e
y
l
o
P

e
r
b
ﬁ
/
e
p
y
t

e
r
b
i
F

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
/
h
t
g
n
e
l

n
i
t
a
s
d
n
a
T
C
e
v
a
e

W

,
0
8
9
1

,
0
6
9
1
/
)
S
C
H
-
4

t

%
w
5
6
/

2
m
/
g
k

0
3
9
1

n
i
a
l
p
(

e
r
b
ﬁ
n
o
b
r
a
c

l
l
i

w

t

,

P
C
e
v
a
e
w

,
0
0
4

,
0
0
2

:
d
a
o
L

D
N

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

N
0
0
6

:
e
v
i
s
e
h
d
A

(cid:129)

D
N

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

:
d
e
e
p
s

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

;
s
/

m
6
6
4
0
.
1

,
0
0
3

,
0
0
2

:
d
a
o
L

N
0
0
5

,
0
0
4

h
2

:
e
m

i
t

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

:
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
r
F

(cid:129)

.

m
k

6
3
5
.
7

,
0
5
1

,
0
0
1

:
d
a
o
L

N
0
0
3

,
0
5
2

,
0
0
2

:
e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

(cid:129)

;
n
i
m
m
2

/

:
d
e
e
p
S

,
0
3

,
0
2

,
0
1

:
d
a
o
L

:
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

N
0
4

e
v
i
s
o
r
E

(cid:129)

.

m
5
.
1

:
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

g
n
i
g
n
i
p
m

I

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

;
s
/

m
6
6
.
8
1

;
n
i
m
/
g
8
:
e
t
a
r

x
u
l
F

n
i
m
0
1

:
n
o
i
s
o
r
e

f
o

:
t
n
e
d
o
r
e

f
o
s
s
a

M

;
g
0
8

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

83

)
1
1
0
2

y
r
o
b
g
l
A

(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

–

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

D
N

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

,
6

,
3
/
m
m
3
/
e
r
b
ﬁ
t
r
o
h
S

y
x
o
p
E

f
o

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

g
n
i
d
i
l
s

y
r
D

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

.
s
f
e
R

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
R

r
a
e

W

e
p
y
t

r
a
e

W

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
V

t
s
e
t
-
o
b
i
r
T

e
r
b
ﬁ
/
e
p
y
t

e
r
b
i
F

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
/
h
t
g
n
e
l

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

5
5

.

e
l
b
a
T

x
i
r
t
a

M

d
n
a

n
r
o
w
e
u
g
i
t
a
F

h
g
i
h
t
a

g
n
i
l
e
e
p

t
n
e
t
n
o
c

e
r
b
ﬁ

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

–

e
l
i
t
c
u
d
-
i

m
e
S

r
a
e
w
e
v
i
s
o
r
e

N
6
1
,
2
1
,
8
,
4
:
d
a
o
L

,
4
.
0

:
d
e
e
p
s

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

.
c
e
s
/

m
6
.
1

,
2
.
1

,
8
.
0

,
0
1

,
5

:
e
m

i
t

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

y
r
d

:
t
n
e
m
n
o
r
i
v
n
E

n
i
m
0
2

,
5
1

D
N

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

t
e
w
d
n
a

:
d
e
e
p
s

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

m
p
r

4
6
3

%
l
o
v

3
2

,
2
2

,
1
2

:
d
e
e
p
s

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

N
0
4
4

:
d
a
o
L

m
p
r

0
0
7

)

t

%
w
8
,
6

,
4

)
8
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

o
a
h
Z
(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
s
a
e
r
c
e
D

w
o
l

t
a

e
v
i
s
e
h
d
A

k
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

,
0
2

,
0
1

,
5
/
–
/
e
r
b
ﬁ
t
r
o
h
S

e
n
o
f
l
u
s
r
e
h
t
e
y
l
o
P

.
t
n
e
t
n
o
c

e
r
b
ﬁ

g

0
0
8

:
d
a
o
l

l
a
m
r
o
N

%
l
o
v

0
3

)
S
E
P
(

i
n
a
k
o
j
i
d
a
m
h
A

(

)
9
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
s
a
e
r
c
e
D

,
9
1

e
t
i
r
a
B

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

e
p
y
t

g
n
i
r

e
s
u
o
h
-
n
I

d
n
a
2

,
1

,
0
:
e
r
b
ﬁ
t
r
o
h
S

c
i
l
o
n
e
h
P

)
5
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e
o
a
R

(

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
D

–

,
2
(

e
t
i
h
p
a
r
G

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

t
s
e
t

r
a
e
w
n
o
i
s
o
r
E

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
B

y
x
o
p
E

g
i
r

t

%
w
0
6
/

2
m
/
g

0
0
2
/
e
r
b
ﬁ

n
o
b
r
a
c

n
e
v
o
w
-
n
i
a
l
p

%
l
o
v
9

%
l
o
v
4

84

H. Jena

the surface roughness and adhesion toward the polymer through treatments of some
functional groups. Lin et al. (2015) have found that the wear rate and the coefﬁcient of
friction are decreased in the case of recyclic cryogenic treated carbon ﬁbre composite
as compared to the recycled carbon ﬁbres composite. Similarly, carbon ﬁbre treated
with cold remote nitrogen improves wear resistance of the composite as compared
to untreated carbon ﬁbre composite (Sharma and Bijwe 2011). Another technique
to improve the service performance and wear-resistance of carbon ﬁbre with SiC
is through prepared by hot press sintering. Again carbon ﬁbre is treated with air
oxidation and liquid oxidation methods to increase wear resistance (Yang et al. 2019).

5.4.3 Natural Fibre Composite

Tribological property is an important property when natural ﬁbre composites are
going to use in structural application. Wear property of the polymer have been
improved by adding the natural ﬁbre into the polymer matrix as shown in the
Table 5.6. Again ﬁbre loading in the polymer matrix composite increases the wear
resistance of the composite (Dwivedi and Chand 2008).

In abrasive wear, the nature of wear mechanism is different for different ﬁbre
directions i.e parallel orientation, anti-parallel orientation and normal orientation.
Various authors have studied the effect of natural ﬁbre orientation with respect to
sliding distance on abrasive wear. El-Sayed et al. (1995) have found that at 15 wt%
of ﬁbre gives the lowest wear rate in normal direction than transverse and the lon-
gitudinal orientation of ﬁbres in linen composite and jute composite. Where Mishra
and Acharya (2010) have concluded that wear rate of Bagassae composite in normal
direction is lowest followed by antiparallel and parallel direction.

Operating parameters and material parameters have a signiﬁcant role in the tribo-
property in the natural ﬁbre composite (Sumithra and Sidda Reddy 2018). Akpan
et al. (2018) have studied the tribological properties using a block-on-ring test on
hard wood and soft wood of various length in water soluble acrylic resin and make a
fully bio degradable composite material. The increasing in ﬁbre length is increased
the wear rate of the composite which attributes that longer ﬁbre length have an
afﬁnity of poorer impregnation quality. Table 5.6 indicates the various natural ﬁbre
polymer composite in tribological test and its various process parameter and material
parameters. It may help to gather the knowledge of how the natural ﬁbre content
improves the wear resistance of the composites.

5.5 Tribological Application of Composite Materials

The research on development of ﬁbre reinforced composite for improving vehicle
efﬁciency through weight reduction is an emerging trend in automotive application.
Rathnakar and Pandian (2015) have reported that the highest consumption of the

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

85

)
8
0
0
2

b
e
y
a
T
-
l
E
(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
s
a
e
r
c
e
D

e
v
i
s
e
h
d
A

D
N

:
r
e
l
l
i

F

e
n
i
h
c
a
m
c
s
i
d

n
o
n
i
P

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

f
o

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
r

r
a
e

W

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

g
n
i
d
i
l
s
y
r
D

e
p
y
t

r
a
e

W

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v
s
s
e
c
o
r
P

t
s
e
t
-
o
b
i
r
T

e
r
b
ﬁ
/
e
p
y
t

e
r
b
i
F

x
i
r
t
a
m
-
e
r
b
i
F

e
t
i
s
o
p
m
o
c

r
e
m
y
l
o
p

d
e
c
r
o
f
n
i
e
r

e
r
b
ﬁ
l
a
r
u
t
a
n

f
o
s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

l
a
c
i
g
o
l
o
b
i
r
T

6
5

.

e
l
b
a
T

-
e
n
a
c
r
a
g
u
S

d
e
t
a
r
u
t
a
s
n
u

r
e
t
s
e
y
l
o
p

)
5
9
9
1
.
l
a

t
e

d
e
y
a
S
-
l
E
(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
s
a
e
r
c
e
D

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

0
0
5
–
0
0
2
:
d
e
e
p
S

e
n
i
h
c
a
m
c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

,
5
/
D
N
/
e
r
b
ﬁ
n
e
v
o
W

r
e
t
s
e
y
l
o
p
-
e
r
b
ﬁ
n
e
n
i
L

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

)
2
1
0
2

–

–

)
0
1
0
2

a
y
r
a
h
c
A
d
n
a

a
r
h
s
i

M

(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

–

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

N
7

d
n
a
5

,
3

,
1

:
s
d
a
o
L

c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

y
x
o
p
e
-
e
s
s
a
g
a
B

)
2
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

i
h
t
a
p
o
o
B

(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
s
a
e
r
c
e
D

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

N
0
3
,
5
2
,
0
2
,
5
1
:
d
a
o
L

e
n
i
h
c
a
m
c
s
i
d

n
o
n
i
P

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

i
l
a
k
l
A
%
w

/

t

o
t

0
5
/
e
r
b
ﬁ
t
r
o
h
S

5
3
/
m
m
0
1
1

t
i
u
r
f

s
u
s
s
a
r
o
B

y
x
o
p
e
-
e
r
b
ﬁ

)
2
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

i
h
j
a

M

(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

N
5
1

,
0
1

,
5
.
7

,
5

:
d
a
o
L

c
s
i
d

n
o
-
n
i
P

e
t
a
l
u
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
x
o
p
e
-
k
s
u
h

e
c
i
R

.
l
a

t
e
o
a
R
a
r
d
n
a
h
C

(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

N
0
3

d
n
a

0
2

,
0
1

:
d
a
o
L

c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

,
0
2

,
0
1
/
D
N
/
e
r
b
ﬁ
t
r
o
h
S

y
x
o
p
e
-
r
i
o
C

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t
/
t
n
e
t
n
o
c
/
h
t
g
n
e
l

/

t

D
N
%
w
4
–
3
/
t
a
m
m
g

/

,
5

,
1
/
e
r
b
ﬁ
t
r
o
h
S

t

%
w
4
–
3
/
m
m
0
1

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
n
U

8
–
7
/
e
r
b
ﬁ

/

D
N
%
w
3
3

t

,
1
2

,
2
1

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
n
U

D
N
/
e
r
b
ﬁ

0
2

,
5
1

,
0
1

,
5
/
D
N
/
e
r
b
ﬁ

n
o
i
t
a
l
y
o
z
n
e
B
%
w

/

t

n
o
i
t
a
l
y
o
z
n
e
b
/
0
3

N
0
8
,
0
6
,
0
4
,
0
2
:
d
a
o
L

,
5

,
1

:
h
t
g
n
e
l

e
r
b
i
F

m
m
0
1

n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f

e
m
u
l
o
v

e
r
b
i
F

n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
i
r
o

e
r
b
i
F

n
i
m
/
v
e
r

,
0
8
1

,
0
5
1
(

s
e
z
i
s

t
i
r

G

n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
i
r
o

e
r
b
i
F

)
0
0
4
d
n
a

0
2
3

:
s
e
i
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

,
4
8
8
.
1

,
3
1
4
.
1

s
/

m
5
5
3
.
2

m
m
0
0
0
3

,
0
0
0
2

,
0
0
0
1

n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f

e
m
u
l
o
v

e
r
b
i
F

:
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

,
0
0
2

:
d
e
e
p
s

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

m
p
r

0
0
4

,
0
0
3

86

H. Jena

)
1
1
0
2

)
7
1
0
2

)
9
0
0
2

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

f
o

–

–

)
1
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

h
g
n
i
S
(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

–

e
v
i
s
e
h
d
A

t
e

W

0
8

,
0
7

,
0
6

,
0
5

:
d
a
o
L

c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
k
c
o
l
B

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
n
U

e
n
a
h
t
e
r
u
y
l
o
p
-
f
a
n
e
K

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
r

r
a
e

W

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

g
n
i
d
i
l
s
y
r
D

e
p
y
t

r
a
e

W

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v
s
s
e
c
o
r
P

t
s
e
t
-
o
b
i
r
T

e
r
b
ﬁ
/
e
p
y
t

e
r
b
i
F

x
i
r
t
a
m
-
e
r
b
i
F

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

6
5

.

e
l
b
a
T

a
r
h
s
i

M
d
n
a

y
d
d
e
r
i

A

(

)
1
1
0
2

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

N
5
2
d
n
a

,
0
2
,
5
1
,
0
1
,
5

c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

,
0
4

,
0
2

,
0
1
/
t
s
u
d

r
i
o
C

y
x
o
p
e
-
r
i
o
C

a
r
h
s
i

M
d
n
a

y
d
d
e
r
i

A

(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

e
v
i
s
o
r
E

e
l
g
n
a

t
n
e
m
e
g
n
i
p
m

I

r
a
e
w
n
o
i
s
o
r
E

,
0
4

,
0
2

,
0
1
/
t
s
u
d

r
i
o
C

y
x
o
p
e
-
r
i
o
C

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t
/
t
n
e
t
n
o
c
/
h
t
g
n
e
l

t

w
%
5
2
/
m
m
0
0
1
/
e
r
b
ﬁ

e
d
i
x
o
r
d
y
h
m
u
i
d
o
s

t

%
w
0
6

t

%
w
0
6

7
/
d
n
u
o
w
e
l
g
n
i
S

t

%
w
8
1
/
t
n
u
o
c

l
i
h
o
G
d
n
a

h
k
i
r
a
P
(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

–

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

,
3

,
0
(
e
t
i
h
p
a
r
G

:
r
e
i
l
l
i

F

c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

r
e
t
s
e
y
l
o
p
-
n
o
t
t
o
C

f
i
s
u
o
Y
d
n
a

n
i
h
C

(

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

–

e
v
i
s
a
r
b
A

,
0
7

,
0
5

,
0
3

:
d
a
o
L

k
s
i
D
-
n
O
-
k
c
o
l
B

t
r
o
h
S

y
x
o
p
e
-
f
a
n
e
K

%
l
o
v

8
4
/
m
m
0
0
3
/
e
r
b
ﬁ

,
0

:
s
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d

g
n
i
d
i
N s
l

m
k
7
.
2

n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
i
r
o

e
r
b
i
F

.
e
.
i

s
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d

g
n
i
d
i
l
s

d
n
a

,
0
8

,
0
6

,
0
4

,
0
2

m
0
0
1

°
0
9

,
°
5
7

,
°
0
6

,
°
5
4

,
°
0
3

c
e
s
/

m
2
9

,
8
7

,
0
6

,
8
4

e
z
i
s

e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p

t
n
e
d
o
r
E

,
0
0
5

,
0
0
4

,
0
0
3

,
0
0
2

,
4
3

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v
t
c
a
p
m

I

,
6
6
.
1

:
d
e
e
p
s

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

g
k

4

,
3

,
2

:
d
a
o
L

,
1

:
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

s
/

m
3
3
.
3

,
9
4
.
2

m
k
2

,
5
.
1

m
μ
0
0
6

)

t

%
w
5

:
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

s
/

m

)
9
.
3
–
1
.
1
(

:
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d

g
n
i
d
i
l

S

n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d

e
r
b
i
F

)

m
k

5
–
0
(

N
0
0
1

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

87

polymer composite is in automotive industry. It is mainly due to the high strength
to weight ratio, higher stiffness to weight ratio, wear resistance, higher resistance
to thermal expansion, improved fatigue resistance, corrosion resistance, etc. Around
20% utilization of polymer composite is made by aerospace application.

Some of the important applications of FRP in tribological area from literature are
listed below (Rathnakar and Pandian 2015; Mittmann and Czichos 1975; Fiore et al.
2015; Kurokawa et al. 2003; Ahmadijokani et al. 2019):

(cid:129) Aramid ﬁbre reinforced rubber composite for convener belt
(cid:129) Continuous carbon ﬁbre composites for multi layered leaf springs
(cid:129) Short or continuous ﬁbre reinforced polymer composites for bearings in aerospace

application

(cid:129) Short ﬁbre reinforced and self lubricated thermoplastic blends are used for mechan-

ical assemblies like gears or racks etc.

(cid:129) Basalt ﬁbre reinforced polymer composite is used to make roofs, clutch facing,

car headliners, brake disc pads etc.

(cid:129) Plastic gear made of Polymer carbon ﬁbre reinforced polyamide
(cid:129) Phenolic resin-based friction composites are used for disc brake pads and brake

linings in automobiles, airplanes, racing cars, trucks and other vehicles

(cid:129) Fibre-reinforced polymer (FRP) in automotive and aerospace applications like

gears, seals, bushes and cams.

The reinforcement and polymer affect the tribological performance of the machine
elements like gears, friction brake and spring are studied and the details are discussed
below.

5.5.1 Gears

Gears are basically used to transmit power and motion from one shaft to others. It
gives better transmission as compared to other drive such as belt, rope and chain
drives. It may be due to less sleeping between the teeth of two mating gears. Gears
are made of polymer and its composite are now used to replace the metallic gears
which can be used in low load condition. It provides the low cost, light weight,
self-lubricity, high damping resistance and low noise. The main reasons for failure
in polymer composite gears are fatigue and wear (Mao 2007). Life test is used to
measure fatigue where continuous monitored is required to record the wear of the
gear. Extensive researches have been carried out on power transmission of polymer
gears which can be used in motorcycle and electric vehicle lightweight gearbox
applications. Senthilvelan and Gnanamoorthy (2006) have studied the performance
of spur gear made of short carbon ﬁbre reinforced Nylon 66. The property of polymer
gear largely depends upon the time, temperature and stress levels. Table 5.7 shows
the spur gears are made of polymers and polymer composites. In the given table, all
spur gears are manufactured by injection moulding method.

Singh et al. (2018)

ND

POM

88

Table 5.7 Spur gears parameters

Refs.

Polymer

Reinforcement

Singh and
Vashishtha (2018)

Polyamide 66

0, 15, 30 wt% of
glass ﬁbres

Mao et al. (2019)

Polyoxymethylene

28 wt% glass ﬁbre

Kurokawa (2003)

Carbon ﬁbre

Acrylonitrile
Butadiene Styrene,
High Density
Polyethylene,
Polyoxymethylene

Polyamide 6,
Polyamide 12,
Polyamide 46,
Polyamide 66

5.5.2 Brake Pads

H. Jena

Minimum wear
rate at

30 wt% glass ﬁbre
composite

Glass ﬁbre
Polyoxymethylene
composite

Carbon ﬁbre
polyamide 12
composite

Operating
parameter

Rotational
speed:(500–1700
rpm)
Torque: (0.8–3.2
N·m).

Rotational speeds:
600, 800, 1000
and 1200 rpm
Torque: 0.8, 1.2,
1.6 and 2.0 Nm

Rotation speed:
2000 rpm
Torque: 3 to 8.5
Nm

Rotation speed:
200 rpm
Torque =
±3–5 MPa

Asbestos is used to manufacture the brake pads, brake linings, brake couplings etc.
But its use causes the harmful effects and hence studies are carried to use alternative
eco-materials for brake pads. Carbon, glass, aramid ﬁbres are used an alternative
material for asbestos brake pads (Xin et al. 2005; Kato 1994).

Wears are major problem occurred in brake pads. These are: outer pad wear, inner
pad wear, tapered pad wear, cracking, glazing, or lifted edges on the pads, overlapping
friction material (Arman et al. 2018). To improve the wear and friction property
different techniques are adopted. Phenolic resin and its composite are widely used
as friction composites for brake pads and brake linings in automobiles and other
sectors. The ingredients of the friction composite to improve the wear and other
properties are classiﬁed into four different types viz., polymer matrix(thermoset),
ﬁbrous ingredients, ﬁllers (functional ﬁller and space ﬁller) and friction modiﬁers.
Functional ﬁllers are basically abrasive or lubricants where space ﬁller are barites.
Short ﬁbres are basically used for brake friction material which is available in the
form of chopped and milled (Cox 2011). Table 5.8 shows the ingredients used for
the friction composite for automobiles and aeroplanes etc.

Fibre as reinforcement in polymer matrix is a suitable composite material in brake
friction materials. A single ﬁbre may not full ﬁll the desired performance alone,
hence the incorporation of different ﬁbre or so called hybridisation of composite
by the number of ﬁbres are emerging technique in friction material. Abadi et al.
(2010) have mixed the carbon ﬁbre with steel and improve the friction property of
the composite. Similarly, Farhad et al. (Ahmadijokani et al. 2019) have introduced
aramid and glass ﬁbre in carbon ﬁbre in phenolic resin with other additives.

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

89

Table 5.8 Response of ﬁbre in tribological properties of brake friction materials

Matrix

Fibre

Observation

Ref.

Phenolic resin

Carbon ﬁbre

(Ahmadijokani
et al. 2019)

Other
ingredients
(cid:129) Fibrous

ingredients:
Aramid and
glass

(cid:129) Filler: Barite,

Copper
powder,
Alumina,
Calcium
Carbonate,
Friction dust,
Vermiculate

(cid:129) Lubricant:
Graphite

Copper,
Barite,
Felspar, ZnO,
Friction
power,
Sb2S3, Clay

(cid:129) Fibrous

ingredients:
Aramid, PAN,
Lapinus Rb
220, glass,
steel, brass

(cid:129) Friction

modiﬁers:
Alumina,
Cashew
(cid:129) Space ﬁller

Filler:
Aluminium
oxide, Graphite,
Calcium
carbonate

Improvement:
Storage
modulus,
stiffness, wear
resistance
Reduction:
Thermal
stability, friction
coefﬁcient

Improvement:
Friction
coefﬁcient,
Wear resistance
at different
friction
temperatures

Improvement:
Modiﬁed
Phenolic resin
have better
Friction
Coefﬁcient,
Wear resistance,
shelf life, no
emission of
noxious
volatiles, near
zero shrinkage
and void then
conventional
phenolic resin

Improvement:
Wear, friction,
mechanical,
moisture effects,
surface oil and
water
absorptions
property

Phenolic resin

(cid:129) Sisal ﬁbre

(cid:129) Filler:

(Xin et al. 2007)

(cid:129) Phenolic resin
(cid:129) Modiﬁed

Phenolic resin

ND

(Gurunath and
Bijwe 2007)

Epoxy resin

Palm kernel
ﬁbre

(Ikpambese
et al. 2016)

(continued)

90

Table 5.8 (continued)

Matrix

Fibre

Phenolic resin

Aramid ﬁbre

Filler: Flyash

Other
ingredients

Observation

Ref.

H. Jena

Phenolic resin

Glass ﬁbre

Phenolic resin

Palm kernel
ﬁbre

Improvement:
Friction
coefﬁcient,
Recovery factor,
Fade resistance

Improvement:
Friction
coefﬁcient,
Wear resistance

(Dadkar et al.
2009)

(Gweon et al.
2016)

(Pujari and
Srikiran 2019)

Improvement:
Friction
coefﬁcient,
Wear resistance,
oil absorptions
property

(cid:129) Fibrous

ingredients:
Aramid ﬁbre

(cid:129) Filler:

ZrSiO4,
Barite
(cid:129) Lubricant:
Graphite
(cid:129) Fibrous

ingredients:
Wheat ﬁbre
and Nile rose
ﬁbre

(cid:129) Filler: Al2O3,
Graphite

These synthetic ﬁbres performed comparatively good mechanical and friction
properties. The high cost and friction-induced noise are the main problems with these
ﬁbres. To overcome this, the natural ﬁbre composite is the best solution. Xin et al.
(2007) have found that the sisal ﬁbre reinforced phenolic composite is a substitute
of asbestos in brake composite. 20 wt% sisal ﬁbre with copper and other ﬁllers gives
the highest wear property for the friction composites. Different friction modiﬁers
(copper chips, alumina, graphite, SiO2 power, cashew dust) are added in the friction
composite (Xin et al. 2007; Gurunath and Bijwe 2007). Similarly, other natural ﬁbres
like banana ﬁbre (Idris et al. 2015), coir ﬁbres (Maleque and Atiqah 2013), palm
kernel ﬁbres (Ikpambese et al. 2016), bamboo ﬁbres (Purboputro et al. 2017), Kenaf
(Koya and Fono 2009) bagasse (Aigbodion et al. 2010) etc. are used for brake pad.
It is well proven that natural ﬁbres can replace asbestos in brake friction composites.

5.5.3 Springs

Springs plays an important role in vehicle suspension system which is made of
steel. Replacing steel with ﬁbre reinforced polymer composite offers higher strength
to weight ratio, higher stiffness, elastic strain energy storage capacity, corrosion
resistance and high impact energy absorption (Subramanian and Senthilvelan 2010).
Different ﬁbre reinforced polymer composites are widely used for preparing the

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

91

spring for vehicle system. The helical springs are mostly used in the suspension
system in automobiles. The objective is to improve the shock absorption and comfort
of the passengers. It is found from Table 5.9 that carbon ﬁbre composite has better
stiffens characteristic as compared to glass ﬁbre composite.

Kumar et al. (2013) have compared a single-leaf spring made of glass ﬁbre epoxy
composite and jute-glass epoxy composite. It is concluded that stresses are the same
for both steel and composite leaf spring. Nearly 75% weight of multi-leaf steel spring
is reduced by composite material in suspension leaf spring. It is not only reducing
the fuel consumption but also improve the riding qualities.

Foard et al. (2019) have studied the Belleville springs and their application. It is
manufactured by a polymer composite of woven prepreg material. It is well proven
that it can perform in a vibration isolation system like vehicle suspension.

Choi and Choi (2015) have prepared a coil spring of carbon ﬁbre reinforced epoxy
composite by resin transfer moulding (RTM) process. It is found that coil spring made
of CFRP is provide weight reduction about 55% than that of steel and the magnitude
of the shear modulus of the composite is about 16.8% of that of steel.

Manjunatha and Budan (2012) have prepared a helical spring made of glass ﬁbre,
carbon ﬁbre, and glass-carbon ﬁbre in +45° orientation by ﬁlament winding tech-
nique (FWT). Helical spring made of carbon ﬁbre is 24% more than glass ﬁbre and
10% more that glass-carbon hybrid composite in mechanical property. Kara (2017)
have reviewed more on leaf spring of polymer composite and concluded that the
advantage, acceptability of polymer composite in leaf spring more than metal leaf
spring.

5.6 Conclusions

The present work discusses the variety of wears encounter in the composite material
along with different types of tribo-testing machines and their applications to ﬁnd the
wear behaviour of materials in real time conditions. It is observed that neat polymer
and ﬁbre/ﬁller associated with polymer has great role on tribological property of the
composite which could be a potential candidate to replace a metal in wear related
application. Operating parameters like normal load, sliding velocity, sliding distance,
temperature and material parameters like volume/weight fraction, ﬁbre orientation,
ﬁbre length, surface treatment have a inﬂuence the tribological property. Tribolog-
ical study on ﬁller ﬁlled natural ﬁbre reinforced polymer composite is an emerging
technique in tribological world. Addition of ﬁller in polymer matrix composites play
a vital role in improving the wear property of the composite. Application of these
composite materials in gear, brake pad etc. have evolved in automobile and low load
condition for their tribological property. In addition to this, fuel efﬁciency and weight
reduction by polymer composites in automobile application have a reason to replace
the conventional metal.

.
l
a

t
e

r
a
m
u
K

(

)
3
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

r
a
m
u
K

(

)
3
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

r
a
m
u
K

(

)
3
1
0
2

a
h
t
a
n
u
j
n
a
M

(

n
a
d
u
B
d
n
a

)
2
1
0
2

a
h
t
a
n
u
j
n
a
M

(

n
a
d
u
B
d
n
a

)
2
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e
u
i
h
C

(

)
7
0
0
2

.
l
a

t
e
u
i
h
C

(

)
7
0
0
2

H. Jena

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

92

.
s
f
e
R

d
a
o
l

e
r
u
l
i
a
F

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
m
o
c

m
u
m
i
x
a
M

)

N

(

d
a
o
l

n
o
i
t
c
e
ﬂ
e
D

)

m
m

(

s
s
e
r
t
s

r
a
e
h
S

)
2

m
m
N

/

(

f
o

t
h
g
i
e

W

)
g
(

g
n
i
r
p
s

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
a
F

e
u
q
i
n
h
c
e
t

+
e
r
b
i
F

x
i
r
t
a

M

g
n
i
r
p
s

f
a
e
l

f
o

y
t
r
e
p
o
r
p
l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e

M

9
5

.

e
l
b
a
T

)

N

(

–

0
0
4

0
2
5

5
7
2

0
0
3

–

–

–

–

–

0
0
4
7

.

.

0
0
5
2
1

–

7
3
1
2

.

7
4
4
2

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
8
8
8
3

0
0
3
8

.

0
0
3
8

.

0
0
5
1

.

5
7
1
1
5

0
0
0
8

.

7
6
9
7

.

–

–

–

–

–

t
n
a
t
s
n
o
c

)

m
m
N

/

(

g
n
i
r
p
S

8
9
1
3

.

–

–

3
8
4

.

6
3
6

.

1
3
4
1

.

3
0
4
1

.

0
9

t
n
e
m
a
l
i
F

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
n
U

0
0
4
,
3
1

0
9
5
3

0
9
5
2

p
u
y
a
l

d
n
a
H

e
u
q
i
n
h
c
e
t

t
n
e
m
a
l
i
F

g
n
i
d
n
i
w

d
o
h
t
e
m

g
n
i
d
n
i
w

d
o
h
t
e
m

)
0
9
n
M
2
i
S
5
5
(

y
x
o
p
e

s
s
a
l
G

l
e
e
t
S

s
s
a
l
g

e
t
u
J

+

s
s
a
l
G

y
x
o
p
E

y
x
o
p
e

+
n
o
b
r
a
C

y
x
o
p
E

s
e
t
a
n
i
m
a
l

+
n
o
b
r
a
C

y
x
o
p
E

e
r
o
c

r
e
b
b
u
R

-
c
e
r
i
d
i
n
u

l
a
n
o
i
t

s
e
t
a
n
i
m
a
l

+
n
o
b
r
a
C

)
y
x
o
p
E

5 Study of Tribo-Performance and Application of Polymer Composite

93

.
l
a

t
e
u
i
h
C

(

)
7
0
0
2

.
l
a

t
e
u
i
h
C

(

)
7
0
0
2

)

N

(

0
2
3

0
4
3

–

–

–

–

0
1
2
2

.

7
2
6
1

.

.
s
f
e
R

d
a
o
l

e
r
u
l
i
a
F

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
m
o
c

m
u
m
i
x
a
M

)

N

(

d
a
o
l

n
o
i
t
c
e
ﬂ
e
D

)

m
m

(

s
s
e
r
t
s

r
a
e
h
S

)
2

m
m
N

/

(

3
0
1
2

.

t
n
a
t
s
n
o
c

)

m
m
N

/

(

g
n
i
r
p
S

3
2
6
1

.

f
o

t
h
g
i
e

W

)
g
(

g
n
i
r
p
s

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
a
F

e
u
q
i
n
h
c
e
t

+
e
r
b
i
F

x
i
r
t
a

M

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

9
5

.

e
l
b
a
T

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d
i
n
U

r
e
t
u
o
d
e
d
i
a
r
b

s
e
t
a
n
i
m
a
l

a
h
t
i

w

e
r
o
c

r
e
b
b
u
R

+
n
o
b
r
a
C

r
e
y
a
l

)
y
x
o
p
E

r
e
t
u
o
d
e
d
i
a
r
b

-
c
e
r
i
d
i
n
u

l
a
n
o
i
t

s
e
t
a
n
i
m
a
l

a
h
t
i

w

+
n
o
b
r
a
C

r
e
y
a
l

y
x
o
p
E

94

5.7 Future Works

H. Jena

The current ﬁnding is a broad, but not in-depth study. Hence the present work can
be expand in future:
(cid:129) There are still many other varieties of natural ﬁbres and synthetic ﬁbre should have

been explored elaborately.

(cid:129) Other than spur gear should be studied in the wear related application.
(cid:129) The inﬂuence of manufacturing process of composite on wear behavior of break

pad, gear and spring should be explored.

(cid:129) Its application is not limited only automotive but more ﬁnding is required in other

industries also.
Abstract The thermosetting and thermoplastic materials reinforced with natural
ﬁber are widely used in the automotive sector. Variety of natural ﬁbers like jute,
kenaf, hemp, banana, sisal, etc. are used in FRP composite due to lightweight, eco-
friendly, easy availability and low cost. In addition, FRP composite also meets the
structural and robustness demands of interior and exterior components of the vehicles.
However, the erosion behavior of the FRP composites is a critical parameter in
the dusty environment. In this work, needle punched nonwoven ﬁber composite
is prepared using vacuum assisted resin transfer molding (VARTM) process with
variation in ﬁller size (10, 25 and 50 µm). The composites are prepared using 4
layers of needle punched jute ﬁber of 250 × 250 mm and mill scale is added 10 wt%
of epoxy. Tensile and ﬂexural properties are evaluated. The erosion tests are carried
out using irregular silica sand at different impingement angles, impact velocities
and environment temperatures. It is observed that the composite C1 with 10 µm
ﬁller size shows the maximum tensile and ﬂexural strength 45.564 ± 0.72 MPa and
73.16 ± 1.34 MPa respectively. It is also observed that the composite C1 (10 µm)
exhibited lower erosion rate of 216.67 mg/kg at 30° impingement angle compared
to C2 (25 µm) and C3 (50 µm).
Keywords Jute ﬁber · VARTM · Mechanical properties · Erosion rate
Composite material is a combination of two or more divergent element on a macro
scale. A composite is fabricated by embedding one or more discontinuous phases
into the continuous phase (Agarwal et al. 2015). The discontinuous phase incul-
cates hard and strong particles termed as reinforcement, whereas, matrix usually
acts as the continuous phase. Natural ﬁber reinforced hybrid composites can be a
viable substitute to the man-made ﬁber reinforced polymer composites for various
lightweight structural applications (Sathishkumar et al. 2013; Yusriah et al. 2014).
These days, utilization of natural ﬁbers has tremendously increased replacing syn-
thetic ﬁbers in automotive industries owing to its superior properties, environmental
impact and social beneﬁts (Verma and Senal 2019). Therefore, engineers and profes-
sionals across the world are showing their keen interest in utilization of natural ﬁber
composites for the various applications especially automotive sectors. These natural
ﬁbers retains enormous characteristics such as enhanced mechanical properties, bet-
ter thermal and acoustic insulating characteristics and higher resistance to fracture
which are highly desirable for various lightweight structural applications (Deng et al.
2016). Other industrial applications that have been explored previously are namely,
automotive panels and ﬁlling, door and window structures, gardening components,
packaging, shelves etc., other purposes where higher mechanical resistance is not
of much importance but do require reducing overall purchasing and maintenance
costs are in aerospace, sports, leisure and construction based industries (Al-Oqla
and Sapuan 2014; La Mantia and Morreale 2011). Ragupathi et al. (2018) compared
the impact strength, cost and weight of the fabricated jute composite car bumper
with the existing steel car bumper. The weight and cost of composite car bumper
compared to steel was observed to be reduced by 58% and 56.1% respectively with
7.14 J/mm2 impact strength. The mechanical and tribological properties of the natu-
ral ﬁber composites could be modiﬁed by adding conventional and nonconventional
ﬁllers. Sharma and Patnaik (2018) studied the effect of marble dust particulate ﬁlled
jute ﬁber composite. The ﬂexural and interlaminar shear strength was identiﬁed to
be increased with the increase in ﬁller amount from 0 to 30 wt%. Choudhary et al.
(2019a, b) examined the effect of varying marble powder in glass ﬁber reinforced
epoxy composites. 30 wt% inclusion of marble powder in the composite presented
better erosion resistance at 45° impingement angle.

Considering other reinforcing ﬁllers available as industrial waste/by-product, mill
scale is one of them. Mill scale is a by-product pit out from the surface of steel sub-
strates during the process like rolling, forming, forging etc. (Sista et al. 2019). In
India, there are large number of rolling mill industries that produces a huge amount
of mill scale on daily basis. Mill scale is contaminated with lubricants and grease
from the equipment associated with the rolling mills simultaneously, it is considered
as a rich source of iron with minimum impurities (Sen et al. 2015). It is generally
dumped nearby the industrial areas becoming one of the reasons for infertility of

6 Mechanical and Erosion Characteristics of Natural Fiber …

103

the soil, whereas some proportion ﬁnds its application for road construction pur-
pose. Researchers are consistently discovering new methods to utilize this waste/by-
product mill scale in some useful applications. Mill scale is rich source of iron oxide
and displays a potential to be used as ﬁller due to its distinctive mechanical prop-
erties. Soni and Patnaik (2019) investigated the effect of mill scale on mechanical
properties of carbon ﬁber reinforced composites. The results shown that the tensile
strength increases with increasing the mill scale in the composite by 4.73% whereas
the maximum ﬂexural strength was observed at 5 wt% of mill scale. Durowaye et al.
(2018) examined the effect of silicon carbide, mill scale and magnesia particulates as
reinforced in unsaturated polyester resin. The results shown that 15 wt% reinforce-
ment exhibited the maximum tensile strength, ﬂexural strength, impact energy and
hardness.

In the present era, the automotive industries are adopting new materials based
on the market situations, economic situations and environmental regulations. As per
international protocols, manufactures are responsible for the reduction in fuel con-
sumption, pollution emissions and recyclability of the parts after their use. This is
a chance to develop new material for the automotive components. The composites
are the combination of two or more constituents with distinct properties combined at
macroscopic level to get the desired features which are not possible from the origi-
nal individual material. The composites are light material with tailorable properties.
Many automobile companies are using natural ﬁber composites for interior and exte-
rior parts. The European car manufacturers have been used natural ﬁber composites
for headliners, seat backs, dashboards, door panels, etc. (Holbery and Houston 2006).
Hence, this work is aimed to show the effect of ﬁller size on mechanical and ero-
sion properties and the feasibility of mill scale ﬁlled jute ﬁber reinforced hybrid
composites for the automotive components.

6.2 Types of Natural Fibers

The natural ﬁbers are classiﬁed based on their genesis, as shown in Fig. 6.1. The
plant ﬁbers such as Jute, Flax, hemp, Kenaf, coir and many more are commercially
used in the automotive applications (Bharath and Basavarajappa 2016). For various
interior and exterior applications in the cars, major car manufacturing industries in
Germany such as Audi, Mercedes, Ford is using natural ﬁber reinforced polymer
composites due to its moderate strength, low cost, available in bulk quantity and
environment-friendly nature.

104

A. Sharma et al.

Fig. 6.1 Classiﬁcation of natural ﬁber (Kicinska-Jakubowska et al. 2012; Thakur 2013; Thakur
and Thakur 2014; Bharath and Basavarajappa 2016; Mochane et al. 2019)

6.2.1 Composite Fabrication Techniques

The properties of natural ﬁber composites are dependent upon the fabrication meth-
ods. There are many factors on which selection of fabrication technique is dependent
such are production time, volume of production, complexity, etc. (Lau et al. 2018).
The various composite fabrication methods are shown in Fig. 6.2.

In present work, vacuum infusion resin transfer molding process adopted for the
fabrication of different size of mill scale ﬁlled jute ﬁber reinforced epoxy composites
(Sharma and Patnaik 2018; Choudhary et al. 2019a, b). The materials used in the
present work are tabulated in Table 6.1 and the complete set of VARTM is shown in
Fig. 6.3. Firstly, 10 wt% Mill scale of different size (10, 25 and 50 µm) dispersed
in epoxy using magnetic stirrer at 800 rpm for 2 h at room temperature. Initially, a
layer of wax and PVA is placed over a glass mold for easy removal of composite
panel. Then, four layers of jute ﬁber are stacked on glass mold followed by peel
ply with infusion mesh. The matrix material is uniformly distributed in radial and
longitudinal direction by infusion mesh. The spiral tube is laid down at the two ends
of the infusion mesh. The ﬁrst spiral tube is connected with the one end of the inlet
pipe and the spiral tube of the other corner is connected with catch port followed by

6 Mechanical and Erosion Characteristics of Natural Fiber …

105

Composite fabrication 
process

other 

Tube rolling 

For continuous 
fiber composites 

open mold 
processes

Closed mold 
processes

Filament 
winding 

pultrusion 
process

open mold 
processes

other 

Hand Lay-up 

Automated tape 
laying 

Compression 
molding 

Resin transfer 
molding 

Spray -up 

Compression 
molding 

Injection Molding

Centrifugal casting

continuous 
laminating

For short fiber 
composites 

Closed mold 
processes

Transfer molding

Fig. 6.2 Composite fabrication techniques

Table 6.1 Materials for composite fabrication

Material

Supplier

Size

Reinforced material: needle
punched nonwoven jute ﬁber

Matrix material: epoxy (CY-230)
and corresponding hardener

Filler: mill scale

Eskay International, Kolkata, India

400 GSM

Excellence Resin, Meerut, India

–

From local rolling industry: Sarda
Industrial Enterprises, Jaipur, India

10, 25 and 50 µm

106

A. Sharma et al.

Fig. 6.3 Schematic of VARTM process

a vacuum pump. Now the mold area is covered with the ﬂexible transparent vacuum
bag and locked down using sealant tube and vacuum is created inside the covered
area. Thereafter the mill scale ﬁlled resin mixture ﬂows inside the covered area. Once
all layers impregnate with ﬁller mixed matrix material, resin ﬂow is stopped and the
mold is kept for 24 h to cure at room temperature. The composite with 10, 25 and
50 µm size mill scale ﬁlled hybrid composites are designated as C1, C2 and C3
respectively.

6.2.2 Particle Size Distribution of Mill Scale

The particle size of mill scale is measured using particle size analyzer (Model:
Mastersizer 3000, Make: Malvern Panalytical, UK). The particle size distribution of
10, 25 and 50 µm is shown in Fig. 6.4. It can be seen from the graphs that the more
than 90% particles are less than 10.2, 25.4 and 50.3 µm.

6.2.3 Mechanical Characterization

The tensile and ﬂexural test is performed under displacement control mode using
Heico fatigue testing machine (Fig. 6.5) equipped with 25 kN load cell according to
ASTM D3039 and ASTM D7264. Three samples for each fabricated composites are
tested for both the tests. The tensile test is performed with rate of loading of 2 mm/min
and ﬂexural test is conducted under three point bending mode with 1 mm/min rate
of loading and ﬂexural modulus is calculated as per the ASTM D7264.

Figure 6.6 shows the effect of particle size of mill scale on tensile strength and
tensile modulus of jute ﬁber reinforced epoxy hybrid composites. The tensile strength
and tensile modulus decreases with increasing the mill scale size from 10 to 50 µm
(Fig. 6.6). The maximum tensile strength (45.564 ± 0.72) is observed for C1 com-
posite compared to C2 and C3. With the increase in ﬁller size the contact surface
between particle and epoxy tends to decrease which results in poor bonding amongst
epoxy and ﬁller that yields in poor tensile strength (Yilmaz et al. 2008). The tensile
modulus is evaluated from slope of initial portion of the stress-strain curve. The

6 Mechanical and Erosion Characteristics of Natural Fiber …

107

Fig. 6.4 Particle size analysis of mill scale particles

tensile modulus shows the similar trend as tensile strength with respect to mill scale
size. It has been seen from the past studies that the modulus is dependent upon the
interfacial adhesion and at minimal load the large particles easily debond, hence the
modulus of C1, C2 and C3 composites is in decreasing trend (Dányádi et al. 2006,
2007; Renner et al. 2009; Fiore et al. 2014).

The ﬂexural strength is decreasing with the increase in mill scale size from 10
to 50 µm and trend is similar as observed for the tensile strength of the compos-
ites. The maximum ﬂexural strength for C1, C2 and C3 composite is found as 73.16
± 1.34 MPa, 69.212 ± 1.53 MPa and 58.63 ± 1.14 MPa respectively. The ﬂexural
strength of C1 is 24.79% higher than C3 and 5.70% higher than C2. In C1 composite,
the smaller particle size provides higher interface area and stiffness which produces
good rigidity and hence enhanced ﬂexural and modulus strength is attained in com-
parison to C2 and C3 composites. Also, the smaller size of ﬁller possesses larger
surface area hence act as a crack growth barrier. Similarly, the ﬂexural modulus of
C1 composite is 32.99% higher than C3 and 10.29% higher than C2 (Fig. 6.7).

108

A. Sharma et al.

Fig. 6.5 Photograph of fatigue testing machine

Fig. 6.6 Effect of mill scale particle size on tensile strength and tensile modulus of hybrid composite

6 Mechanical and Erosion Characteristics of Natural Fiber …

109

Fig. 6.7 Effect of mill scale particle size on ﬂexural strength and ﬂexural modulus of hybrid
composite

6.3 Erosion Behavior of NFRP Composites

6.3.1 Air Jet Erosion Test Rig

The solid particle erosion tests are conducted using air jet erosion test rig (Model: TR
471, Make: Bangalore, India) containing the facility to mix particles with compressed
air and passed through nozzle conﬁrming to ASTM D76. The Pictorial view of
equipment is shown in Fig. 6.8. The solid particles are feed from the hopper and the
velocity of the conveyor belt controls the mass ﬂow rate. The conveyor belt drops the
particle in the stream of air and carried with the stream through a nozzle of 1.5 mm
diameter to hit the target material. The velocity of erodent ejected from the exit of
the nozzle is varying from 30 to 60 m/s, and stand-off distance is 10 mm. The erosion
test is performed with varying the impingement angle from 15 to 90°, increment in
the step of 15°. River silica sand (Size: ~150 µm) is used as erodent material in
the present study and maintained the discharge rate of 2 g/min. The square samples
of 25 mm × 25 mm are cut from the composite slab for slurry erosion wear test.
The ﬁxed parameters and control factors for slurry jet erosion test are depicted in
Table 6.2.

110

A. Sharma et al.

Fig. 6.8 Air jet erosion tribometer

Table 6.2 Parameters for
solid particle erosion test

Control factor

Impact
velocity

Impingement
angle

Temperature

Filler size

30, 40, 50 and
60 m/s

15, 30, 45, 60,
75 and 90°

40, 50 and
60 °C

10, 25 and
50 µm

Fixed parameter

Erodent

Silica sand

Erodent size

~150 µm

Erodent feed
rate (g/min)

2 g/min

Carrier ﬂuid

Air

1.5 mm

Nozzle
diameter
(mm)

6.3.2 Effect of Impingement Angle on Erosion Rate

with Varying Mill Scale Size in Composites

The effect of impingement angle on the erosion rate is identiﬁed starting from 15
to 90°, increment in the step of 15° by keeping other parameters constant as impact
velocity 30 m/s, erodent ﬂow rate of 2 g/min and erodent size ~150 µm. In general

6 Mechanical and Erosion Characteristics of Natural Fiber …

111

thermoplastic matrix composites usually show ductile erosion whereas the thermoset-
ting ones erode in a brittle manner (Patnaik et al. 2009a). From the Fig. 6.9, it can
be easily visualized that the erosion rate increases initially up to 30° and then the
curve shows a downhill thereby reducing the erosion loss, which shows the ductile
behaviour of the fabricated composites (Hutchings 1992; Finnie 1995; Barkoula and
Karger-Kocsis 2002; Patnaik et al. 2010; Sharma et al. 2018). At lower impingement
angle, the erosion phenomenon may take place via micro-cutting or micro-ploughing
due to penetration of the solid particles on the surface of the composite (Kaundal
2017). It is reported in the literature (Patnaik et al. 2009a, b, c; Choudhary et al.
2019a, b) that at lower impingement angle the impact force due to erodent particles
is split into two components: (i) tangential component (Pt) and (ii) vertical or normal
component (PN). Pt results in shear component of force and controls the abrasive ﬂow
whereas PN represents the impact phenomenon. The inﬂuence of PN is insigniﬁcant as
the impact angle shifts towards 90° (Patnaik et al. 2009b). From Fig. 6.9, it can be seen
that all three composites shows same trend of erosion behaviour with respect to the
impingement angle. Composite C1 exhibits the lowest erosion rate (216.67 mg/kg)
at 30° angle as compared to C2 and C3, which is attributed to smaller the ﬁller size,
more the active sites for bonding with the matrix material thus stronger the bonding
and higher the wear resistance (Raja et al. 2013). Other reason may be that increase
in the size of mill scale results in the formation of air bubbles and void in composites
thereby increasing the non-homogeneity in microstructure which results in decrease
in erosive resistance (Patnaik et al. 2009a, b, c).

Fig. 6.9 Effect of impingement angle on erosion rate with varying mill scale size in composites

112

A. Sharma et al.

6.3.3 Effect of Impact Velocity on Erosion Rate with Varying

Mill Scale Size in Composites

The erosion wear as a function of impact velocity is studied at different velocities
of 30, 40, 50 and 60 m/s keeping other parameters (impingement angle 30°, erodent
rate 2 g/min) constant. The general trend obtained from the Fig. 6.10 is that erosion
wear increases with impact velocity which is supported by the fact that for medium
to high velocities, a power law used to describe the relationship between wear rate
and impact velocity is given as (Stachowiak and Batchelor 1993):

−dm
dt

= kvn

(6.1)

where, m represents the mass of eroded sample, t denotes the test duration, k and
n are the empirical constant and velocity exponent respectively. ‘n’ is a function
of erodent and target material characteristics and varies from 2 to 3 for polymeric
materials possesses ductile behavior.

The erosion of ﬁber is mainly caused by damage mechanisms as micro-cracking
or plastic deformation due to the impact of silica sand, such damage increases with
the increase of kinetic energy (Stachowiak and Batchelor 1993). The impact velocity
shows proportional relationship with the erosion rate for all the three composites as
can be illustrated from Fig. 6.10. Thus with the increase in ﬁller size, the erosion
wear tends to increase and this effect may be explained due to the fact that there is
better adhesion between matrix and the smaller size ﬁller which results in hindering
the stress propagation (Raja et al. 2013).

Fig. 6.10 Effect of impact velocity on erosion rate with varying mill scale size in composites

6 Mechanical and Erosion Characteristics of Natural Fiber …

113

Fig. 6.11 Effect of environment temperature on erosion rate with varying mill scale size in com-
posites

6.3.4 Effect of Environment Temperature on Erosion Rate

with Varying Mill Scale Size in Composites

Figure 6.11 illustrates the inﬂuence of environment temperature on erosion rate with
varying mill scale size in composites. It can be identiﬁed that the erosion rate of
fabricated composite increases with increase in temperature while keeping all other
parameters constant (30 m/s impact velocity, 30° impingement angle and 150 µm
erodent size).

Composite C1 shows least erosion rate as compared to C2 and C3 (Fig. 6.11). With
the elevated temperatures, the stress required for plastic ﬂow of material decreases
due to thermal softening thus leading to enhanced wear (Patnaik et al. 2011). Impinge-
ment of particles also results in heat generation in the surface of composite thereby
leading to softening of the matrix and resulting in easy material removal (Patnaik
et al. 2009c).

6.4 Conclusion

The effect of ﬁller size shows the signiﬁcant impact on the mechanical and tribologi-
cal characteristics of jute ﬁber reinforced epoxy composite and following conclusions
are derived:
(cid:129) The tensile strength and tensile modulus of mill scale ﬁlled hybrid composite
decreases with increasing the mill scale size from 10 to 50 µm. The maximum

114

A. Sharma et al.

tensile strength (45.564 ± 0.72) is observed for C1 composite compared to C2
and C3.

(cid:129) The ﬂexural strength and ﬂexural modulus of the fabricated composites are
decreasing with increase in mill scale size. The maximum ﬂexural strength and
ﬂexural modulus is found for C1 composite as 73.16 ± 1.34 MPa and 2.985 ±
0.073 GPa respectively. The ﬂexural strength of C1 is 24.79% higher than the C3
and 5.70% higher than the C2.

(cid:129) Composite C1 has shown better erosion resistance with respect to impingement
angle, impact velocity and environment temperature followed by C2 and C3. The
smaller size of the ﬁller results in higher the erosion resistance which is attributed
to the good interfacial bonding between the constituents.

(cid:129) The overall results shows the potential use of mill scale (10 µm particle size) ﬁlled

jute ﬁber reinforced composite for automotive application.
Abstract The automotive industry is experiencing a radical change where the metal-
lic components are replaced with the light weight ﬁber reinforced composite mate-
rials. Fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) components are an effective alternate offering
improved properties such as reduced weight, good mechanical strength, corrosion
resistance etc. Carbon ﬁber reinforced polymer (CFRP) is lighter than aluminum and
stronger than iron and exhibits higher elasticity than titanium. In the present study,
the carbon ﬁber and Silicon Nitride (Si3Ni4) ﬁller is used to fabricate FRP composite.
Carbon ﬁber has high strength to volume ratio, high chemical resistance, low weight,
high stiffness and high tensile strength whereas Si3Ni4 is an abrasion resistant and
thermally conductive material. Carbon ﬁber reinforced epoxy matrix composite is
fabricated using vacuum assisted resin transfer molding (VARTM) technique with
different weight percent of silicon nitride (0, 10, 20 and 30 wt%). 10 layers of carbon
ﬁber are stacked in the glass mould for the fabrication of the composite. The ero-
sion test is performed with varying impingement angle from 45–90°, impact velocity
from 30 to 60 m/s and ﬁller content from 0 to 30 wt%. It is found from the Taguchi
design of experiment that the impact velocity is most signiﬁcant factor and the ﬁller
content is the least signiﬁcant factor. However, increase in the ﬁller content increase
the wear resistance of the fabricated composite.
Keywords Automotive industry · CFRP · Erosion wear · Taguchi design of
experiment
The automotive industry is experiencing a radical change where the metallic com-
ponents are replaced with the light weight ﬁber reinforced composite materials. The
attention was focused more on the use of metals and alloys for the development of
automotive components in the past. However, ﬁber reinforced polymer (FRP) com-
posites are replacing metallic components in structures, housing, bushing, windshield
wiper motors, shock absorbers, steering shaft joints and door hinges (Forintos and
Czigany 2018). One of the most critical parameter for design of any product is the
reduction in weight while increasing the load carrying capacity (Chung 2017). High-
performance ﬁber reinforced composite is one of the key solution in designing new
materials for such applications (Adam 1997). The application of composite in auto-
motive sector has increased manifold in the recent years and is expected to increase
tremendously in the future. The use of carbon ﬁbre reinforced plastic (CFRP) in
automotive industry is expected to increase to $6.3 billion by 2021 with an average
increase of 17.5% (Mazumdar 2016).

Fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) composite generally possesses high speciﬁc
strength and enhanced stiffness as compared to the other materials such as metal,
alloys, metal matrix composite. Both the natural ﬁber and the synthetic ﬁber are
widely used as the reinforcement in the composite material and provide improved
mechanical and wear resistance property for application in various industries (Gangil
et al. 2019; Ghalia and Abdelrasoul 2019; Harsha and Jha 2008; Patnaik et al. 2010).
However, synthetic ﬁber reinforced composites are more advantageous as compared
to the natural ﬁber composites in terms of the mechanical properties. The synthetic
ﬁber reinforced composites are widely used for the development of large number of
automotive components. The common synthetic ﬁbers used for the development of
the composites are Carbon, Glass, Aramid and Kevlar. The property of epoxy such
as high mechanical strength, low viscosity, low volatility and low shrinkage further
enhances the performance of the composite. The weight of the carbon-ﬁber compos-
ites is about one-ﬁfth of the steel and also comparable in terms of the stiffness and
strength. This leads to the improved efﬁciency of the automobiles.

A number of automotive components are subjected to the impact of the particles
resulting in the removal of materials from the surface. Most of the automobiles used
in the desert area are subjected to the impact of the sand particles resulting in the
loss of materials. Polymer composite are ﬁnding increased application under the arid
conditions (Friedrich 2018). The use of ﬁller along with the ﬁber as reinforcement
has attracted many researchers to enhance the performance of the composites in
the automotive industry. In the present study, Silicon Nitride (Si3Ni4) is used as a
ﬁller and the carbon ﬁber as reinforcement in the polymer matrix composite. Carbon
ﬁber reinforced polymer matrix composite is fabricated using vacuum assisted resin
transfer molding (VARTM) technique with different weight percentage of silicon
nitride. The present work investigates the erosive wear behavior of particulate ﬁlled
carbon ﬁber reinforced epoxy composites. Design of experiments is used to study

7 Erosive Wear Behaviour of Carbon Fiber/Silicon Nitride Polymer …

119

the effect of impact velocity, impingement angle and ﬁller content on the erosive
wear behavior of composites.

7.2 Materials and Methods

Different types of materials are used as matrix in composites such as polymers, metals
and ceramics. In modern composites, polymers are widely used as a matrix material
because of its light weight, ease of fabrication and its compatibility with variety of
reinforcements. Polymer matrices such as Epoxy, vinylester, phenolics and polyester
are the most commonly used thermosets. Biphenol A epoxy (CY230) is used as a
matrix material along with the Amide hardener Aradur (HY951) for the fabrication
of composite.

Carbon ﬁber is used as reinforcement in the present study due to high strength to
volume ratio, high chemical resistance, low weight, high stiffness and high tensile
strength. These properties are very much advantageous in the automotive application.
Filler or particulate are used along with the ﬁber to develop hybrid composite to
further enhance the mechanical properties. Silicon Nitride (Si3Ni4) particle of size
5 microns procured from Jayshree spheres and measures, Pune, India with 99.5%
purity is used as a particulate for the fabrication of the composite material. The
properties of the raw materials used in the current study are presented in Table 7.1.
Various ﬁbers and ﬁllers used in the fabrication of the composite available in the
literature are listed in Table 7.2.

7.2.1 Composite Fabrication

Carbon ﬁber reinforced epoxy matrix composite is fabricated using vacuum assisted
resin transfer molding (VARTM) technique with different weight percentage of sili-
con nitride as given in Table 7.3. 10 number of carbon ﬁber layers are stacked in the
glass mould for the fabrication of the composite samples. The VARTM technique is

Table 7.1 Properties of raw
materials used for fabrication
of composite (Callister and
Rethwisch 2007)

Material

Density,
gm/cm3

Ultimate
tensile
strength,
MPa

35.79

–

580

Elastic
modulus,
GPa

2.4

247

228

Epoxy

Silicon
Nitride

1.176

3.44

Carbon ﬁber

1.8

120

V. Kukshal et al.

Table 7.2 Effect of ﬁber/ﬁller used in the fabrication of the composites

Author

Fibre/ﬁller

Matrix

Hyuga et al. (2004)

Carbon ﬁbre

Silicon nitride

Guo et al. (1982)

Carbon ﬁbre

Silicon nitride

Suzuki et al. (1992)

Carbon ﬁbre

Silicon nitride

Xie et al. (2016)

Silicon
nitride/carbon ﬁbre

Bismaleimide (BMI)
resin

Friedrich et al. (2005)

Silicon nitride

Ramdani et al. (2015)

Silicon nitride
(10–70 wt%)

Polyetheretherketone
(PEEK) matrix nano
composite

Polybenzoxazine
matrix

Shimamura et al.
(2015)

Both alpha and beta
phase Silicon nitride

Epoxy resin

Ramdani et al. (2014)

Polybenzoxazine

Silicon nitride
nanoparticles

Bodis et al. (2017)

Graphine

Silicon carbide

Effect of ﬁller/ﬁber

Carbon ﬁbre helps in
maintaining the low
friction coefﬁcient.
Fracture strength
decrease with
increase in carbon
ﬁbre content

Issue of
incompatibility of
carbon ﬁbre and
silicon nitride at high
temperature

Pullout ﬁbre length is
determined and
considered in the
pullout mechanism
and processes

Flexural strength and
interlaminar shear
strength and thermal
resistance properties
of the composites are
improved

Reduction in
frictional coefﬁcient

Improve thermal
conductivity, thermal
stability

Increased thermal
conductivity and
inﬂuence on fracture
pattern of composite
is addressed

Increase tensile
strength and micro
hardness. Increase in
thermal and
mechanical
properties

Fracture toughness
(FT) increases 20%
for 1 wt% MLG. FT
is calculated at
different sintering
temperatures

(continued)

7 Erosive Wear Behaviour of Carbon Fiber/Silicon Nitride Polymer …

121

Table 7.2 (continued)

Author

Fibre/ﬁller

Matrix

Ahmed and Ibrahim
(2014)

Zirconium oxide
nanoﬁller

Polymethyl-
methacrylate
(PMMA)

Sedlek et al. (2017)

Graphene Platelet
(GPLs) (4–10wt%)

Boron carbide

Li et al. (2017)

Multi layered
graphene

Al2O3/TiC

Rahman and Radford
(2017)

Geopolymer matrix

Alumina nano-ﬁber,
silicon carbide
whisker, carbon
nanoﬁber

Alumina
Nanoparticles (0.5,
1.0, 2.0, and
3.0 wt%) of epoxy
resin

Graphenenanoplatelets
and reduced
graphene oxide
(rGO)

Polymer concrete

Silicon carbide

Emiroglu et al.
(2017)

Belmonte et al.
(2016)

Effect of ﬁller/ﬁber

Best mechanical
properties achieved
at 7% ZrO2
concentration.
Increment in fracture
toughness is seen

Fracture toughness
w. r. t GPLs addition
is calculated and it
increase with
increase in wt% of
GPLs

Composite with
0.2 wt% MLG has
highest fracture
toughness

2 vol% silicon
carbide whisker
shows largest
improvement in KIC
of geopolymer

Incorporation of
ANPs into PC mixes
steadily improved its
fracture toughness

Outstanding
mechanical
performance and
increment in fracture
toughness of
composites
containing just 5
vol% of rGOs is
observed

Fracture toughness
increase with
increase in ﬁller
volume

Basu et al. (2011)

HAp
(Hydroxyapatite) and
Al2O3

High density
Polyethylene
(HDPE)

Table 7.3 Composition of
carbon ﬁber reinforced
composite

Designation

EC

EC10

EC20

EC30

Composition
Epoxy + carbon ﬁber
Epoxy + carbon ﬁber + 10 wt% silicon nitride
Epoxy + carbon ﬁber + 20 wt% silicon nitride
Epoxy + carbon ﬁber + 30 wt% silicon nitride

122

V. Kukshal et al.

successfully used by many researchers to fabricate the composites (Sharma and Pat-
naik 2018; Choudhary et al. 2019a). The mould consists of a single die and preform
over it. The Si3Ni4 particles are spayed over the carbon ﬁber and are placed over
the mould before the entire vacuum bag is sealed. The vacuum is maintained in the
complete set up and the mixture of resin and hardener is injected in the mould. The
samples are allowed to cure for 24 h before removal from the mould. The tooling
cost and the time required to ﬁll the mould is very less as compared to the other fabri-
cation process. The complete fabrication process is performed at room temperature.
Concentration of the ﬁbers and the adhesion between the layers is improved by the
application of the pressure. The ﬂowchart of the different processes involved in the
fabrication process of composites using VARTM process is shown in Fig. 7.1.

7.2.2 Solid Particle Erosion

The solid particle erosion tests were performed using Ducom TR 471 according to
ASTM D76 (Sharma et al. 2018). The pictorial diagram of solid particle erosion test
rig is shown in Fig. 7.2. The solid particles are fed from hopper and the mass ﬂow rate
is controlled by the conveyor belt. The mix is carried by the conveyor belt and through
the nozzle of diameter 1.5 mm made to strike the composite sample with desired
velocity. The velocity of the erodent is selected in the range of 30–60 m/s. The stand-
off distance between the sample and the nozzle is kept 10 mm. The impingement
angle is selected as 45, 60, 75 and 90°. Silica is used as a erodent and the discharge
is maintained at constant rate i.e. 2 g/min. The test coupon of size 25 mm × 25 mm
were used to perform the erosion test. Taguchi design of experiment is selected for
performing solid particle erosion test (Choudhary et al. 2019b; Kiragi et al. 2019).
Taguchi method is one of the robust design which helps to improve the quality of
response by reducing the variation in the experimentation as a result of efﬁcient
and systematic utilization of ﬁxed table of array. It is a tool for designing a set of
experiment providing much-reduced variance with optimum control parameters. The
method uses an integrated approach for ﬁnding the inﬂuence of process parameters
on performance on the developed composite with minimum number of experiments.
The selected control factors for solid particle erosion along with their levels are
shown in Table 7.4.

7.3 Result and Discussion

The performance of control factor (signal-to-noise ratio) is measured using Taguchi
design of experiment technique. The signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio considers both the
mean and the unpredictability into account. Considering smaller is better character-
istic, S/N ratio for minimum erosion rate can be calculated as logarithmic value of
the loss function as given in Eq. (7.1). Lower is the better characteristic:

7 Erosive Wear Behaviour of Carbon Fiber/Silicon Nitride Polymer …

123

Fig. 7.1 Flowchart of the fabrication process of composite material using VARTM technique

124

V. Kukshal et al.

Fig. 7.2 Pictorial diagram of solid particle erosion test rig

Table 7.4 Levels of various control factors

Control factor

Level

A: Impact velocity

B: Impingement angle

C: Filler content (Si3Ni4)

I

30

45

0

II

40

60

10

III

50

75

20

IV

60

90

30

Unit

m/s

Degree

wt%

S
N

= −10log

(cid:2)

n(cid:3)

(cid:4)

(y2
i

)

i=1

1
n

(7.1)

where, n is the number of observations, and yi the observed data (Taguchi 1990).

The present work involves the systematic study of erosive wear performance of
Si3Ni4 based CFRP with the help of Taguchi analysis. The most important factors i.e.
impact velocity, impingement angle and ﬁller content are considered for the erosion
tests with L16 orthogonal array. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) technique in-turn
resembles the dominant factor that has signiﬁcant contribution in erosive wear of
CFRP. In Taguchi method, after assigning the individual factor to its appropriate
levels, the obtained result is transformed to the output called Signal to Noise (S/N)
ratio, which helps in predicting the quality characteristic of the obtained result. As the
current study is based on wear analysis, it is desired to have small is the better char-
acteristic condition in the three factors drawn at three levels with its corresponding
S/N ratio as presented in Table 7.5.

7 Erosive Wear Behaviour of Carbon Fiber/Silicon Nitride Polymer …

125

2
5
6
4
1
.
1

6
3
0
6
.
0
1

4
0
7
1
5
.
0
−

9
8
2
2
6
.
0

6
3
2
5
2
.
1
−

7
3
0
1
4
.
1
−

9
8
0
8
7
.
0

1
9
8
3
7
.
1

4
4
9
0
1
.
1
−

0
4
6
6
6
.
1

1
0
6
1
9
.
0

0
4
3
5
8
.
0

6
5
2
0
4
.
1
−

6
8
9
7
1
.
1
−

1
0
4
7
0
.
1

0
4
8
0
5
.
1

1
9
9
4
.
9

9
3
7
8
.
8

9
3
7
8
.
8

9
2
3
4
.
5

1
2
7
2
.
5

2
5
8
2
.
6

0
3
8
5
.
4

1
9
0
6
.
3

8
6
2
3
.
2

1
5
1
9
.
0

4
1
9
4
.
0

0
7
4
5
.
0
−

3
8
8
7
.
0
−

8
8
9
2
.
0
−

1
8
5
3
4
.
3
−

4
0
4
3
.
6
−

5
9
2
0

.

5
3
3
0

.

6
3
0

.

6
3
0

.

5
3
5
0

.

5
4
5
0

.

5
8
4
0

.

9
5
0

.

6
6
0

.

5
6
7
0

.

5
7
0
2

.

5
4
9
0

.

5
6
0
1

.

5
9
0
1

.

5
3
0
1

.

9
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

9
5
0
0
0

.

7
1
7
1

.

9
2
2
7
1

.

7
6
0
0
0

.

2
3
1
9
1

.

9
9
1
9
1

.

2
7
0
0
0

.

4
9
4
0
2

.

6
6
5
0
2

.

2
7
0
0
0

.

2
6
5
1
2

.

4
3
6
1
2

.

7
0
1
0
0

.

8
7
2
9
1

.

5
8
3
9
1

.

9
0
1
0
0

.

3
0
1
8
1

.

2
1
2
8
1

.

7
9
0
0
0

.

6
3
3
0
2

.

3
3
4
0
2

.

8
1
1
0
0

.

9
8
5
0
2

.

7
0
7
0
2

.

2
3
1
0
0

.

6
5
7
0
2

.

8
8
8
0
2

.

3
5
1
0
0

.

4
6
7
0
2

.

7
1
9
0
2

.

5
1
4
0
0

.

8
1
0
0

.

8
3
8
1

.

5
7
9
1

.

5
9
7
8
1

.

3
9
9
1

.

9
8
1
0
0

.

2
8
9
9
1

.

1
7
1
0
2

.

3
1
2
0
0

.

5
8
1
9
1

.

8
9
3
9
1

.

9
1
2
0
0

.

1
5
9
1

.

9
2
7
9
1

.

7
0
2
0
0

.

8
3
8
7
1

.

5
4
0
8
1

.

0

0
1

0
2

0
3

0
1

0

0
3

0
2

0
2

0
3

0

0
1

0
3

0
2

0
1

0

5
4

0
6

5
7

0
9

5
4

0
6

5
7

0
9

5
4

0
6

5
7

0
9

5
4

0
6

5
7

0
9

0
3

0
3

0
3

0
3

0
4

0
4

0
4

0
4

0
5

0
5

0
5

0
5

0
6

0
6

0
6

0
6

.

1

.

2

.

3

.

4

.

5

.

6

.

7

.

8

.

9

.

0
1

.

1
1

.

2
1

.

3
1

.

4
1

.

5
1

.

6
1

)
g
k
(

e
g
r
a
h
c
s
i
d

)
g
m

(

1
I
S
E
R

1
A
R
N
S

)
g
k
/
g
m

(

R
E

t
n
e
d
o
r
E

s
s
o
l

s
s
a

M

2
W

1
W

t
n
e
t
n
o
c

r
e
l
l
i
F

t
n
e
m
e
g
n
i
p
m

I

t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
e

f
o

t
e
s

e
h
t

r
o
f

n
g
i
s
e
d

l
a
n
o
g
o
h
t
r
o

6
1
L

5
7

.

e
l
b
a
T

e
l
g
n
a

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

t
c
a
p
m

I

o
N

.

S

a
u
d
i
s
e
R
=
1
S
E
R

,

o
i
t
a
r

e
s
i
o
n
o
t

l
a
n
g
i

S
=
1
A
R
N
S

,
e
t
a
r

n
o
i
s
o
r
E
=
R
E

,
t
h
g
i
e
w

l
a
n
i
F
=
2
W

,
t
h
g
i
e
w

l
a
i
t
i
n
I

=
1
W

e
r
e
h
W

Main Effects Plot (data means) for SN ratios

Impact Velocity

Impaingement Angle

10.0

(a)

(b)

V. Kukshal et al.

30

40

50

60

45

60

75

90

10.0

(c)

Filler Content

126

s
o
i
t
a
r
 
N
S
 
f
o
n
a
e
M

 

7.5

5.0

2.5

0.0

7.5

5.0

2.5

0.0

0

10

20

30

Signal-to-noise: Smaller is better

Fig. 7.3 Main effect plot of S/N Ratio

Figure 7.3 shows the main effect plot of S/N ratio. The increase in impact velocity
from 30 m/s implies decrease in mean of S/N ratio in turn implies the increased
erosive wear rate. This may attributes to the reduced time of travel to reach the target
material with the increased velocity and also the increased kinetic energy of the
impacting erodent. Also, Fig. 7.3 implies that the decrease in S/N ratio results in
increased wear rate of the Si3Ni4 induced CFRP. Wear rate of the CFRP composite is
found to increase up to 75° impingement angle irrespective of impact velocity. This
behavior may be due to the brittle nature of the fabricated composites as well the
dominant normal component of the impacting erodent. However, 90° impingement
angle shows reduction in the wear rate due to the impact of the erodent normal to the
samples thereby reducing the removal of material. In case of the ﬁller content, it is
observed that with the increase in the wt% of Si3Ni4, there is a continuous increase
in the S/N ratio. This implies that the addition of the ﬁller content in the composite
results in the decrease in the wear rate. This may be attributed to the presence of the
hard Si3Ni4 particles in the CFR composite resulting in the decrease in the wear rate.
In Taguchi, ANOVA is a subsequent step followed to ﬁnd out statistical signiﬁ-
cance of factors adopted like impact velocity, impingement angle and ﬁller content
on erosion wear rate on experimental data. A conﬁdence of 95% was considered in
the analysis. The ANOVA results for the erosion rate of Si3Ni4 ﬁlled carbon ﬁber
reinforced composite are shown in Table 7.6. The last column of Table 7.6 indicates
signiﬁcance of individual control factor on erosion rate. Smaller the p-value, better
is the signiﬁcance of the control factor on the erosion rate. From Table 7.6, it is

7 Erosive Wear Behaviour of Carbon Fiber/Silicon Nitride Polymer …

127

Table 7.6 ANOVA table for Si3Ni4 ﬁlled CFRP composite
DF

Adj SS

Seq SS

Source

Adj MS

F

A: Impact velocity

B: Impingement angle

C: Filler content

Error

3

3

3

6

258.879

258.879

86.293

19.466

11.007

33.329

19.466

11.007

33.329

6.489

3.669

5.555

P

0.003

0.397

0.606

15.53

1.17

0.66

Total
Where DF = Degree of freedom, Seq SS = Sequential sum of square, Adj SS = Adjusted sums of
square, Adj MS = Adjusted mean squares

322.681

15

observed that the p-value of impact velocity is smallest and hence it the most signiﬁ-
cant factor that controls the erosion rate of the composite. Similarly, the second most
inﬂuential factor is the impingement angle with p-value equivalent to 0.397 and the
ﬁller content is the third signiﬁcant factor with p-value of 0.606.

7.4 Conclusion

The carbon ﬁber/silicon nitride polymer composite were successfully fabricated
using VARTM technique with different weight percent of silicon nitride (0, 10, 20
and 30 wt%). Inﬂuence of various factors such as impact velocity, impingement angle
and ﬁller content on the erosion wear behavior of the composite is determined. It is
found that the impact velocity is most signiﬁcant factor and the ﬁller content is the
least signiﬁcant factor. However, increase in the ﬁller content increase the wear resis-
tance of the fabricated composite. The fabricated composites have shown the better
wear resistance and hence can be used in the development of automotive components
subjected to the impact of solid particles.

Abstract This segment encompasses the tribological changes usher by the addition
of various reinforcements to the aluminium metal matrix composite. Aluminium
matrix composites (AMCs) are being successfully tailored to achieve certain mechan-
ical properties for speciﬁc applications. AMCs can be called as advance engineering
materials with excellent properties. High hardness, high thermal conductivity, good
yielding strength, strength to weight ratio, low coefﬁcient of thermal expansion and
excellent wear resistance are some of the attractive properties which AMCs possess.
Applications like automobile, aerospace and several other industrial applications are
being attracted towards AMCs due to its qualities. Various reinforcements are avail-
able in the market which can be added to aluminium metal to further enhance its
properties. Particularly, in the ﬁeld of tribology, these reinforcements have proved
their worth in AMCs. To examine the effects of various reinforcements, a compre-
hensive study has been reported in the ﬁeld of tribology for AMCs.
Keywords Metal Matrix Composite · Tribology · Mechanical Properties ·
Aluminum · Automobile

8.1 Introduction

Two different material with different characteristics is brought together to obtain the
desired properties and termed as composite materials. This composite usually possess
special features which are generally better than the features of the individual section.
Composite materials have the fundamental advantage of being lightweight, low den-
sity, good quality and reduced weight of the completed part (Guo and Leu 2013).
Phenomenal attention leading to innovation in the application has been received by
composite materials in recent years. Metals are characterized by their physical, chem-
ical and mechanical properties (Helu et al. 2011; Nair et al. 1985). These properties
are inﬂuenced by the addition of reinforcements to it. Method of reinforcement, size
of reinforcement particle and the level of dispersion are some of the variables which
control the property of the output composite. In addition, the surface between the
base metal and the reinforced particle has a critical role to play (Lalit et al. 2018).
Moreover, environmental condition like dry or lubricated sliding condition provides
the basis for the choice of metal matrix and reinforcing materials. The metal matrix
composites (MMC) derived from the combination of the reinforcing element to the
base metal. This reinforcing element can be of metal, ceramic or organic nature.
MMCs are produced by the dispersion of reinforcement to the base metal. When
the base is selected as aluminium, then the metal matrix is called Aluminum matrix
composites (AMCs). Fly ash, silicon carbide (SiC), graphite, red mud, rice husk, cow
dung and some common agro-based ﬁller are reinforcing ﬁllers which are added to
the aluminium metal for the enhancement of its mechanical and tribological proper-
ties (Prasad and Asthana 2004). The demand for AMCs in the industries have been
increasing due to its attractive properties such as high strength, high thermal con-
ductivity, high speciﬁc modulus, good abrasion and wear resistance, and low density
etc. Particularly, in the ﬁeld of tribology, extensive research has been carried out for
aluminum metal. An experimental result has been reported by various researchers
which explained the potential of aluminium metal to be used as a competent tribo-
logical material (Kumar et al. 2011). In this regards, several techniques have been
evolved to fabricate the AMCs using various reinforcing material (Surappa 2003).
Being the case, the tribological behaviour of AMCs with the addition of various
reinforcing materials and their criticalities has been discussed in the coming section.

8.2 Reinforcement Particle in AMC

The reinforcement materials in AMCs may be oxides, carbides, borides and nitrides
of ceramics materials. The important conventional reinforcement materials used in
the aluminium matrix composites are carbon/graphite, silicon carbide, alumina, zir-
conia, zircon, titanium oxides, titanium carbide, molybdenum disulphate, boron car-
bide, tungsten carbide, cerium oxide, titanium nitride, ferric oxide, titanium diboride,
chromium oxide and carbon nanotubes. These reinforcement materials may be in the
form of particulate, whisker or ﬁbers. The physical, mechanical, tribological and
other desired properties of composite depend upon factors like fabrication tech-
niques and processing temperature, and reinforcement shape, size, chemical afﬁnity
and wettability with the matrix material. The selection of the reinforcement mostly
depends on the targeted application and compatibility with matrix materials. Boron
carbide (B4C) offers outstanding neutron absorptivity along with thermal and wears
resistance. The B4C reinforced composites contain the excellent neutron absorbing
capability and used as main neutron shield material in reactors (Dinaharan et al.
2016). The mechanical property of Mg–CNT composites is outstanding whereas

8 Effects of Reinforcement on Tribological Behaviour …

133

Mg–Al2O3 composite possesses greater wear resistance (Lu et al. 2013). The rein-
forcement particle dimension is an important factor and required to be considered in
composite fabrication. Normally, two scales viz. micrometer and nanometer of parti-
cles are incorporated in the composites. The coarse particles have larger grains during
recrystallization whereas ﬁne particle reduces grain size. The dimensions and volume
fraction of the reinforcements extensively affect the properties and microstructure of
surface composites.

The availability and high-cost ceramic reinforcing materials have a major con-
straint for the development of metal matrix composites particularly in developing
countries (Bhandakkar et al. 2014). Other challenges of metal matrix composites
are poor ductility and fracture toughness. The various researchers addressed and
resolved these problems by selecting the proper reinforcing materials. The rein-
forcing materials have a major role in determining the whole performance of the
composite materials. Mainly three strategies are used to improve the performance
of composites materials as well as to curtail the cost (Kok 2005). The ﬁrst strat-
egy involves ﬁnding alternative and cheaper reinforcements. The aim is to provide
a solution to the problems of high-cost conventional reinforcements. The agro and
industrial wastes ashes such as rice husk, coconut shell and sugar cane bagasse,
bamboo leaf, pine needle ash and ﬂy ash are some of the alternatives reinforcing
materials that have been used to resolve issues of high cost and limited availability
of conventional reinforcements (Loh et al. 2013; Ubolluk et al. 2010; Lancaster et al.
2013). The use of these alternative reinforcements showed noteworthy enhancement
in the properties of the composites as compared to the matrix material. The second
strategy is to optimize the properties of composites by using nanoscale particle size
of reinforcement materials instead of micron-scale particles (Madakson et al. 2012;
Anilkumar et al. 2011). The third strategy involves using two or more reinforcing
materials are called as hybrid composites. The aim of this approach is to reduce
the cost of composite coupled with property optimization (Gupta and Rakesh 2019;
Gupta et al. 2016; Gupta 2018). Some of the commonly used reinforcement materials
in the aluminum matrix are listed in Table 8.1.

8.3 Techniques of Manufacturing AMCs

Many ways have been evolved to fabricate the AMCs. Powder metallurgy and cast-
ing method are some of the frequently used techniques. Powder metallurgy produces
quality AMCs with higher cost as compared to AMCs produced by the casting
method. Thus only specially assigned components are produced by powder metal-
lurgy with speciﬁc characteristics. Widely applied techniques in the production of
AMMCs are squeeze casting, compo casting and stir casting.

134

M. K. Gupta et al.

Table 8.1 Reinforcement and their effects in aluminium matrix

Reinforcement Matrix

Effects

Al and Al–Mg

1. Formation of reactive layers MgO/Ti leads to covering of

particles

2. Signiﬁcant reduction in the formation of Al4C3

Al and Al–Mg

1. Good protection in whiskers but no protection in

Al and Al–Mg

1. The reaction between Al reacts SiC precede only after Al

Particulates

reacts with SiO2

2. The interfacial reaction depends on the alloy composition

and thickness of the SiO2 layer

1. Good reaction barrier but poor wettability

1. Modulus of elasticity increases
2. Degradation of ﬁber resulted in lower strength

1. Fibers are protected during processing and improved

mechanical properties

1. Promote wetting
2. Improvement in interfacial reaction between Al and C
3. Reaction troubles the coating

1. Formation of NiAl3 around the ﬁbers including wetting
1. Wetting and uniformity of ﬁbers get improved

TiO2

Al2O3

SiO2

Al2O3
SiO2

SiC

Titanium

Nickel

Copper

Al

Al

Al

Al

Al

Al

8.3.1 Squeeze Casting

It is one of the oldest and most frequently applied techniques in the industry. It is
primarily used for the production of automotive parts (Aghajanian et al. 1991). The
schematic diagram of squeeze casting has been shown in Fig. 8.1. This technique is
based on the melting of metal, matrix and alloys. Metals in melting state and at a
pressure above 100 MPa are allowed to take the space of pores and volume of preform
(Vencl et al. 2004). The preform must have a property of porosity enough to conﬁrm
the appropriate ﬁlling and it is made up of particles of reinforcement materials. A
strong bond between the matrix and reinforcement can be assured due to the following
characteristics of the preform. This method deals with the sudden change of phase of
metal from liquid to solid state which results in a composite structure of ﬁner grains
(Ruehle and Evans 1989). In addition, a product with a smoother surface is obtained.
Rapid pressing is applied in this technique which leads to increased productivity
and greater signiﬁcance towards practical approach (Rohatgi and Asthana 2001).
Disadvantages of this method are expensive tools and their maintenance as higher
pressure and temperature has to be sustained by the tool. Damaging of the tool can
lead to error in the dimension of the ﬁnal product.

8 Effects of Reinforcement on Tribological Behaviour …

135

Fig. 8.1 Schematic diagram of squeeze casting

8.3.2 Compocasting

Hypo and hyper-eutectic alloys which are in the semi-solid state can be reformed by
the semi-solid forming which comprises various methods and composting is one of
them. Semi-solids are those materials which act as pseudo-plastic ﬂuid when under-
goes shear forces (Rohatgi 1991). Thus the viscosity of the ﬂuid does not remain
constant but depends upon the intensity of the force. This change in viscosity allows
easy penetration and entanglement of particulates into the matrix material. Genera-
tion of fumes at the boundary of reinforcement and matrix is another advantage of
solving the problem of wettability. Compo casting can be carried out at lower tem-
perature and pressure. This makes it the best suited method with respect to energy
consumption and tool life. Shear rate and mixing rate ratio are varied which makes it
suitable for the distribution of reinforcement into the matrix (Mehrabian et al. 1974).
The main drawback is the non-processability of eutectic alloys by this method but
still, alloys with semi-solid states are considered to be processed by compo casting
for the most appropriate output.

8.3.3 Stir Casting

Schematic diagram of stir casting has been shown in Fig. 8.2. The reinforcement
melted above the liquidus temperature and along with stirring is performed to attain
appropriate distribution. It is the simplest among all the three and productive also.
Pure metals with matrices at eutectic state can be easily cast by this technique (Hosk-
ing et al. 1982; Ghosh and Ray 1988). Low-cost casting can be easily executed with

136

M. K. Gupta et al.

Fig. 8.2 Schematic diagram of stir casting setup

complex geometry such as thin walls products. The major drawback is the wettability
of the reinforced particle in the melt of matrix.

8.4 Tribology of AMCs

Study of friction and wear is termed as tribology study. Wear is a phenomenon in
which the material removes gradually from the surface of a body. It occurs due to
the continuous rubbing of materials in the contact surface of two bodies. For the
wear to take place, plastic deformation at a localized place and microcracks are
two major reasons. Physical, chemical and mechanical are other phenomena that
lead to wear. The mechanism of wear depends upon adhesion, corrosion, oxidation,
fatigue, fretting and abrasion. These mechanisms are partially or fully in relation
to one another. Wear cannot be completely suppressed but can be reduced to some
extent by the application of lubrication. Lubrication forms a smooth layer between
the mating bodies and helps in smooth operation with a reduction in wear. Basically,

8 Effects of Reinforcement on Tribological Behaviour …

137

wear in AMCs occur due to two main reasons (Wilson and Alpas 1997). First one
is the wear due to oxidation and the second one is wear of metallic surface. Wear
due to oxidation is considered as mild wear while the severity of metallic wear
appears to be higher. The severe wear initiates the seizure which is called seizure
point. Several studies have been reported in relevance to the analysis of effects of
load, sliding velocity and composition on the seizure point. These variables affect
the seizure point until its initiation but as the execution of seizure point starts, the
effects of the variables also start diminishing. Seizure point has harmful effects on the
body as the surface deteriorates with the occurrence of seizure. Many particulates are
being added to aluminium as being discussed earlier. Silicon is most commonly used
particulate in the aluminium base metal. Wear properties of aluminium generally
increase with the addition of Silicon. Literature available in tribology of AMCs is
in support of the reinforcement of metal particulates to the aluminium. An alloy of
Al–Cu has been investigated for the wear loss. It was found that addition of 30%
Al2O3 to Al–Cu alloy leads to reduction in wear rate from 2 × 10−3 to 0.5 × 10−3
mm3/min under the dry test condition, withstanding 10 N loads at 3.6 m/s of sliding
speed (Deuis et al. 1997). Similarly, the wear rate reduces signiﬁcantly while using
SiC as reinforcement. It was reported that wear rate down to 4 × 10−12 to 12 ×
10−3 mm3/min on the addition of 10% SiC to the Al–Cu alloy in the similar dry
condition at 1 m/s sliding speed with a sliding distance of 500 m (Casati and Vedani
2014). This reduction in wear rate varied according to the material properties. In
case of Al356 aluminium alloy, the addition of 5% SiC brings the wear rate down
to 12 × 10−3 mm3/min from 18 × 10−3 mm3/min under the 5 N load at 0.4 m/s
of sliding speed and 1000 m of sliding distance (Yalcin and Akbulut 2006). As the
percentage of particle reinforcement increase the wear strength of the metal matrix
composite increases. The total wear loss carried on pin-on-disc has been found for
the AlMgSi metal to be 35 mg which was reduced to 25 mg and 20 mg at 3% and
5% of SiC respectively at sliding speed of 2.64 m/s and sliding distance of 3200 m
a distinct grade of aluminium known as Al6061 has been investigated for the wear
loss. Load conditions were set at 150 N with the sliding speed of 2000 rpm (Gürler
1999). It was found that total wear loss reduced from 3 mg to 1.2 mg with the
incorporation of 30% SiC to the Al6061 (Reihani 2006). It has been shown that wear
loss increases as the load increases. The properties of reinforcement also affect the
tribological properties of the fabricated composite. Figure 8.3 revealed wear rate
of hybrid composite is superior to the B4C and TiC mono reinforced composites.
Furthermore, B4C reinforced composite exhibited less wear. Figure 8.4 showed that
coefﬁcient of friction of B4C reinforced composite is least as compared to other
composite and matrix material as a result this composite exhibited less wear rate.

Composite of Al–Cu with 13% addition of SiC has been investigated at 1 m/s of
sliding speed with the sliding distance of 1000 m. The wear loss was found to be
3 mg, 4 mg and 5 mg under the load of 30 N, 50 N and 70 N respectively (Lim et al.
1999). It was also reported that oxidation wear is independent of load, percentage
of reinforcement and particle size. The tribological properties of composites depend
upon the surface roughness of testing disc. The effect of surface roughness of GCr15

138

M. K. Gupta et al.

Fig. 8.3 Wear properties of composites (Yuvaraj et al. 2017)

Fig. 8.4 Coefﬁcent of friction of composites (Yuvaraj et al. 2017)

8 Effects of Reinforcement on Tribological Behaviour …

139

Fig. 8.5 Wear rate of
TiB2/Al composite against
GCr15 bearing steel as a
function of sliding speed and
surface roughness under dry
sliding condition (Tian et al.
2014)

steel disc (Ra 0.606, 0.372, 0.023, 0.005 μm) on TiB2/2024Al composites investi-
gated shows that Ra 0.023 μm disc exhibited lowest friction coefﬁcient and wear
rate as shown in Fig. 8.5.

A comparative study for the AMC, grey cast iron and semi-metallic material of
brake shoe lining has also been reported (Natarajan et al. 2006). It was reported that
MMCs are more wear resistant as compared to grey cast iron and metallic brake shoe
lining under similar working condition.

8.5 Mechanical Properties of AMCs

Various studies are also available related to the mechanical properties of the alu-
minium based metal matrix. One of the work was carried out to compare the mechan-
ical properties of the Al6061 and Al7075 with the reinforcement of SiC and Al2O3
respectively (Kumar et al. 2010). The composite was prepared with the help of
stir casting. It was observed that hardness increased from 97 VHN and 109 VHN
for Al6061 and Al7075 respectively. Improvement in the tensile strength was also
reported in their studies which were observed to be 68% and 24% for Al6061 and
Al7075 respectively. Concluding remarks show that reinforcement of SiC brings bet-
ter mechanical and tribological properties than Al2O3. Mechanism of wettability is
also the main concern during the processing of aluminium metal matrix. Factors like
free silicon kinetics of SiC and wetting angle have an enormous effect on the wet-
tability (Jones and Atkinson 1993). However, it should be noted that incorporation
time is the most important factor for the wetting reaction to take place. Particulate
to be wetted fully need more time but the incorporation of magnesium and titanium
reduces the wetting time of particulate (Kobashi and Choh 1993). Discussion on the
interface bonding of the particulate and the aluminium matrix would be valuable.
Silicon takes time to melt with the aluminium thus processing time is generally kept

140

M. K. Gupta et al.

large. This leads to an increase in the concentration of silicon at the interface thus
prevent the formation of Al4C3 at the interface which further makes the composite
uniform (Sozhamannan and Prabu 2009). TiB2 is commonly known reinforcement
used in the aluminum metal matrix. Incorporation of 12% TiB2 in Al6061 leads to an
increase in tensile, hardness and young modulus but decreases the ductility (Christy
et al. 2010). If we look at the stress-strain behaviour of aluminium metal matrix
composite, silicon carbide with 40% volume in Al6061 shows higher modulus of
elasticity but lower ductility. The type of reinforcement i.e. whisker, nodule partic-
ulate or discontinuous, and the matrix used also has a greater role in the properties
of the composite (McDanels 1985).

On the other hand, using the atmosphere of argon during the processing of alu-
minium metal matrix affects the ﬂuidity due to the presence of silicon. Argon pre-
vents the formation of oxides ﬁlm at the surface and wetting has no role to play in
the presence of argon. Moreover, the presence of magnesium acts as a catalyst which
enhances the phenomena of wetting (Moraes et al. 2006). Percentage of particulate
has a major role in the aluminium metal matrix composite. Increase in the percentage
of TiB2 in Al6061 leads to an increase in yield and ultimate stress. Generally, the
percentage of TiB2 is kept below 15%. The increase in yield and ultimate stress is
found to be about 53% and 44% respectively (Sreenivasan et al. 2011; Lü et al. 2001;
RC and Ramakrishnan 1996). In case of formation of α-Al2O3 at the surface of the
metal matrix, particulates like TiO2 and B2O3 gets segregated at the grain boundaries
which lead to uniformity of the particulate at in the metal matrix (Zhu et al. 2007).
Several studies have also been reported regarding the machinability of the aluminum
metal matrix. Various parameters like speed, feed, depth of cut, angle of cut etc. have
been optimized in the work carried out earlier. Effect of tool material, the lubricant
used and the reinforcement material on the aluminium metal matrix are also been
discussed. Machining of Al–SiC requires low feed and high speed for good surface
ﬁnish (Manna and Bhattacharayya 2005). The similar parameter is required for the
machining of A356–SiC composite to obtain better surface ﬁnish (Muthukrishnan
et al. 2008) but the case of Al2024 reinforced with Al2O3 is different as the surface
gets rough as the speed is increased. Particle size and their percentage have a sig-
niﬁcant role to play. Smaller particle size increases the surface roughness and vice
versa (Kök 2011).

8.6 Applications of AMCs

Engineering industries require lightweight, strong and durable material. High corro-
sion resistance and thermal resistance would be the icing on the cake. Aluminium is
lighter in weight as compared to conventional material like cast iron and steel. Appli-
cations of AMMCs in industries would lead to a reduction in mass, higher efﬁciency
which further resulted in low fuel requirement and low vehicle emission. AMCs are
better tribological material which extends their applications in a ﬁeld where higher
wear takes place. Primarily, AMCs are treated as an avionics material but later made

8 Effects of Reinforcement on Tribological Behaviour …

141

its place in the ﬁeld of automotive also. A product like engine blocks, pistons, brakes,
and the cylinder is now being developed by AMCs. Numerous reports have been pre-
sented for the further possible applications of AMCs. A diesel engine was developed
by Toyota motor in 1985 by squeeze casting method with the incorporation of Al2O3
into the Al metal matrix. Later on, Honda motor has employed a similar technique
in its manufacturing system since 1990 (Surappa 2003). Applications of AMCs can
also be seen in power plant components like heat exchanger, cooling transmission
etc. (Vencl et al. 2004). Reinforcing the Al with solid lubricants shows anti-galling
and anti-seizing properties which have extensive application in high-temperature
tribosystems.

8.7 Conclusion

The sets of microscopic interaction are the basic causes of friction and wear. The
tribological ﬁeld requires those materials which require high wear resistant along
with optimum strength. Aluminium is a lightweight, strong, durable material but
lack in tribological properties. Various reinforcements can be added to aluminium
to enhance its wear and resistance. Percentage, type, and size of aluminium are
the crucial variables that can enrich the tribological behaviour of aluminium metal.
Applied load, sliding velocity and environment condition are the deciding factor for
the tribological behaviour of aluminium metal.
Abstract The traditional greases are composed of mineral or synthetic oil, thick-
ening agent, additives and ﬁllers. Thickeners having ﬁbrous matrix are generally
made of fatty acid soaps (calcium, lithium, aluminum, sodium) and non-soaps (clay,
PTFE, polyurea, silica). The tribological performance of the grease is depends upon
the viscosity of the base oil, type and its concentration of thickening agent. A variety
of additives and ﬁllers were added to the grease to obtain the desired properties of
the grease. Lubricating greases are widely used in numerous automotive applica-
tions such as gears, cams, ball and roller bearings. A signiﬁcant amount of power is
lost due to the friction (i.e. friction in brakes, engine, tires, and transmission) in the
automotive components. By reducing the frictional losses, the signiﬁcant amount of
power can be saved and this will improve the efﬁciency of the parts. The lubrication
by the grease help in separation of the contacting surfaces to achieve low friction,
wear, and long life. In the last decades, the researchers have contributed for enhanc-
ing the tribological performance of the grease with different ﬁllers. In recent time
the nano-additives is gaining importance for improving the tribological performance
of the mating surface. Further, due to environmental concern, bio-based greases
are explored in the formulation of the lubricating grease. This chapter enumerates
the recent developments in the formulation of grease and their important aspect for
improvising the tribological performance of automotive components.
Keywords Grease · Fibrous Matrix · Nano additives · Bio-based Grease
Friction is a resistance which opposes the relative motion of interacting surfaces.
Many tribological situations demand less friction and wear such as ball bearing,
gears etc. High friction often leads to adverse impact on efﬁciency, wear rate, reli-
ability and component life. It is great challenge for a human being to minimize
friction in moving components. On average 33% energy of the fuel is utilized to
overcome friction in the various parts (i.e. gearbox, engine, clutches, tries etc.) of
the passenger cars and heavy-duty vehicles (Holmberg et al. 2012, 2014). This is
an enormous amount of energy lost due to frictional losses. The global demand for
energy consumption is increasing tremendously due to the increase in automobile
and industrial activities. The share of energy used by various transportation vehicles
is summarized in Table 9.1. The proper lubrication in the interacting surfaces can
minimize the frictional losses. Improved efﬁciency and operation age of machinery
is obtained by reducing the frictional losses. A noticeable amount of energy can be
saved with best lubrication practices which reduce the frictional losses.

9.1.2 Overview of Lubricants

Lubricants are those having inherent lubricious property as well as have the capability
to reduce friction between the rubbing pairs and prevent the surfaces against wear.
Lubricants are generally a mixture of base stock and additives. Additives are added
to enhance the performance of the base stock. The classiﬁcation of the lubricants is
generally based on their physical appearance and, their source of origin, as shown
in Fig. 9.1. As per physical appearance, lubricants are classiﬁed as solid, semi-
solid, and liquid lubricants. Sometimes gas is also used as a lubricant. Based on the
source of origin, lubricants are classiﬁed as non-biological and biological derivates.
Parafﬁnic, naphthenic, and aromatic oils are non-biological lubricants. Synthetic oils

Table 9.1 Global energy
consumption in automobile
sector by transportation
vehicles (Holmberg et al.
2014)

Transportation sector

Consumption of energy (%)

Light duty vehicles

Trucks

Buses

Aviation

Marine

Rail

Others

52

17

4

10

10

3

3

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

149

Lubricant

Physical 
appearance

Base oil 
resource

Liquid

Semi-solid

Solid

Mineral oil

Synthetic oil

Vegetable
oil

Example

Petroleum,
vegetable
oil

Grease

MoS2,
graphite

Paraffinic,
naphthenic,
aromatic

Synthetic esters, 
silicons,
polyalphaolefine

Plant seed 
oils

Fig. 9.1 Classiﬁcation of lubricants

are chemically modiﬁed version of mineral oils, which is artiﬁcially developed in the
laboratory. Synthetic esters, silicones and polyalphaoleﬁns are examples of synthetic
oils. Synthetic oils have superior performance at elevated temperature as compared
to mineral oils. While oil extracted from plants seeds are coming under the category
of biological lubricants.

9.2 Grease

The term ‘grease’ is a Latin language originated word ‘crassus’ which means fat.
Grease is a semi-solid in physical appearance and the semiﬂuid product obtained
by the dispersion of thickening agent in a liquid lubricant. The other ingredients
are added to impart unique properties (Melville 1984). A grease has three basic
ingredients: base stock, thickening agent and additives. A typical grease consists of
80–90% base oil, 5–20% thickening agent, and 0–5% additives, as shown in Fig. 9.2.
The base oil used in the formulation of the grease may be synthetic, mineral or
vegetable oil while the thickening agent may be soap or non-soap. The fundamental
requirement of the lubricating grease is to achieve the desired level of wear, friction,
and life expectancy of the machinery. The consumption of grease at a worldwide
scale is estimated about 1296 Kiloton while 691 Kiloton grease used in industrial
applications till 2017 (Panchal et al. 2017). Approximately 90% of grease of global
demand is manufactured with petroleum oils. Remaining 9 and 1% share of global
demand is manufactured with synthetic esters and vegetable oils, respectively.

Grease protects the surfaces against wear and corrosion. The solid additives dis-
persed in the lubricating oil tends to settle down with time while in the grease solid
additives remain fully dispersed. Textiles, pharmaceutical and food industry need to
maintain hygiene and purity in the development of the product. Lubricating oil is

150

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

Fig. 9.2 Grease composition

proneness to splash or leak, which is not desirable in these industries. This prob-
lem is well controlled with the lubricating grease. The viscoelastic behavior of the
lubricating grease imparts a consistency which restricts to leak out easily. Bearing
lubricated with lubricating oil needs seal to prevent dirt, contamination particles and
leakage. Grease acts as an inherent seal against dirt and foreign particles. Grease is
more viscous, so it is more water-resistive as compared to lubricating oil. The viscos-
ity of lubricating oil is affected with rise in temperature while grease has apparent
viscosity, which is less inﬂuenced by temperature. Along with these advantages,
lubricating grease has some demerits as compared to lubricating oil. Grease has very
poor thermal conductivity and high oxidative characteristics.

9.3 Grease Composition

9.3.1 Base Oil

The base oil is the key ingredient of lubricants/greases. Further, the base oil is clas-
siﬁed into mineral, synthetic and vegetable oils. In addition to this, mineral oil is
categorized into parafﬁnic, naphthenic and aromatic oils.

Mineral oil Mineral oils are derived through the fractional distillation process of
crude oil. Mineral oil is widely used in the formulation of commercially available
engine oils, industrial lubricants, greases, transmission oil etc. Low cost, available in
a wide assortment of viscosities and ample availability of mineral oil, makes it most
preferable base stock. Available mineral oil consists of basic three forms:

Parafﬁnic Parafﬁn oil comprises a blend of alkenes (hydrocarbon). It has straight
or branched hydrocarbon chain structures. Parafﬁn oil exhibited higher viscosity
index, oxidation stability, and pour point as compared with naphthenic oils. As the
degree of branching of hydrocarbon increases in the parafﬁn oil, the decay observed

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

151

in the melting point and viscosity index of the oil. Figure 9.3 shows the structure of
different mineral oils.

Naphthenic Naphthenic oils have a cyclic structure; generally, it contains six car-
bon rings with no unsaturation. This oil has good solubility property, low viscosity
index, low temperature ﬂowability properties. This oil displays poor oxidation sta-
bility and viscosity-temperature characteristic at elevated temperature applications.
Naphthenic oils have better compatibility with polar additives. The solubility of
metallic soap is better in naphthenic oil as compared to parafﬁnic oil. The mechani-
cal stability of the grease developed with metallic soap and naphthenic oil is higher as

Fig. 9.3 Structure of
different mineral oils
a straight chain parafﬁn
b branched chain parafﬁn
c Naphthenic and
d Aromatic

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

152

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

compared with the grease developed with parafﬁn oil and metallic soap. Therefore,
naphthenic oil has gained more preference as a base oil for grease formulation. Fur-
thermore, this oil is more preferable in the production of metal working applications,
turbine oils, and hydraulic oils.

Aromatic Aromatic oils have a cyclic structure of six carbon atoms with alternating
single and double bonds. It has a high density, oxidation resistance, good thermal
stability. Aromatic oils display better thermal stability to a certain degree than either
parafﬁn or naphthenic oil. Absence of wax in the base stock imparts it good low-
temperature ﬂuidity and low melting point. Aromatic oil has high polarity causes a
strong afﬁnity to water to dissolve it.

Synthetic oil. Synthetic oils are artiﬁcially developed in the laboratories to
enhance the desired properties of the mineral oils. Polyphenyl ethers, polyal-
phaoleﬁns (POA), perﬂuoropolyalkylether (PFPE), polyalkylene glycols, synthetic
hydrocarbon oils, polysiloxanes, synthetic esters, silicones etc. are the examples of
the synthetic oils. Synthetic oil-based greases are formulated where mineral oil-based
greases are unable to fulﬁl the service requirements. Generally, synthetic base oils
are not companionable with conventional thickening agents. Clay, polyurea, fumed
silica, Teﬂon, are commonly preferable thickening agents in the formulation of syn-
thetic grease.

Vegetable oil Vegetable oils are extracted from plants seeds, which is renewable
and biodegradable. Those vegetable oils are consumed by human beings are catego-
rized into edible vegetable oil. Sunﬂower, peanut, soybean, olive, rapeseed, coconut,
palm are the most common examples of edible oils. On the other hand, which is not
consumed by human beings are called non-edible vegetable oils. Mahua, Karanja,
cottonseed, sesame, linseed, neem, castor are the most common examples of non-
edible oils. In the past decades, edible and non-edible vegetable oils gained popularity
as biofuels, which shows signiﬁcant potential as an alternative for fuels (Sumathi et al.
2008). Non-edible oils are used in agrochemicals, varnishes, soaps, and paints etc.
Vegetable oils contain almost all desired properties for lubrication applications, i.e.
excellent lubricity, good metal adherence, high ﬂash point, non-toxic, higher load
bearing capacity, higher shear stability, higher viscosity index, low volatility, low
evaporative losses, and environmentally friendly relative to the conventional mineral
oil (Fox and Stachowiak 2007; Reeves et al. 2017). Therefore, vegetable oils are
gaining more attention as lubricating base stock for lubrication engineers. In addi-
tion to vegetable oils have lower oxidation stability and pour point as compared with
conventional mineral oils. These issues of conventional vegetable oils are rectiﬁed
with chemical modiﬁcation in the structure of fatty acids (Kashyap and Harsha 2016;
Gupta et al. 2018).

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

153

9.3.2 Thickener

The thickener is also termed as ‘soap’ which is a reaction product of fatty acid and a
strong base (alkali). Water is obtained as a by-product in the neutralization process
of fatty acid and base (Honary and Erwin 2011).

FATTY ACID + BASE                    SOAP + WATER 

For example- 

CH3-(CH2)5-CHOH-(CH2)10-COOH + LiOH            CH3-(CH2)5-CHOH-(CH2)10-COOLi + H2O

12-hydroxy stearic acid           

lithium 12-hydroxy stearate            water

Lithium 
hydroxide

Lithium soap 

Calcium 
hydroxide

Calcium soap 

CH3-(CH2)5-CHOH-(CH2)10-COOH + Ca(OH)2       [CH3-(CH2)5-CHOH-(CH2)10-COO]2Ca + H2O 

12-hydroxy stearic acid           

Calcium di (12-hydroxy stearate)

water

CH3-(CH2)16-COOH + Al(OH)3

[CH3-(CH2)16-COO]3Al + H2O 

Stearic acid           

Aluminum tristearate       water

Aluminum 
hydroxide

Aluminum soap 

The product of the neutralization process, ‘soap’ is mixed with a base oil to obtain
grease. The length of thickener ﬁbers varies in the range between 1 and 100 microns
and length to diameter ratio varies from about 10 to 100 (Lugt 2009). The thickener
imparts a unique property to the lubricating oil. The lubricating oil is reinforced by the
thickening agent, which formed a three-dimensional network. Thickening capacity
of the grease is directly proportional to the chain length of the hydroxystearate
soap (Mang and Dresel 2007). The matrix of the soap behaves as a reservoir of
the lubricating oil, release the lubricating oil at the contact of friction surfaces. An
enormous variety of thickeners are used for grease lubrication. Figure 9.4 shows the
classiﬁcation of thickeners. Thickeners are broadly classiﬁed into two groups (a)
soap and (b) non-soap. Soaps are generally metallic soap (ﬁbrous structure) which
is further classiﬁed into four groups (a) alkali metals (b) alkaline-earth metals (c)
aluminum metal and (d) heavy metals. Each category of soap is further subdivided
into straight and complex soap. Chloride, carbonate, benzoate, metallic acetate is a

154

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

Straight

Complex

Straight

Complex

Straight

Complex

Straight

Complex

Alkali metal 
(Na and Li)

Alkaline-earth metal 
(Ca & Ba)

Aluminum metal

Heavy metal 
(Pb & Zn)

Inorganic
(Clay & Silica)

Organic
(Polyurea & PTFE)

Grease
thickener

Soap

Non soap

Fig. 9.4 Classiﬁcation of thickeners

common type of complex agents. The complex agent is added in grease to improve
its heat resistance property or, we can say to improve the dropping point of the
grease. Straight soaps are excluded from complexing agents. The carboxylic acid
containing 18 carbon atoms exhibited maximum thickening impression (Mang and
Dresel 2007).

Non-soaps are broadly classiﬁed as inorganic and organic soaps. Lithium grease
preferably used globally. The estimated amount of different grease formulate with
simple and complex soap worldwide is given in Table 9.2.

9.3.3 Additives

Additives are added in the lubricating grease to improve its desired properties and
to minimize its undesired features. Generally, antioxidants, antiseizure, antifriction,
antiwear, extreme pressure, anticorrosive, and tackiness additives are used in the
grease to enhance its performance. Some additives modify the grease structure
(Adhvaryu et al. 2005), or some additives ameliorate the base oil characteristics.

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

155

Table 9.2 Share of different grease formulated with straight and simple soap at worldwide scale
(Honary and Erwin 2011)

Percentage (%)

Type of soap

Lithium complex grease

Conventional lithium grease

Calcium soap grease

Aluminum soap grease

Polyurea grease

Organophilic clay thickeners

Sodium and other metallic soap grease

Other non-soap grease

40

29

11

7

5

4

2

2

Table 9.3 Commonly used additives in commercially available greases

Additives

Antioxidants

Examples

Diphenylamine, paraoxydiphenylamine, butyl-4-methyl-phenol,
zinc dithiophosphate, phenolic thioesters, diaryldisulﬁdes etc

Antiseizure

Graphite, molybdenum disulﬁde, zinc dialkyl dithiophosphate

Antifriction and antiwear

zinc dialkyl dithiophosphate, Lead napthanate

Anticorrosion

Viscous

Thickening

Tackiﬁers

zinc dialkyl dithiophosphate, triethanolamine Amines, dextramin,
lanolin, amides, sulfonates, disodium sebacate etc

Polyisobutylene, vinypol, atapol, latex etc

Atapol, Polybutene, low-pressure high-density polyethylene

Polyisobutylene, methacrylates, ethylene-propylene copolymer,
oleﬁn coplymer

The prime function of the antioxidants additives to protect the grease against oxida-
tion and elongate service life at elevated temperature situations. Antiseizure additives
prevent the tribo-pairs against the high friction sticking under high load condition.
The primary purpose of antifriction and antiwear additives are to reduce friction
and protect the surface against wear. Tackiﬁers additives are added to the grease to
enhance its adhesion and cohesion with the mating surface. Commonly used additives
in commercially available greases are tabulated in Table 9.3.

9.4 General Method for Grease Synthesis

The basic idea in development of the lubricating grease is by the dispersion of
readymade soap into the base oil at high temperature with continuous stirring. The
remaining base oil is added to the dispersion to control the consistency of the grease.
Further, additives are added in the cooling phase of the grease. For the synthesis

156

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

of in situ soap-based grease, a measured amount of the fatty acid is added to the
pre-heated base oil followed by the addition of a measured amount of alkali with
continuous stirring. The saponiﬁcation reaction takes place which allows dispersion
of the soap in the base oil. The addition of remaining base oil and additive is done
during the cooling phase of the grease. In the ﬁnal stage, the grease is milled for the
homogenization of the dispersion.

The lithium 12-hydroxy stearate is the most commonly used thickening agent in
the synthesis of lubricating grease. Various researchers were adopted lithium soap
(Sahoo and Biswas 2014; Rawat et al. 2018, 2019; Wang et al. 2008; Ji et al. 2011),
titanium complex (Chen 2010; Shen et al. 2016), calcium soap (Kamel et al. 2016;
Dai et al. 2017), bentonite clay (Chen et al. 2014), PTFE (Ge et al. 2015a, b) and
different mineral or synthetic oils adopted as a base oil for the synthesis of lubricating
grease. A great diversity showed in the synthesis procedure of lubricating grease. The
cooking temperature of the grease varies according to the type of thickener used and
play an important role in the property of the grease.

Incorporation of additives in the grease is an important issue. Some additives
are sensitive to heat and, they lose their effectiveness at a cooking temperature of
the grease. Therefore, in normal practice, the addition of additive is done during
the cooling phase of the grease, when the temperature is less than 85 °C. Some
additives are unaffected with heat so it can be incorporated in the grease at any time.
In industry, the greases are manufactured in large grease kettle in batch or continuous
grease plants. Rawat et al. (2018) have developed the parafﬁn grease blended with
SiO2 nanoparticles by in situ dispersion method. SiO2 nanoparticles were dispersed
in the base oil at the very beginning for homogenous dispersion of the nanoparticles.
Further 12-hydroxy stearic acid was added in the base oil with continuous stirring and
temperature was maintained at 90 °C. The aqueous solution of the lithium hydroxide
monohydrate added in the solution in a dropwise manner. Saponiﬁcation reaction took
place and temperature was raised up to 180 °C to dehydrate the colloidal solution
for 2 h. Further, leave the grease to cool down at room temperature for the next 24 h.

9.5 Test Methods

Grease testing is broadly classiﬁed into the following two categories:
• Physical property testing
• Tribological performance testing.

9.5.1 Physical Property Testing

National Lubricating Grease Institute (NLGI) of the United States is the pioneer
institute in the ﬁeld of grease. NLGI with the association of American Society of

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

157

Testing Materials (ASTM) develops the technical standards for the grease. Numerous
ASTM standards are available to evaluate the various common physical property of
grease, i.e. dropping point, cone penetration, water washout, grease mobility test,
evaporation loss, oxidation stability, leakage tendency etc. and these are tabulated in
Table 9.4.

Dropping point Dropping point test is used to determine the melting point of
the grease as per ASTM D566 (ASTM D566-16 2016). It is a critical property to
evaluate the performance of the grease. When the grease is heated, it softens and
turns its phase from semi-solid to liquid. This test indicates the temperature at which
thickener is able no more to hold the base oil in its matrix. This test method is limited
to bath temperature up to 288 °C. Figure 9.5 shows the schematic diagram of drop
point apparatus. Furthermore, ASTM D2265 (2017) is used for the high-temperature
range. Dropping point is also dependent on the type of thickener used in the synthesis
of the grease. Dropping point and working temperature of some types of greases are
tabulated in Table 9.5.

Cone penetration The cone penetration test is used to determine the consistency
of the lubricating grease as per ASTM D217 (ASTM D217-02 2003). Figure 9.6
shows the schematic diagram of the cone penetrometer. The concentration of the
thickening agent governs the consistency of grease. The importance of this test is to
ﬁnd the NLGI grade of the grease. NLGI classiﬁed grease based on the consistency
as measured by worked penetration. This test is performed at room temperature
(25 °C). The worked and unworked penetration is measured when speciﬁed weight
and dimension cone dropped freely in the grease cup ﬁlled with grease for 5 s. The
unworked penetration test is carried out without disturbing the grease structure. In
a worked penetration test, before the measurement of penetration depth of the cone,
the grease sample was subjected to 60 double strokes in grease worker and, the
remaining procedure is the same as unworked penetration. The digital image of the
one-quarter scale grease worker is shown in Fig. 9.7.

The various grades of grease designated by NLGI are tabulated in Table 9.6. The
temperature shows an adverse effect on the consistency of the grease. As temperature
increases, the penetration depth of the grease also increases. The grease becomes
softer when it is heated. At dropping point grease converts its phase from semi-
solid to liquid. At this temperature, the structure of the grease has been destroyed.
Dropping point is the critical temperature at which grease loses its consistency. A
grease does not recover its same consistency when it is heated above its drop point
and followed by cooling.

Water washout Water wash out test is used to evaluate the resistance capability of
lubricating grease against water to wash out under prescribed conditions as per ASTM
D1264 (ASTM 1264 2017). The ball bearing (D2PP version, 6204) was packed with
grease and encountered with a jet of water under standard conditions. The amount
of grease washout through water indicates the resistance of grease against washout.
After completion of the test, the shields and bearing were dried at 77 °C for 15 h and
then weighed to estimate the loss of grease. If the base oil of the grease is highly
volatile, then some weight loss may be possible during drying. Therefore, this test
is not preferred for some greases which comprise highly volatile constituents. Any

Evaporation loss of lubricating greases
and oils

To determine the evaporation loss of
lubricating grease

158

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

Table 9.4 List of physical characterization of lubricating grease

Designation ASTM Standard

Purpose

D 217

Cone penetration of lubricating grease

D 566

Dropping point of lubricating grease

To determine the consistency of the
lubricating grease

To determine the dropping point of
lubricating grease

To determine resistance capacity of
lubricating grease to oxidation when
stored statically in an oxygen
atmosphere

To measurement of apparent viscosity
of lubricating grease in the
temperature range from −54 to 38 °C
To evaluate the leakage tendency of
wheel bearing greases

To evaluate the resistance capacity of a
lubricating grease to washout by water
from a bearing

To determine the consistency of the
lubricating grease

To determine the tendency of a
lubricating grease to separate oil
during storage in both normally ﬁlled
and partially ﬁlled containers

To determine the corrosion preventive
properties of lubricating grease under
wet conditions

To determine the change in
consistency of lubricated grease when
worked in a roll stability test apparatus

To determine the dropping point of
lubricating grease up to temperature
400 °C

To determine the evaporation loss of
lubricating grease up to temperature
316 °C

Oxidation stability of lubricating
grease by the oxygen pressure vessel
method

Measuring apparent viscosity of
lubricating greases

Leakage tendencies of automotive
wheel bearing greases

Determining the water washout
characteristics of lubricating greases

Cone penetration of lubricating grease
using one-quarter and one-half scale
cone equipment

Oil separation from lubricating grease
during storage

D 1743

Determining corrosion preventive
properties of lubricating greases

D 1831

Roll stability of lubricating grease

Dropping point of lubricating grease
over wide range temperature range

Evaporation loss of lubricating greases
over wide- temperature range

D 942

D 972

D 1092

D 1263

D 1264

D 1403

D 1742

D 2265

D 2595

D 4048

D 4289

Detection of copper corrosion from
lubricating grease

To determine the corrosiveness to
copper of lubricating grease

Elastomer compatibility of lubricating
greases and ﬂuids

To determine the compatibility of
lubricating greases and ﬂuids with
standard elastomer sheets

(continued)

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

159

Table 9.4 (continued)

Designation ASTM Standard

Purpose

D 4290

D 5969

D 6138

D 6184

Determining the leakage tendencies of
automotive wheel bearing grease
under accelerated conditions

To evaluate the leakage tendency of
wheel bearing greases

Corrosion-preventive properties of
lubricating greases in presence of
dilute synthetic sea water
environments

To determine the corrosion-preventive
properties of lubricating grease
exposed under dilute synthetic sea
water environment

Determination of corrosion-preventive
properties of lubricating greases under
dynamic wet conditions (Emcor test)

To determine the corrosion preventive
properties of greases under dynamic
wet conditions

Oil separation from lubricating grease
(Conical sieve method)

To determine the tendency of
lubricating grease to separate oil at an
elevated temperature

Fig. 9.5 Schematic diagram for drop point apparatus

loss due to leakage occurred during drying of the grease should not be added in the
account of grease loss.

Leakage tendency This test is performed to estimate the leakage of base oil,
grease or both from the wheel bearing grease when it is tested as per ASTM D1263
(ASTM 1263 2017). Separation of oil from grease or grease from the bulk grease or
overﬂow of grease may be caused by bearing rotation and high temperature. After
completion of the test, apparatus permitted to cool down, weigh the hub cap and
leakage collector to estimate the leakage loss.

Evaporation loss This test is performed to determine the evaporation loss of the
base oil and grease when grease is encountered with elevated temperature. As per

160

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

Table 9.5 Effect of thickener
on the dropping point of the
grease (Melville 1984)

Thickener

Working limit (°C)

Dropping point
(°C)

Sodium soap

Lithium soap

Lithium complex
soap

Hydrated calcium
soap

Anhydrous
calcium soap

Aluminium soap

Aluminium
complex soap

Barium soap

PTFE

163–177

177–204

250–320

70–104

130–140

100–120

200–260

120–150

230–300

121

135

177

60

100

79

150

100

177

Fig. 9.6 Schematic diagram for cone penetration apparatus

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

161

Fig. 9.7 The digital image
of one-quarter scale grease
worker

Table 9.6 NLGI
classiﬁcation of grease
(ASTM D217-02 2003)

NLGI grade Work penetration depth after
60 strokes at 25 °C (0.1 mm)

Appearance

000

00

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

445–475

400–430

355–385

310–340

265–295

220–250

175–205

130–160

85–115

Fluid

Semi-ﬂuid

Very soft

Soft

Normal

Firm

Very ﬁrm

Hard

Very hard

ASTM D972 (ASTM D972-16 2017), this test is carried out in the temperature range
between 100 to 150 °C. Further, ASTM D2595 is preferred for the higher temperature
range between 93 to 316 °C. The performance of the grease is affected by the loss
of volatile components in the base oil and grease.

The test parameters of above-mentioned physical properties in accordance with

ASTM standards are summarized in Table 9.7.

9.5.2 Tribological Performance Testing

The friction and wear play an important role in any tribological situation. The lubri-
cating grease is used for reducing the wear and for improving the asperity to asperity
separation capability. The tribological testing is performed to evaluate the antiwear,
antifriction, and load carrying capacity properties of the grease. Most commonly

162

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

Table 9.7 Test conditions required for the evaluation of some physical properties of the grease as
per ASTM standard

Test
speciﬁcation

Cone
penetration

Drop point

Evaporation
loss

Leakage
tendency

Standard test ASTM D217 ASTM D566 ASTM D972 ASTM
D1263
90 ± 1

400

20

2

Water
washout

ASTM
D1264
4 ± 0.05

Quantity of
grease (gm)

Speed (rpm)

Temperature
(°C)

Duration
(min)

Flow rate
(ml/sec)

Heat rate
(°C/min)

–
25 ± 0.5

0.0833

–

–

–
−5 to +288

100–150

660 ± 30
105 ± 1.2

600 ± 30
38 or 79

–

–

4–7

1320 ± 5

360 ± 5

60 ± 1

2000 (air)

–

–

5 ± 0.5
(water)

–

–

–

used tribometers are four-ball tester, SRV tribometer, and Timken tester, etc. The
schematic diagram of four-ball and digital image of SRV tribometers are shown in
Figs. 9.8 and 9.9 respectively. Timken tester is used to determine the extreme pres-
sure property of lubricating grease as per ASTM D2509 (ASTM 2509 2015). This
test consists of a rotating cup and stationary test block tribo-pair. In this test, the
minimum load (score value) and the maximum load (OK value) is used for test eval-
uation. When adhesion between the test cup and stationary test block takes place by

Fig. 9.8 Schematic diagram four-ball tester

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

163

Fig. 9.9 Typical photograph
of SRV V model

rupturing of the lubricant ﬁlm is called minimum load. If the adhesion takes place
between the test cup and test block without rupturing of the lubricant ﬁlm is called
maximum load. Four-ball tester, SRV tribometer is used to measure antiwear and
extreme pressure property of the lubricating grease, test speciﬁcations are summa-
rized in Table 9.8.

Table 9.8 The details of test conditions used in various tribometers for the evaluation of antiwear
and extreme pressure property of the grease

Test
speciﬁcations

Wear test

Four-ball tester

Extreme pressure test

Four-ball tester

SRV machine

Test standard

Load (N)

ASTM D2266
392 ± 2

ASTM D5707

ASTM D2596

ASTM D5706

SRV
machine

50 N for 30 s
(pre load)
Then 200 N

6, 8, 10, 13, 16,
20, 24, 32, 40,
50, 63, 80, 100,
126, 160, 200,
250, 315, 400,
500, 620, 800

1760 ± 40
–

0.167 at each
load
27 ± 8

50 N for 30 s
(pre load)
100 N for
15 min, then
100 N steps with
a duration of
2 min till seizure

–

1.5

53.5

50 or 80

Speed (rpm)

Stroke (mm)

Duration (min)

1200 ± 60
–
60 ± 1

–

1.0
120 ± 0.25

Temperature
(oC)

75 ± 2

50 or 80 or 120

164

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

9.6 Grease Speciﬁcation for Automotive Industry

Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) in association with ASTM incorporated
the ideas of NLGI and established ASTM D 4950 standard for automotive service
application. As per ASTM D 4950 (ASTM D4950-14 2015) the service greases are
categorized into two class: general chassis grease (“L” category) and wheel bearing
grease (“G” category). L category grease is used in service lubrication of universal
joints, ball joints, steering pivots, suspensions, and other chassis components. While
G category grease is used in service lubrication of wheel bearings, both the category
of service greases is applied to passenger cars, buses, light-duty trucks and high-
duty trucks etc. Further, service grease category is subdivided based on the severity
of service (ASTM D4950-14 2015), and summarized in Table 9.9.

Some commercially available grease is termed as ‘multipurpose grease’. This
product indicates that it is compatible for lubrication of both chassis and wheel
bearings. If grease is suitable to lubricate both chassis and wheel bearing, it should
be designated with both “L” and “G” speciﬁcation (i.e. LB-GC). ASTM D 4950 for
service grease consists of other 12 ASTM standards, and these are summarized in
Table 9.10, which also includes acceptance limit.

9.7 Grease Lubrication Mechanism

The property of grease lies between liquid and solid. Therefore, it shows viscous
and elastic properties like liquid and solid, respectively. It can be referred to as ‘vis-
coelastic’ material. Grease is a non-Newtonian ﬂuid which shows thixotropy behavior
(Singh et al. 2017a). Grease has a ﬁbrous structure like that sponge. Thickener is
a gelling agent which immobilizes the base oil into the matrix by weak Van der
Walls forces and capillary forces (Lugt 2009). The lubricating oil is trapped between
the voids available in the matrix. The base oil and thickener both play a role in
lubrication mechanism. Antiwear performance of lubricating grease evaluated as per
ASTM D2266 with four-ball tester and the Hertzian contact stress was found to be
3.4 GPa (Rawat et al. 2019). The soap molecules of lubricating grease squeeze under
high Hertzian contact stress and bleed the lubricating oil on the contacting surfaces
and develops a tribo-ﬁlm. Schematic diagram of grease lubrication is depicted in
Fig. 9.10. The lubricating oil comprises the additives which also exposed to tribo-
pairs. These additives are nano-sized, which enters easily between the tribo-pairs and
provide a better tribo-ﬁlm for lubrication (Rawat et al. 2018). Spherical morphology
of nano-additives transforms the sliding friction into rolling friction, which promotes
the reduction in direct contact of asperity to asperity (Kashyap and Harsha 2016; Ge
et al. 2015a). High Hertzian contact stress compels the grease molecules and nano-
additives to fuse and gets deposited on the contact interfaces. This deposition of
nano-additives on the surface forms a protective layer which assists the lubricating
ﬁlm (Rawat et al. 2019). Nano-additives also behaves as a self-healing agent which

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

165

C
°

0
6
1
o
t

0
4
−

–

e
h
t

f
o

s
g
n
i
r
a
e
b

l
e
e
h
w
e
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l
o
t

C
G

C
°

0
2
1
o
t

0
4
−

e
r
o
m

(

s
l
a
v
r
e
t
n
i
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

d
e
g
n
o
l
o
r
P

)
s
r
a
c

r
e
g
n
e
s
s
a
p

r
o
f

m
k

0
0
2
3

n
a
h
t

2

s
i
s
s
a
h
c

d
n
a

s
t
n
i
o
j

l
a
s
r
e
v
i
n
u
e
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

o
T

B
L

)
s
r
a
c

r
e
g
n
e
s
s
a
p

r
o
f

s
s
e
l

r
o

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

l
a
v
r
e
t
n
i
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l
e
R

e
d
a
r
G

I

G
L
N

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
A

y
r
o
g
e
t
a
C

e
s
a
e
r
G

–

m
k

0
0
2
3

.

x
o
r
p
p
a
(
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l
e
r

t
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

2

s
i
s
s
a
h
c

d
n
a

s
t
n
i
o
j

l
a
s
r
e
v
i
n
u
e
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

o
T

A
L

e
s
a
e
r
g
s
i
s
s
a
h
C

n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
d

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

d
n
a

y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c

e
s
a
e
r
g

e
c
i
v
r
e
s

f
o
t
s
i
L

9
9

.

e
l
b
a
T

C
°

0
2
1
o
t

0
4
−

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l
e
r

t
n
e
u
q
e
r
f

s
s
e
L

e
h
t

f
o

s
g
n
i
r
a
e
b

l
e
e
h
w
e
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

o
T

B
G

C
°

0
7
o
t

0
2
−

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l
e
r

t
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

A
G

e
s
a
e
r
g

g
n
i
r
a
e
b

l
e
e
h
W

r
e
d
n
u
d
e
t
a
r
e
p
o
s
e
l
c
i
h
e
v
n
i

t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
c
n
o
n

d
n
a
n
o
i
t
a
u
t
i
s

y
t
u
d
d
l
i

m

s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

r
e
d
n
u
d
e
t
a
r
e
p
o
s
e
l
c
i
h
e
v
n
i

t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c

d
n
a
n
o
i
t
a
u
t
i
s

y
t
u
d

e
r
e
v
e
s
o
t
d
l
i

m

r
e
h
t
o

r
o
r
e
t
a
w
o
t

e
r
u
s
o
p
x
e

s
n
o
i
t
a
n
i
m
a
t
n
o
c

s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
c
n
o
n

d
n
a
n
o
i
t
a
u
t
i
s

e
h
t

f
o

s
g
n
i
r
a
e
b

l
e
e
h
w
e
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

o
T

y
t
u
d
d
l
i

m

r
e
d
n
u

d
e
t
a
r
e
p
o
s
e
l
c
i
h
e
v

2

2

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
o
t
d
l
i

m

r
e
d
n
u

d
e
t
a
r
e
p
o
s
e
l
c
i
h
e
v

d
n
a

y
a
w
h
g
i
h
s
a

h
c
u
s
n
o
i
t
a
u
t
i
s

y
t
u
d

e
c
i
v
r
e
s

s
y
a
w
h
g
i
h
-
f
f
o

e
r
e
v
e
s
o
t
d
l
i

m

r
e
d
n
u

d
e
t
a
r
e
p
o
s
e
l
c
i
h
e
v

g
n
i
k
a
r
b

e
r
e
v
e
s

s
a

h
c
u
s

,
n
o
i
t
a
u
t
i
s

y
t
u
d

e
c
i
v
r
e
s

o
g
-
d
n
a
-
p
o
t
s

t
n
e
u
q
e
r
f

,
e
c
i
v
r
e
s

166

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

0
3
o
t
5
– –−

2

o
t

5
1
−

0
3
o
t
5
– –−

2
o
t

5
1
−

C
G

0
2
2

5
1

s
s
a
P

9
.
0

6

0
0
2

0
3

0
8

–

B
G

5
7
1

5
1

s
s
a
P

9
0

.

0
1

– –

0
4

–

A
G

0
8

–

–

–

–

– –

–

–

– – – –

B
L

0
5
1

–

s
s
a
P

6
0

.

0
1

0
0
2

0
3

–

0
1

0
o
t

0
4
–
0

5
1
−

– –

A
L

0
8

–

–

–

– –

–

–

– –

0
o
t

0
4
–
0

5
1
−

y
t
i
l
i
b
i
t
a
p
m
o
c

r
e
m
o
t
s
a
l
E

e
m
u
l
o
v
)

%

(

R
C
B
3
/
7
1
2
3

e
g
n
a
h
c

s
s
e
n
d
r
a
h
R
C
B
3
/
7
1
2
3

e
m
u
l
o
v
L
-
R
B
N
B
2
/
7
1
2
3

s
s
e
n
d
r
a
h
L
-
R
B
N
B
2
/
7
1
2
3

)

%

(

e
g
n
a
h
c

e
g
n
a
h
c

9
.
0

,
)

m
m

(

r
e
t
e
m
a
i
d
r
a
c
s

,
l
l
a
b

r
u
o
F

x
a
m

,
)

%

(

n
o
i
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

l
i

O

x
a
m

,
t
s
u
R

)

C
o
(

t
n
i
o
p

g
n
i
p
p
o
r
D

,
)

%

(

C
°

0
8
@

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
r

r
e
t
a

W

4
6
2
1
D

n
i
m

,
)
f
g
k
(

x
e
d
n
i

r
a
e
w
d
a
o
L

n
i
m

,
)
f
g
k
(

t
n
i
o
p
d
l
e

W

n
i
m

,
)
h
(

e
f
i
l

.
p
m
e
t

h
g
i
H

,
)
s
s
o
l

g
m

(
n
o
i
t
c
e
t
o
r
p
g
n
i
t
t
e
r
F

P
E

l
l
a
b

r
u
o
F

6
9
5
2
D

7
1
2
D

6
6
5
D

2
4
7
1
D

3
4
7
1
D

6
6
2
2
D

7
2
5
3
D

0
7
1
4
D

9
8
2
4
D

x
a
m

x
a
m

x
a
m

e
g
n
a
h
c

0
4
3
–
0
2
2

0
4
3
–
0
2
2

0
4
3
–
0
2
2

0
4
3
–
0
2
2

0
4
3
–
0
2
2

0
1
/
m
m

,
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
e
n
e
p

k
r
o
W

e
s
a
e
r
g

g
n
i
r
a
e
b

l
e
e
h
W

t
i

m

i
l

e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

e
s
a
e
r
g
s
i
s
s
a
h
C

y
t
r
e
p
o
r
P

t
s
e
T

s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

g
n
i
r
a
e
b

l
e
e
h
w
d
n
a

s
i
s
s
a
h
c

r
o
f

e
s
a
e
r
g

e
c
i
v
r
e
s

r
o
f

s
t
n
e
m
e
r
i
u
q
e
R

0
1
9

.

e
l
b
a
T

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

167

C
G

0
1

5
.
5
1

e
s
a
e
r
g

g
n
i
r
a
e
b

l
e
e
h
W

B
G

4
2

.

5
5
1

A
G

–

.

5
5
1

B
L

–

.

5
5
1

t
i

m

i
l

e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

e
s
a
e
r
g
s
i
s
s
a
h
C

A
L

–

–

C
°

0
4
−
@

e
u
q
r
o
t

.
p
m
e
t

w
o
L

x
a
m

)
g
(
y
c
n
e
d
n
e
t

e
g
a
k
a
e
L

0
9
2
4
D

3
9
6
4
D

)

m
N

-

(

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

0
1
9

.

e
l
b
a
T

y
t
r
e
p
o
r
P

t
s
e
T

168

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

Fig. 9.10 Schematic diagram for grease lubrication

heals the dimples of the contact interfaces and it is called mending effect (Gupta and
Harsha 2018). The sandwiched nano-additives between contact interfaces decreases
the real area of contact causes a decrement in the contact pressure (Rawat et al.
2019; Ghaednia and Jackson 2013). The grease becomes soft due to the ﬂash tem-
perature developed by Hertzian contact stress and shear rate, facilitating the exposure
of lubricating oil with the degradation of grease matrix. The induced temperature
in the grease due to Hertzian contact stress also affects the ﬁlm thickness between
the contact interfaces. As the temperature increases in the grease, the decrement in
the ﬁlm thickness was observed (Gonçalves et al. 2017). Experiments unveiled that
at low-speed grease develop a thicker tribo-ﬁlm as compared to the corresponding
base oil. While at high speed formation of tribo-ﬁlm similar to the base oil properties
alone (Kanazawa et al. 2017).

9.8 Grease Tribology

The amount and type of thickening agent, dropping point, consistency, extreme pres-
sure additives, antioxidant additives, volatility and ambient conditions are some
important factors which inﬂuence the properties and performance of the lubricat-
ing grease. The tribological performance of the lubricating grease is entirely reliant
on the properties of the ingredient involved in their composition. In recent decades,
the researchers have demonstrated the excellent tribological performance of nanopar-
ticles in the lubrication system. A variety of nano-sized materials were explored as a
lubricant additive to enhance the tribological performance (Gulzar et al. 2016). The
presence of additives in the grease enhances the tribological performance as well as

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

169

it affects the microstructure of the grease (Adhvaryu et al. 2005). Various morpholo-
gies of solid nano-sized materials such as Sn (Chang et al. 2015), Cu (Qiang et al.
2017), CaF2 (Wang et al. 2007), MoS2 (Sahoo and Biswas 2014; Rawat et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2014; Gänsheimer and Holinski 1972; Czarny 2007), SiO2 (Rawat et al.
2018; Chen 2010; Ge et al. 2015a), CuO (Peña-Parás et al. 2015; Chang et al. 2014),
TiO2 (Chen 2010; Ge et al. 2015a; Peña-Parás et al. 2015; Chang et al. 2014), Al2O3
(Singh et al. 2017a, b; Peña-Parás et al. 2015), CeF3 (Wang et al. 2008), CeO2 (Shen
et al. 2016; He et al. 2018), carbon nanotubes (Kamel et al. 2016; Ge et al. 2015b;
Peña-Parás et al. 2015; Mohamed et al. 2015; Yang et al. 2011; Hongtao et al. 2014),
carbon black (Ge et al. 2015b), carbon nanohorn (Kobayashi et al. 2005), CaCO3
(Ji et al. 2011; Chen et al. 2014; Singh et al. 2017a, b), reduced graphene oxide
(Singh et al. 2017a, b), graphite (Chen et al. 2014; Czarny 2007; Silver and Stanley
1974), graphene (Fan et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2017; Kamel et al. 2017; Singh et al.
2016; Cheng and Qin 2014), quartz-enriched rice husk ash (Akhtar et al. 2016),
calcium borate (Zhao et al. 2013), zirconium phosphate (Dai et al. 2017), polyte-
traﬂuoroethylene (Chen 2010; Chen et al. 2014; Czarny 2007), nanocomposites (Wu
et al. 2018) were explored as an additive to enhance the tribological performance of
the lubricating grease. The effect of nanoparticles on the tribological performance
of the grease is summarized in Table 9.11. A variety of additives were added in the
grease to improve the antiwear as well as load bearing capacity of the grease. Each
nanoparticle added in the grease exhibited their signiﬁcant potential to minimize the
friction and wear. Rawat et al. (2018) have obtained a ~20% reduction in coefﬁcient
of friction with a dispersion of 0.03% w/w SiO2 nanoparticles in parafﬁn grease,
whereas ~42% reduction in the mean wear volume. Furthermore, ~42% reduction in
the coefﬁcient of friction and ~55% in mean wear volume has achieved at a concen-
tration of 0.04% w/w addition of MoS2 in parafﬁn grease (Rawat et al. 2019). This
reduction in coefﬁcient of friction directly decreases the demand for energy, which
improves the efﬁciency and working life of the machinery.

Vegetable oils have excellent lubrication property, and environment-friendly
nature are gaining more attention of lubrication engineers. Vegetable oils have poor
oxidation stability, which makes it incompetent to use straight as base stock for
development of the grease. This deﬁciency of vegetable oil can overcome by differ-
ent chemical modiﬁcation techniques. Various chemical modiﬁcation route has been
discovered for bio-lubricants viz transesteriﬁcation (Panchal et al. 2015), estolide
formation (Garcı´a-Zapateiro et al. 2013), hydrogenation (Fernández and Tonetto
2009), and epoxidation (Kashyap and Harsha 2016; Gupta et al. 2018). An investiga-
tion conducted by Panchal et al. (2015) is a shred of transesteriﬁcation of non-edible
vegetable oil (Karanja oil). Chemically modiﬁed Karanja oil (Transesteriﬁed esters)
has chosen as the base oil, and lithium-12-hydroxy stearate opted as a thickening
agent in the formulation of grease samples. The tribological results showed that veg-
etable oil-based grease has good antiwear and load carrying capacity as compared
to mineral oil (SN 500) based commercially available lithium grease. Researchers
are trying to ﬁnd an effective alternative of conventional thickening agents (metallic
soap, clay, or polyurea etc.) in the formulation of grease, which is also biodegrad-
able and eco-friendly. Alternative thickeners derived from natural resources should

170

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

g
k

0
2
2
–
0
0
1

↑
P
E

– – –

– – –

%
8
4
↑
P
E

↑
P
E

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

n
a
e

M

/
)

D
S
W

(

e
m
u
l
o
v

r
a
e
w

)

V
W
M

(

r
a
c
s

r
a
e

W

r
e
t
e
m
a
i
d

↓
D
S
W

↓
D
S
W

↓
D
S
W

–

↓
D
S
W

%
9
1

↓
D
S
W

↓
D
S
W

%
5
9
4

.

↓
D
S
W

%
5
3
4

.

↓
D
S
W

%
0
8
1

.

–

↓
µ

↓
µ

↓
µ

%
9
2

↓
µ

↓
µ

%
8
5
4
3

.

↓
µ

%
7
9
2
2

.

↓
µ

%
7
4
4
2

.

↓
µ

/

w
w
%
3

r
a
l
l
e
m
a
l
(

2
S
o
M

)

m
µ
0
1
–
5
=

t

%

s
s
a
m

d
e
p
a
h
s
-
n
r
o
h
(

1
n
a
h
t

s
s
e
L

e
r
o
m

r
o

3

%

s
s
a
m

%

s
s
a
m

/

w
w
%
0
1

.

/

w
w
%
0
2

.

t

%
w
0

.

2

t

%
w
5

.

0

t

%
w
5

.

1

)

m
n

0
0
1
–
0
8

H
N
C
-
T
H

d
e
p
a
h
s
-
n
r
o
h
(

d

,

p
i
t

d
e
d
n
u
o
r

)

m
n

0
0
6
=

<
d

,

p
i
t

e
t
i
h
p
a
r
G

)
e
k
a
l

F
(

l

,
c
i
b
u
c
(

2
F
a
C

)

m
n

5
6
–
0
6
=

=
d

,
l
a
n
o
g
a
x
e
h
(

3
F
e
C
A
O

-

)

m
n

0
2

E
F
T
P

2
O
T

i

2
O
S

i

p
a
o
s
m
u
i
h
t
i

L

l
i
o

n
ﬁ
f
a
r
a
P

e
s
a
e
r
g
m
u
i
h
t
i
l

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

x
e
l
p
m
o
c
m
u
i
n
a
t
i

T

p
a
o
s

y
o
s

,
r
e
t
s
e

l
o
y
l
o
p

f
o

e
r
u
t
x
i
M

l
y
t
n
e
p
o
e
N

d
n
a

l
i
o

n
a
e
b

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
c

)
1
:
5
.
2
:
5
.
4
(

N
S
0
5
6

1
n
a
h
t

s
s
e
L

H
N
C

p
a
o
s
m
u
i
h
t
i

L

l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
M

.
l
a

t
e

i
h
s
a
y
a
b
o
K

p
a
o
s
m
u
i
h
t
i

L

l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
M

r
e
m
i
e
h
s
n
ä
G

)
2
7
9
1
(

.
l
a

t
e

)
5
0
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

g
n
a
W

)
7
0
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

g
n
a
W

)
8
0
0
2
(

)
0
1
0
2
(

n
e
h
C

)
P
E
(

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p

e
m
e
r
t
x
E

f
o

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
C

)

µ

(
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

s
e
v
i
t
i
d
d
a
-
o
n
a
n

s
u
o
r
e
m
u
n
h
t
i

w
d
e
s
r
e
p
s
i
d

e
s
a
e
r
g
g
n
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

f
o

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

l
a
c
i
g
o
l
o
b
i
r
T

1
1
9

.

e
l
b
a
T

m
u
m

i
t
p
O

s
e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p
o
n
a
N

r
e
n
e
k
c
i
h
T

l
i
o
e
s
a
B

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

171

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

–

–

–

–

↑
P
E

↑
P
E

n
a
e

M

/
)

D
S
W

(

e
m
u
l
o
v

r
a
e
w

r
a
c
s

r
a
e

W

r
e
t
e
m
a
i
d

)

V
W
M

(

↓
D
S
W

↓
D
S
W

↓
W
S
W

–

↑
V
W
M

↓
V
W
M

↑
V
W
M

↑
V
W
M

↓
o
i
t
a
r

r
a
e

W

)
P
E
(

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p

e
m
e
r
t
x
E

f
o

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
C

)

µ

(
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

m
u
m

i
t
p
O

s
e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p
o
n
a
N

r
e
n
e
k
c
i
h
T

l
i
o
e
s
a
B

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
1
9

.

e
l
b
a
T

↓
µ

↓
µ

↓
µ

↓
µ

↓
µ

↓
µ

↓
µ

↑
µ

↓
µ

=

l

,
c
i
b
u
c
(

3
O
C
a
C

)

m
n

5
4

)

m
n

2
S
o
M

0
5
3
–
l

)

m
n

0
7

e
t
i
h
p
a
r
G

3
O
C
a
C

E
F
T
P

2
S
o
M

t

%
w
3

.

0

,
r
a
l
u
b
u
t
(

s
T
N
C

l

,

m
n

0
5
1
=
d

)

m
µ
0
2
–
0
1
=

)
T
E

l
e
g
a
h
p
l
A
e
n
h
p
a
D

(

)

R
S
s
k
c
e
n
o
p
E
e
n
h
p
a
D

(

s
e
s
a
e
r
g
l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

)
2
S
e
s
a
e
r
g

a
i
n
a
v
l
A

.
l
a

t
e

g
n
a
Y

)
1
1
0
2
(

t

%
w
0

.

5

p
a
o
s
m
u
i
h
t
i

L

O
A
P

)
1
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

i
J

t

%
w
0

.

6

e
t
a
r
o
b
m
u
i
c
l
a
C

=
d

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(

p
a
o
s
m
u
i
h
t
i

L

l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
M

t

%
w
2

.

0

,
r
a
l
l
e
m
a
l
(

p
a
o
s
m
u
i
h
t
i

L

l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
M

)
4
1
0
2
(

s
a
w
s
i
B

d
n
a

o
o
h
a
S

.
l
a

t
e

o
a
h
Z

)
3
1
0
2
(

t

%
w
0

.

3

e
t
i
n
o
t
n
e
B
/
e
t
i
g
l
u
p
a
t
t

A

y
a
l
c

0
4
-
O
A
P

)
6
6
1

.
l
a

t
e

n
e
h
C

)

4
1
0
2
(

–

=

,
r
a
l
u
b
u
t
(

s
T
N
C

l

,

m
n

.

4
1
=
d

)

m
µ
0
4
–
5
0

.

m
u
i
d
o
s
-
m
u
i
c
l
a
C

O
A
P

.
l
a

t
e

o
a
t
g
n
o
H

p
a
o
s

-

N
Y
S
A
R
U
D

(

)
4
1
0
2
(

172

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

e
g
n
a
h
c

o
N

↓
µ

t

%
w
0

.

6

p
a
o
s
m
u
i
h
t
i

L

l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
M

)
P
E
(

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p

e
m
e
r
t
x
E

f
o

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
C

)

µ

(
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

m
u
m

i
t
p
O

s
e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p
o
n
a
N

r
e
n
e
k
c
i
h
T

l
i
o
e
s
a
B

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
1
9

.

e
l
b
a
T

–

– –

–

– –

n
a
e

M

/
)

D
S
W

(

e
m
u
l
o
v

r
a
e
w

r
a
c
s

r
a
e

W

r
e
t
e
m
a
i
d

)

V
W
M

(

↓
D
S
W

↓
V
W
M

%
0
5
–
5
2

↓
D
S
W

↓
D
S
W

%
0
6

%
0
5
↓
D
S
W

↓
D
S
W

↓
D
S
W

%
0
4

↓
µ

↓
µ

%
0
6
–
0
4

↓
µ

↓
µ

↓
µ

e
t
a
r
o
B
m
u
i
c
l
a
C

=
d

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(

)

m
n

0
7

=

t

,
r
a
l
l
e
m
a
l
(

e
n
e
h
p
a
r
G

)

m
n

3
1

.

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(

2
O
T

i

)

m
n

0
6
–
0
4
=
d

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(

O
u
C

)

m
n

0
1
1
–
0
9

=
d

=
d

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(

)
e
k
a
ﬂ
(

2
O
T

i

)

m
n

5
3

2
O
S

i

)

m
n

0
3

.

%
4
0
1
↓
µ

t

%
w
1

.

0

p
a
o
s

e
n
o
t
n
e
B

0
4
-
O
A
P

)
4
1
0
2
(

.
l
a
t
e
n
a
F

t

%
w
0

.

1

t

%
w
0
2

.

)
2
0
1
0
8
B
L
(

e
s
a
e
r
g
m
u
i
h
t
i
l

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

.
l
a

t
e

g
n
a
h
C

t

%
w
1

.

0

t

%
w
1
0

.

=
d

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(

E
F
T
P

l
i
o

c
i
n
e
h
t
h
p
a
N

/

w
w
%
5
7
0
0

.

e
d
i
x
o

e
n
e
h
p
a
r
G

e
s
a
e
r
g
m
u
i
h
t
i
l

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

n
i
Q
d
n
a

g
n
e
h
C

.
l
a

t
e

o
a
h
Z

)
3
1
0
2
(

)
4
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

e
G

)
a
5
1
0
2
(

)
4
1
0
2
(

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

173

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

↑
P
E

– – – –

↑
P
E

%
2
5

–

n
a
e

M

/
)

D
S
W

(

e
m
u
l
o
v

r
a
e
w

r
a
c
s

r
a
e

W

r
e
t
e
m
a
i
d

)

V
W
M

(

↓
D
S
W

↓
D
S
W

↑
D
S
W

%
0
2

↓
D
S
W

%
1
1

↓
D
S
W

%
4
1

%
4

↓
D
S
W

%
3
6

↓
D
S
W

%
9
8
5

.

↓
µ

%
0
3

↓
µ

↓
µ

%
5
7

.

↓
µ

%
6
3

↓
µ

%
6
1

%
5
1
8

.

↓
µ

%
5
3
6

.

↓
µ

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(

2
O
T

i

)

m
n

1
2
<
d

d

,
r
a
l
u
b
u
t
(

O
u
C

=

s
T
N
W
M

l

,
r
a
l
u
b
u
t
(

)

m
n

9
–
6
=

)

m
µ
5

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
e
p
s
(

)

m
n

0
5
<
d

3
O
2
l
A

=

l

,

m
n

0
1
=
d

)

m
µ
5

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(

1
n
S

)

m
n

0
6
=
d

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(

2
n
S

)

m
n

0
8
=
d

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(

3
n
S

)

m
n

0
2
1
=
d

t

%
w
1

.

0

t

%
w
1

.

0

t

%
w
1

.

0

t

%
w
1
0
0

.

–

–

p
a
o
s
m
u
i
h
t
i

L

l
i
o
a
j
n
a
r
a
K

.
l
a

t
e

l
a
h
c
n
a
P

)

B
3
2
6
8

r
o
ﬂ
i
n
U
d
n
a

8
2
e
s
a
e
r
g
l
i
l
o
M

(

e
s
a
e
r
g
l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

)
5
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

s
á
r
a
P
-
a
ñ
e
P

)
5
1
0
2
(

t

%
w
0

.

1

,
r
a
l
u
b
u
t
(

s
T
N
C

e
s
a
e
r
g
m
u
i
h
t
i
l

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

.
l
a

t
e

d
e
m
a
h
o
M

t

%
w
0

.

1

e
s
a
e
r
g
m
u
i
h
t
i
l

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

.
l
a

t
e

g
n
a
h
C

)
5
1
0
2
(

)
5
1
0
2
(

)
P
E
(

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p

e
m
e
r
t
x
E

f
o

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
C

)

µ

(
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

m
u
m

i
t
p
O

s
e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p
o
n
a
N

r
e
n
e
k
c
i
h
T

l
i
o
e
s
a
B

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
1
9

.

e
l
b
a
T

174

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

↑
P
E

↑
P
E

– – – –

n
a
e

M

/
)

D
S
W

(

e
m
u
l
o
v

r
a
e
w

r
a
c
s

r
a
e

W

r
e
t
e
m
a
i
d

)

V
W
M

(

↓
D
S
W

↓
D
S
W

↓
V
W
M

↓
V
W
M

↓
V
W
M

↓
V
W
M

↑
P
E

%
8
3

↓
D
S
W

%
2
3

%
0
5

↓
µ

t

%
w
0

.

3

N
A
K
R
E
M

(

e
s
a
e
r
g
m
u
i
c
l
a
c

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

.
l
a

t
e

l
e
m
a
K

)
3
2

)
6
1
0
2
(

=
d

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(

)

m
n

0
1

)
e
k
a
ﬂ
(

2
O
e
C

=
d

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(

B
C

=
d

,
r
a
l
u
b
u
t
(

s
T
N
C
W
M

s
T
N
C
W
M
C

=
d

,
r
a
l
u
b
u
t
(

)

m
n

0
5

)

m
n

5
3

=
d

s
T
N
C
W
S

)

m
n

0
5

,
r
a
l
u
b
u
t
(

)

m
n

2
–
1

=

=
d

,
r
a
l
u
b
u
t
(

s
T
N
C
W
M

l

,

m
n

2
1
–
0
1

)

m
µ
0
2
–
1

↓
µ

↓
µ

↓
µ

↓
µ

↓
µ

↓
µ

t

%
w
0

.

3

t

%
w
0

.

1

t

%
w
0

.

1

t

%
w
0

.

1

t

%
w
0

.

1

t

%
w
5

.

0

h
s
a

k
s
u
h
e
c
i
R

e
s
a
e
r
g
m
u
i
h
t
i
l

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

.
l
a

t
e

r
a
t
h
k
A

x
e
l
p
m
o
c
m
u
i
n
a
t
i

T

p
a
o
s

E
F
T
P

d
n
a
N
S
0
5
3
(

l
i
o

d
e
x
i
M

t
h
g
i
e
w
1
:
1
(

)

N
S
0
5
6

)
o
i
t
a
r

G
A
P

.
l
a

t
e

n
e
h
S

)
6
1
0
2
(

)
6
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

e
G

)
b
5
1
0
2
(

)
P
E
(

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p

e
m
e
r
t
x
E

f
o

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
C

)

µ

(
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

m
u
m

i
t
p
O

s
e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p
o
n
a
N

r
e
n
e
k
c
i
h
T

l
i
o
e
s
a
B

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
1
9

.

e
l
b
a
T

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

175

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

↑
P
E

↑
P
E

%
0
6

–

–

–

– – –

n
a
e

M

/
)

D
S
W

(

e
m
u
l
o
v

r
a
e
w

)

V
W
M

(

r
a
c
s

r
a
e

W

r
e
t
e
m
a
i
d

↓
D
S
W

↓
D
S
W

↓
D
S
W

%
4
0
1

.

↓
D
S
W

%
5
4

–

– – –

)
P
E
(

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p

e
m
e
r
t
x
E

f
o

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
C

)

µ

(
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

m
u
m

i
t
p
O

s
e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p
o
n
a
N

r
e
n
e
k
c
i
h
T

l
i
o
e
s
a
B

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
1
9

.

e
l
b
a
T

%
0
3

↓
µ

↓
µ

↓
µ

↓
µ

%
9
8
1

.

%
1
6

↓
µ

%
5
3

↓
µ

%
7
2

↓
µ

%
0
1

↓
µ

t

%
w
5

.

0

t

%
w
0

.

3

t

%
w
4

.

0

t

%
w
0

.

5

t

%
w
8

.

0

m
u
i
n
o
c
r
i
Z

e
t
a
h
p
s
o
h
p

)

m
n

0
1
=

e
n
e
h
p
a
r
G

)
r
a
l
l
e
m
a
l
(

=

t

,
r
a
l
l
e
m
a
l
(

e
n
e
h
p
a
r
G

=

l

,

m
n

3
1

.

)

m
µ
2

l

,
r
a
l
l
e
m
a
l
(

O
G

r

l

,
c
i
b
u
c
(

)

m
n

0
0
5
=

)

m
n

3
O
C
a
C

0
5
=

,

m
o
d
n
a
r
(

)

m
n

0
4
=

3
O
2
l
A

l

t

%
w
5
2
0

.

d

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(
u
C

e
s
a
e
r
g
m
u
i
h
t
i
l

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

t

%
w
4

.

0

)
r
a
l
l
e
m
a
l
(

O
G

r

e
s
a
e
r
g
m
u
i
h
t
i
l

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

t

%
w
0

.

3

p
a
o
s
m
u
i
c
l
a
C

8
-
A
O
P

)
7
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

i
a
D

.
l
a

t
e

h
g
n
i
S

)
6
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

g
n
a
i
Q

)
7
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

g
n
a
W

)
7
1
0
2
(

p
a
o
s
m
u
i
h
t
i

L

l
i
o
l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

)
0
0
5
I
V
M

(

N
A
K
R
E
M

(

e
s
a
e
r
g
m
u
i
c
l
a
c

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

.
l
a

t
e

l
e
m
a
K

)
3
2

)
7
1
0
2
(

e
s
a
e
r
g
m
u
i
h
t
i
l

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

.
l
a

t
e

h
g
n
i
S

)
a
7
1
0
2
(

176

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

e
g
n
a
h
C
o
N

↑
P
E

%
5
4

↑
P
E

%
5
2

%
1
.
3
2

↑
P
E

e
g
n
a
h
c

o
N

–

n
a
e

M

/
)

D
S
W

(

e
m
u
l
o
v

r
a
e
w

)

V
W
M

(

r
a
c
s

r
a
e

W

r
e
t
e
m
a
i
d

– – –

↓
D
S
W

%
3
1

↓
V
W
M

↓
V
W
M

%
5
5

%
1
6

%
0
2

↓
µ

%
8
2

↓
µ

%
2
4

↓
µ

%
2
4

↓
µ

/

w
w
%
5
0
0

.

)
F
O
C

(

)

V
W
M

(

t

%
w
6

.

0

/

w
w
%
4
0
0

.

)

V
W
M

(

)
F
O
C

(

)

V
W
M
&
F
O
C

(

/

w
w
%
1
0
0

.

)

m
n

l

,
r
a
l
l
e
m
a
l
(

O
G

r

l

,
c
i
b
u
c
(

)

m
n

0
0
5
=

)

m
n

3
O
C
a
C

0
5
=

,

m
o
d
n
a
r
(

)

m
n

0
4
=

3
O
2
l
A

l

-
s
o
p
m
o
c
o
n
a
n
(

2
S
o
M

)
e
t
i

)

m
n

0
7
=
d

2
O
S

i

,

m
o
d
n
a
r
(

2
O
e
C

)

m
n

0
0
5
<

l

,

m
n

7
–
3
=

0
5
1
–
0
5
=

t

l

=

T
D
O

-
2
S
o
M

t

,
r
a
l
l
e
m
a
l
(

)

m
n

0
5
1
–
0
5
=

l

,

m
n

7
–
3

e
g
n
a
h
c

o
N

%
2
4
↓
V
W
M

/

w
w
%
3
0
0

.

,
l
a
c
i
r
e
h
p
s
(

p
a
o
s
m
u
i
h
t
i

L

l
i
o

n
ﬁ
f
a
r
a
P

/

w
w
%
4
0
0

.

,
r
a
l
l
e
m
a
l
(

2
S
o
M

p
a
o
s
m
u
i
h
t
i

L

l
i
o

n
ﬁ
f
a
r
a
P

e
s
a
e
r
g
m
u
i
h
t
i
l

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

)
8
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

e
H

.
l
a

t
e

t
a
w
a
R

)
8
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

t
a
w
a
R

)
9
1
0
2
(

↓
D
S
W

%
1
3
2

.

%
2
8
2

.

↓
µ

t

%
w
6
0
0

.

&
e
t
a
r
o
b

c
n
i
Z

e
s
a
e
r
g
l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

)
8
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

u
W

– – –

t

%
w
4

.

0

t

%
w
0

.

5

t

%
w
8

.

0

e
s
a
e
r
g
m
u
i
h
t
i
l

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

.
l
a

t
e

h
g
n
i
S

)
b
7
1
0
2
(

r
e
t
e
m
a
i
d
=
d

;
h
t
g
n
e
l

=

=

l

;
s
s
e
n
k
c
i
h
t

t

;
t
n
e
m
e
r
c
n
i

↑

;
t
n
e
m
e
r
c
e
d
↓

)
P
E
(

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p

e
m
e
r
t
x
E

f
o

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
C

)

µ

(
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

m
u
m

i
t
p
O

s
e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p
o
n
a
N

r
e
n
e
k
c
i
h
T

l
i
o
e
s
a
B

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
1
9

.

e
l
b
a
T

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication

177

include gel-like characteristics, non-toxicity, thermal resistance, biodegradability
property. Apart from that, it should have a similar potential to minimize wear and fric-
tion as achieved by conventional non-renewable thickening agents. García-Zapateiro
(García-Zapateiro et al. 2014) and coworkers developed biodegradable grease with
vegetable oil (castor oil, High-oleic sunﬂower acid oil and a ricinoleic acid-derived
estolide) with biopolymers (chitosan and Kraft cellulose pulp). These biopolymers
are renewable and proposed as an alternative to conventional thickening agents for
the formulation of lubricating grease.

9.9 Compatibility of Greases

Sometimes some base oils and some thickening agents are not compatible with each
other. Therefore, it is not recommended for mixing of two greases with each other.
The mixing of two incompatible greases deteriorates the physical and tribological
behavior of the grease. The compatibility of lubricating greases with bearing seals is
also a signiﬁcant aspect, which is mainly considered on the basis of base oil. ASTM
D6185 (ASTM D6185-11 2018) protocol covers the evaluation of compatibility of
one or more mixtures of lubricating greases.

The mixing of two greases is possible only when the similar base oil (chemical
structure), similar thickening agent (including concentration), similar additives (con-
centration also) and similar formulation technique is followed for the preparation of
greases.

9.10 Application of Grease

The grease has great demand in railroad, agriculture, steel mills, cement, mining,
textile, food industry, and automobile sector etc. The operating conditions of grease
often encountered with wet and humid conditions, dusty environment, exposure of
water, and corrosive environment. Draglines and excavators used in mining indus-
try furnished with kilometers long wire ropes lubricated with grease. The wire ropes
met with shock loads, high wear rate, and dusty environment. The wire ropes greases
should have a high concentration of AW and EP as well as anticorrosion additives. In
aviation application, the applied grease in aircraft ﬂew at high altitude and encoun-
tered with temperature in the range between −75 and 200 °C. Therefore, synthetic
oil preferred as base stock for aviation application. In space, the grease confronts
the vacuum environment, so outstandingly low volatility base oil is ideal. Specially
designed seals controlled the evaporation loss in the space. If grease applied at water
contamination area, then grease should possess high viscosity base oil and water-
resistant thickener. Water wash out property can be minimized with the addition of
tackiness additives. In the situation of heavy or shock load, high viscosity lubricating
oil grease preferred as well as it should contain a higher concentration of antiwear

178

S. S. Rawat and A. P. Harsha

Table 9.12 Application of grease in various parts of the passenger cars (Mang and Dresel 2007)

Automobile systems

Automobile parts

Steering system

Suspension system

Rack and pinion steering gear, pivots joints of steering linkages,
steering intermediate shafts

Ball joints of cross-bar and antiroll-bar, shock absorbers, half
shaft joints

Brake system

Caliper pins, ABS follower

Power transmission system Universal joints, cardan joint, constant velocity joint, belt-pulley

Wheel bearing

Body hardware

bearing, clutch bearing/spline, fan clutch bearing,
turbo/supercharger, differential gear, hypoid rear axle

Roller bearings, needle bearings

Door locks, door check hinges, windshield wiper gear, window
levers, seat adjustment gears

Electrical system

Electrical contacts, alternator bearing

Others

Water pump bearing, cable actuators

and extreme pressure additives. The grease selection for a speciﬁc application is
based on the operating temperature, operational life, load, speed, type of component
and, the environment. The application of grease in various parts of a passenger car
is summarized in Table 9.12.

9.11 Summary

The fundamental of lubricants, greases and its composition has been discussed in this
chapter. Large varieties of base oils and thickening agents are used in the formulation
of lubricating grease. Blending of additives in the grease is a common practice to
enhance properties of the grease. Lubricating greases are widely used in locomo-
tive, automotive, mining, steel, food industry, textile, and agriculture applications.
Besides this, greases are extensively used in a large variety of severe operating envi-
ronmental situations viz. higher temperature higher load, speed, and extreme pres-
sure. Various ASTM protocol for physical and tribological characterization of grease
is also discussed. From the last decade, the nano-additives are gaining more attention
for improvising the tribological performance of the grease. Remarkable reduction
in coefﬁcient of friction and wear is reported which indicates the signiﬁcant poten-
tial of nano-additives for improving the tribological performance. Biodegradability
and other environmental issues attract the researchers to search for an alternative for
conventional lubricants. Excellent lubrication behavior, renewability, and biodegrad-
ability properties of the vegetable oils are an attractive alternative for traditional
petroleum-based lubricants. Therefore, some researchers shift their choice towards
renewable resources, which is readily biodegradable as well as eco-friendly.

9 Current and Future Trends in Grease Lubrication
Abstract In the automotive industry, losses results from friction and wear processes
are huge, and every year almost thirty percent of the economy is consumed due to
tribological losses. Recent advancement in technologies now permits the tribologist
to design suitable lubrication techniques that were unachievable in the past. Recently,
vapor ﬁlm deposition or adding a thin layer of lubricants with improved physical and
chemical properties is enormous. However, the suitability of such type of techniques
is still in developing stage. To control the contact mechanism of sliding/rolling ele-
ments in the automotive industry, this work reports the importance of solid/liquid
particles in lubrication. The friction and wear behavior of nanoparticles based on
thin ﬁlm coating and liquid lubrication technique is studied with traditional lubri-
cation concept of vapor deposition and ﬂuid ﬁlm lubrication. Both techniques are
necessary for designing lubricating ﬁlm at the nanometer scale to control the surface
properties of materials at nano/micro scales. Further, nanoparticles of self-lubricious
materials are also used to prepare laboratory grease and are compared with traditional
industrial grease. The obtained results are discussed by the intrinsic mechanism of
sliding/rolling, theories of friction, wear, and involved parameters in the tribological
tests. The potential application of prepared vapor deposition ﬁlms/nanolubricants is
loaded gears, bearings, piston cylinder, etc. The work can also be suitable in other
industries where failure occurrence is repeated continuously due to resulting fric-
tional losses.
Keywords Lubrication · Tribological effects · Liquid-contact · Vapor deposition ·
Automotive industry

10.1 Introduction

Lubrication is an effective technology to reduce surface ﬂuctuation and provide
smooth operation during sliding/rolling contact (Zhu et al. 2019). However, the pro-
cess is not easy due to the involvement of various factors such as properties of two
contact surfaces, environment factors, effective load, and operational speed (Gong
et al. 2019; Qin et al. 2019). Among all load and speed are the main inﬂuential
factors, which determine the performance of components. More than ﬁfty percent
of automotive components are made of steel structure and need some lubrication
for their proper functioning. Hence, the choice of lubrication method is the most
important selection criteria in designing automotive components (Tai et al. 2014).

Based on the working principle, automotive components are provided with liquid
or solid lubricants. Solid particles such as graphite, graphene, molybdenum disul-
ﬁde, and boron nitride are the commonly used solid particles for extreme pressure
situation (Miyake 2005; Zhai et al. 2017; Shi and Wu 2018). In solid lubrication,
these particles act as a barrier between the contacts because generally these particles
are used under boundary lubrication condition. In this case, the exerted load is very
high, and the sliding speed is low, which causes a seizure problem. For resolving the
seizure problem, extreme pressure grease can be used (Sommer and Haas 2016; Lugt
2016). Grease can also be prepared by solid particle addition for providing support
in lubrication mechanism. On the other hand, the need for liquid ﬁlm arises where
operating sped is high and acted load is low. The most important selection criteria
are the adequate thickness of ﬁlm responsible for supporting the ﬁlm (Cen and Lugt
2019; Jammal et al. 2019; Karakashev et al. 2014). Similar to solid lubrication, this
is also achieved in boundary regime with or without any additive in oil medium.

In special cases where chances of heat transfer and local deformation arise it can be
provided with vapor deposition, and polymer ﬁlms (Upadhyay and Kumaraswamid-
has 2014, 2015; Upadhyay and Kumar 2019a, b). Both these coatings are highly
recommended for their unique properties in reducing friction and wear with the abil-
ity to withstand pressure. Nowadays, especially polymer-based nanocomposites are
ﬁnding its place in a variety of applications (Upadhyay and Kumar 2019a). Gener-
ally, they are made of solid/liquid ﬁllers into the epoxy matrix. The only problem
of these nanocomposites is their hygroscopic property and the unknown amount
of ﬁller quantity that has to be added for a particular application (Upadhyay and
Kumar 2019b). Based on the above lubrication methodologies, this chapter provides
a detailed tribological investigation of solid/liquid/grease/polymer based lubrication
mechanism under the boundary contact condition.

10.1.1 Preparation Method of Lubricants/Vapor Deposition

Scheme of various lubrication methodologies and their preparation method is pre-
sented in Fig. 10.1. In solid lubrication, solid particles are added between the con-
tacts with the help of volatile liquid in order to distribute homogeneously. In liquid
lubrication, the major difference is that particles are suspended in an oil medium to
provide better lubrication mechanism. Physical vapor deposition (PVD) with sput-
tering technique is one of the best methods available in the market for application
ranging from low to high temperature. Vapor deposition with sputtering is based
on dislodging and ejecting the atom from the target to the substrate material in the

10 Lubrication Effectiveness and Sustainability of Solid/Liquid …

185

Fig. 10.1 Various lubrication methodology and preparation method

presence of reactive argon gas. The target material is a type of coating that needs to
be provided onto the substrate material. The sputtering process was carried in the
presence of high-temperature plasma atmosphere. The dimension of the PVD target
was 600 mm height and 125 mm width.

Polymer nanocomposites are prepared by infusing the nano/micro sized
solid/liquid particles in the epoxy resin. This type of composites preparation required
an extensive stirring process for particles in order to distribute uniformly throughout
the matrix. A highly bonded composite is a result of room and temperature curing
process. For preparing grease, desired particles are initially suspended in oil medium
and provided with ultrasonication at temperature 70 °C. After a while, stearic acid
(C18H36O2) was added in the oil suspension and continuously stirred up to 180 °C
until it solidiﬁes. This solidiﬁcation process is known as the saponiﬁcation reaction.
At this stage, the fats are completely absorbed into the liquid soap.

10.1.2 Physical Properties of Steel and Ball-on-Disk Test

Procedure

Tool steel (substrate material) and bearing ball SAE 52100 was used in sliding test.
The physical properties of both materials are mentioned in Table 10.1. A tribology
test was conducted in a room temperature environment under a relative humidity
of 60% with ±2% deviation. The tribology test was performed by ball-on-disk tri-
bometer under 5N load, sliding velocity of 0.41 m/s and rotational speed of thousand
revolutions per minute. In a ball-on-disk tribometer, a ball is sliding against the rotat-
ing disk utilizing the stepper motor. The friction force is calculated by the deﬂection
of strains gauge system, which is provided adjacent to the ball holder. During sliding,

186

Table 10.1 Physical properties and dimensions of substrate and ball material
Surface roughness Ra (µm) Dia (mm)
0.40

Hardness (HRC)

Tool steel

Material

40

60

SAE 52100

62

3

4

10

–

R. K. Upadhyay

Thickness (mm)

ball holder experiences some deﬂection, which is used in the calculation of friction
coefﬁcient. The wear rate was estimated using the Archard’s Equation by calculating
the wear volume to the applied load and sliding distance.

10.1.3 Theory of Sliding Friction and Wear

The friction force is a combined effect of mechanical interactions such as contact
asperity deformation, plowing, and adhesion effect. The friction coefﬁcient is the
sum of two theories such as adhesion and plowing by hard grit particles (Shaw and
Macks 1949). Nevertheless, surface roughness contribution cannot be ignored in
friction. Surface roughness determines the deformation of asperities using slip-line
plasticity. According to Green (1954), the predicted model of friction values due
to asperity deformation are nearby the experimented values. Asperity interlocking
and surface roughness during sliding/rolling contact affect the friction force, which
signiﬁes the proportionality relation between friction force and surface roughness.
Surfaces during boundary contact condition become rough due to the formation of
bonding slip, which is caused by the deformation of contact surface by plowing
action. In various coating system, the requirement of low friction is achievable by
depositing a low shear strength ﬁlm.

The wear behavior of sliding contact has been earlier explained in terms of the
adhesion theory of wear (Holm 1938; Archard 1953). According to the theory, when
two sliding surfaces are in contact, wear occurs from the softer surface and sticks
to the harder surface by continuous shearing of asperities. A theory presented by
Holm (1938) signiﬁes that wear rate is directly proportional to the normal load
and inversely proportional to the hardness of the wearing material. Another model
was proposed by Archard (1953) and suggests the dependence of wear rate on the
normal load and materials hardness. Archard’s model describes the proportionality
constant, also known as wear coefﬁcient, which is the probability of loose particle
formation during the transfer of debris between two sliding surfaces. Wear coefﬁcient
of different material can have different values depending on the type of contact.
Table 10.2 shows some of the wear coefﬁcient values for different materials.

Adhesion theory of wear is the simplest one, but there are number of criticism

have been made. Some of the critical points are:
(cid:129) The harder surface cannot wear at all. This is a major criticism, which is challenged
by the experimental analysis. The theory is later modiﬁed by stating that sometimes
hard surface contains weak spots and at the same point fracture takes place.

10 Lubrication Effectiveness and Sustainability of Solid/Liquid …

187

Table 10.2 Wear coefﬁcient values

Material

Mild steel (on mild steel)

Copper-beryllium

Hard tool steel

Ferritic stainless steel

Polytetraﬂuoroethylene

Polythene

Poly(methyl methacrylate)

Wear coefﬁcient (K)
7 × 10−3
3.7 × 10−5
1.3 × 10−4
1.7 × 10−5
2.5 × 10−5
1.3 × 10−7
7 × 10−6

(cid:129) Wear debris only generated through asperities contact. This means that the steady-
state wear rate must depend on the surface roughness only, which is criticized
through experimental observations.

(cid:129) Material’s plasticity is the maximum work required to generate a wear particle
by adhesion. Hence, for better understanding of adhesion phenomena, a wear
coefﬁcient factor is introduced.

(cid:129) Mechanical and structural properties of materials are not linked with the adhesion
theory. Under the varied load conditions, mechanical properties depend on the
microstructure of test material, which must be included during sliding tests.

From the above criticism and adhesion theory, it is concluded that some of the
important properties and parameters have been overlooked, but these properties need
to be incorporated during tribological experimental observation.

10.1.4 Tribological Investigation

The friction and wear performance of molybdenum disulﬁde (MoS2) dispersed in
water and oil (parafﬁn oil) medium with or without dispersants/surfactant is presented
in Fig. 10.2. A thin layer of water/oil based solution is provided at the top surface of
tool steel. At every ﬁxed duration of time or after every 5-min, the liquid addition
process is repeated for continuous lubrication and motion. The friction coefﬁcient
and wear rate are high for bare steel surface and dry MoS2 nanoparticles due to the
absence of any liquid medium. However, as soon as the dispersant (Polyisobuty-
lene succinimides, PIBS) is added the friction values minimize, see Fig. 10.2a. On
contrary addition of water has not affected the friction values and attained similar
properties like bare surface. This is because of the fact that water is not able to
provide lubrication and starts evaporating as soon as the contact zone temperature
rises enormously. However, the addition of Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) reduces
the friction coefﬁcient by lowering the surface tension and total contact area. Later,
MoS2 particle based grease is prepared and compared with industrial grease. The

188

R. K. Upadhyay

Fig. 10.2 a Friction performance and b wear rate of MoS2 nanoparticles dispersed in a different
medium

main purpose of greases is to transmit power, reduce friction and wear, heat dissipa-
tion, support load at high pressure, and eliminate vibration and deﬂections. Industrial
grease (lithium based) has provided high friction performance compared to the MoS2
due to self-lubrication properties of these nanoparticles. Compared to all, the best
performance in terms of friction and wear (see Fig. 10.2b) of MoS2 has been achieved
in case of oil-dispersant medium and suggest its use in automotive for intermediate
contacts in the form of rolling and sliding.

10 Lubrication Effectiveness and Sustainability of Solid/Liquid …

189

Oil and water both considered being important lubricants for controlling friction
and wear. However, for speciﬁc conditions, the functionality of each changes severely.
In most of the machine elements oil is used for separating the machine members to
avoid contact with each another. This gives minimum or no contact to further control
the wear behavior of materials. On the other hand, water cannot be used as an internal
lubrication because it can severely attach metal components and triggered the rate
of erosion-corrosion. This is why water is only used a coolant during machining or
surface ﬁnish process.

The friction coefﬁcient and wear rate of vapor deposited single layer, and mul-
tilayer molybdenum nitride (MoN, Mo/MoN) ﬁlms have been investigated under a
room temperature environment. As seen in Fig. 10.3, a single layer of coating has
been provided high values of friction and wear. On the other hand multilayer of
ﬁlms of molybdenum nitride lowering the friction coefﬁcient by forming a low shear
strength ﬁlms on the surface. This shear ﬁlm is also responsible for the low values
of the wear rate. Molybdenum ﬁlms possess excellent properties and can be used at
temperatures. The friction and wear properties of vapor deposited ﬁlms completely
depend on the nitrogen partial pressure. As the nitrogen partial pressure increases,
the resulting tribological losses decreased because of deposited ﬁlm hardness. Due
to high hardness and surface smoothing process, molybdenum nitride produced little
wear, and no plowed region was observed for multilayer coatings. The wear behavior
of multilayer coatings is better than that of single layer coating.

The hardness of single layer and multilayer coatings were measured by Rockwell
hardness tester, see Fig. 10.4. The dark patches nearby the Rockwell indenter reﬂects
under the load. Based on the applied load and pile up process the suitability and
hardness of coatings can be identiﬁed. Table 10.3 shows some of the mechanical

Fig. 10.3 Friction and wear of single/multilayer molybdenum nitride coating

190

R. K. Upadhyay

Fig. 10.4 Rockwell hardness and adhesion measurement of molybdenum single/multilayer coat-
ings

Table 10.3 Mechanical properties of molybdenum nitride single/multilayer coating

Coating
material

Coating type Hardness

H/E ratio Critical load

(GPa)

38

48

Young’s
modulus
(GPa)

390

491

(N)

100+

100+

0.097

0.097

Molybdenum

Single layer

Multilayer

properties of these coatings. Importantly, coating resistance against the applied load
is veriﬁed by the plasticity index. The value close to this index (~0.1) shows the
better behavior of deposited coatings. Scratch adhesion measurement on the surface
show only Lc1 (crack generation) and Lc2 (crack propagation) region, which signiﬁes
the strength of these coatings. Coating spallation can be observed when the scratch
adhesion value reached to Ls, means ﬁnal delamination.

10.1.5 Inﬂuencing Wear Parameters

In coating tribology, the wear behavior of two sliding/rolling surfaces is highly
depended on the sliding speed, normal load, surface roughness, coating adhesion,
coating thickness, the microstructure of sliding material and counterpart material,

10 Lubrication Effectiveness and Sustainability of Solid/Liquid …

191

elastic modulus, and hardness. All the above effective parameters are summarized
in the subsequent sections.
(cid:129) Normal Load

According to the friction theory and Archard wear law, wear volume is directly
proportional to the normal load and independent of the geometry and size of contact
surfaces. Hence, wear increases with the normal load as the two surfaces tend to slide
against each other.
(cid:129) Sliding Speed

Sliding speed is one of the dominant factors that reduce surface strength and results
in failure. At very low sliding speed, coating can be worn away due to the developed
stick-slip process. A medium range of speed shortens the contact motion and result
in low adhesion wear. If the speed increases beyond the prescribed limit, the material
wear increases due to brittle fracture. However, the friction coefﬁcient can be lower
due to the softening of surface asperities.
(cid:129) Substrate Roughness

The wear rate of the material increases dramatically with an increase in roughness of
two sliding/rolling surfaces. However, in some instances, after continuous shearing of
these asperities, some ﬁlm-formation occurs which helps in providing low adhesion
between the contacts.
(cid:129) Coating Adhesion

The adhesion strength of coating depends on the bonding mechanism between the
atom of the outer surface and internal residual stresses. Coating adhesion can be
inﬂuenced by several factors, such as temperature, chemical elements of surfaces, a
coating method, and the thickness of coating.
(cid:129) Coating Thickness

Coating thickness is an important factor because low thin ﬁlm shear quickly and
worn away due to excessive penetration under varying load. On the other hand, thick
coatings may have poor adhesion and induce residual stresses within the coating
interface, which degrades coating quality.
(cid:129) Microstructure

The tribological properties of coatings are depended on its microstructure. The
microstructure properties mainly depend on the chemical composition of the struc-
ture, deposition technique and the deposition parameters like gas pressure, deposition
temperature and the substrate bias voltage. In addition, variation in temperature can
lead coating surface from crystalline structure to amorphous like solid structures.

192

R. K. Upadhyay

(cid:129) Hardness and Elastic Modulus Ratio

Hardness to elastic (H/E) ratio is an important parameter to indicate surface resistance
to plastic deformation. Enhancing the H/E ratio can provide a better perspective
on tribological performance. The coating hardness must be higher, and the elastic
modulus should be kept low for better performance.
(cid:129) Elastic Modulus

Elastic modulus mismatch between coating surface and base substrate surface can
lead to failure due to developed residual stresses. Hard and thick coatings have higher
elastic modulus than the substrates, and under tensile stresses, coating starts delam-
inating. Nevertheless, thick coating supports the entire load, and it is independent of
substrate elastic modulus. However, for thin coatings, the load is entirely supported
by the substrate.
(cid:129) Coating Hardness

High hardness of the coating can result in a low rate of wear. However, if the coating
thickness is increased beyond the prescribed limit, it cannot provide good wear
resistance. Further, high thickness ﬁlm induces brittleness in the coating zone and
reduces fracture toughness.
(cid:129) Substrate Hardness

The surface fracture of the coating depends on the substrate hardness. Surface fracture
of the softer material will be lower compared to the hardest. Hard material prolongs
the life of coating for the tribological application. In the present work, tool steel
reﬂects better delamination under adhesion test due to a moderate hardness value.

Above described tribological properties are related to the steel/steel contact. This
means a slight difference in the hardness of both materials. Now it is interesting to see
the tribological properties of two surfaces having different hardness. In this regard,
MoS2 is infused into a soft polymer, i.e., epoxy resin, and slide against a bearing steel
ball. The different concentration (1, 3, 5 wt%) of MoS2 nanocomposites are prepared,
and test for friction and wear behavior. Before that tribological property of pure epoxy
were evaluated and found friction coefﬁcient, and wear rate values of 0.4, 5.5 × 10−7
mm3/N m, respectively. Figure 10.5a, b show the hardness, friction coefﬁcient and
wear rate behavior of MoS2 nanocomposites ﬁller in epoxy resin. From the friction
and wear rate, it is clear that an increase in particle concentration decreases the surface
adhesion of composites and provide low values. However, the obtained friction values
can be often minimized if the polymer does not have hygroscopic properties. Due
to this property, the self-lubrication performance of MoS2 is affected by its reaction
with a humid environment. Filling of vacant asperities triggers the wear mechanism
in this scenario. Overall, the surface contact area increased with more ﬁller particles
and attained a low wear rate. At starting the wear rate is high, but as soon as the
MoS2 starts providing self-lubrication properties, composite wear rate gets affected.
Another important aspect of these polymer nanocomposites is their contact angle
and surface energy. Table 10.4 shows the contact angle and surface energy values

10 Lubrication Effectiveness and Sustainability of Solid/Liquid …

193

Fig. 10.5 a Hardness, b friction and wear performance of epoxy-MoS2 nanocomposites

Table 10.4 Contact angle and surface energy of epoxy-MoS2 nanocomposite

Contact angle (°)

Surface energy (mJ/m2)

Composite

MoS2 1%
MoS2 3%
MoS2 5%

50.0

45.2

41.0

45.30

52.56

58.23

of epoxy-MoS2 nanocomposites. With increase in particle concentration, the water
contact angle value decreases and surface energy moves towards the high limit. This
signiﬁes that nanocomposite should have high adhesion and can result in high friction
coefﬁcient and wear rate. However, the observed experimented results are different
from the theory. This is because of the fact that MoS2 has lubrication properties and
reduces high contact forces when present in the boundary or any matrix.

194

R. K. Upadhyay

Another important aspect is that the utilized volume of water, which is 0.2 µL.
Depending on the reactivity of water on the epoxy surface, it spreads on the surface.
The contact angle was measured with the help of a Goniometer using distilled water
droplet of 0.2 µL. A small volume of liquid in the droplet provides a low effect of
gravitational forces and depicts the true physical properties of the equilibrium system
(as all the forces are in line contact) (Dimitrakopoulos 2007; Sasges and Ward 1998).
Throughout the contact angle measurement, this small droplet retains the spherical
shape and contacts with the minimum surface area. Basically, the water molecules
are pulled inward by the neighboring molecules on the surface and create internal
pressure. This intermolecular attraction is responsible for the contact and is known
as surface tension, which maintains the shape of the water molecules on the epoxy
surface (Yuan and Lee 2013). If the liquid volume is too large, the droplet reactivity on
the epoxy surface increases with high gravitational forces. In this case, the contacting
drop on the surface includes additional kinetic energy, which increases the impact
force of water molecules. In the presence of high gravitational forces and kinetic
energy the shape of water drop changes from spherical to ﬂat, which additionally
creates apparent wetting area. This apparent area cannot be used for representing
true physical behavior of water and epoxy contact surfaces. Hence, the low volume
of the water droplet is used in the experiment to reach the state of equilibrium.

10.1.6 Conclusions and Future Directions

Lubrication mechanism of particles added in any medium is an important strategy to
reduce surface friction and wear. From the study, several conclusions can be drawn
in terms of dry, liquid, coating, and composite friction evaluation. Molybdenum
disulﬁde in dry medium provide slight high values of friction and wear due to the
requirement of more work to form particles into the lubricant ﬁlm. In liquid medium,
this characteristic is achieved quickly due to developed low shear strength ﬁlms,
which ease sliding between the contact surfaces. Single/multilayer ﬁlms of MoS2 are
compatible for high-temperature operation especially in case of tool steels operating
under extreme environmental conditions. The critical loading of MoS2 ﬁlm is beyond
the critical limit, which also signiﬁes its application. Addition of MoS2 into the epoxy
resin signiﬁcantly lowers the wear behavior due to its lubrication mechanism. This is
the most demonstrative evidence of two different materials having opposite hardness.
Nanolubricants have found widespread application in the aerospace industry
because they are better suited to the more demanding requirements of aerospace
than any other materials. The main demanding condition of aerospace applications
is that requirement of operation under an extremely wide temperature range. Indus-
trial application of solid/liquid based nanolubricant are bearing, engine oils (automo-
tive, diesel), gas turbine (aircraft), gears (machinery, helicopters), two-cycle engines
(scooters). Hence, synthesis and evolution of more specialized materials for nano-
tribological application is required for future applications. The surface wetting prop-
erties are essential, and this needs to be explored in detail with the effect of surfactant

10 Lubrication Effectiveness and Sustainability of Solid/Liquid …

195

interaction and their role in friction reduction. For coating tribology, more noble and
reliable functionally graded materials need to design and develop through a sputtering
process where extremely low friction and wear values are of high interest. Another
evolution can be done in the area of parallel computing of large-scale simulation.
In polymer nanocomposite, still, the exact particle weight concentration needs to
be explored for better utilization of available resources economically. Also, various
surface characterization techniques such as microstructure studied will be performed
to establish the relationship between experimented results and surface properties.

Abstract Lubricants are used as anti-friction and heat absorbing media and there-
fore lead to smooth and reliable functions/operations, and therefore reduces the risks
of frequent failures and thus enhance the durability/life-cycle of vehicle. At present,
due to worldwide concern in protecting the environment from pollution and the
increased prices and depletion of reserve crude oil, there has been growing interest
to formulate and apply an alternative solution with the research and development in
environment-friendly bio-lubricants from natural resources. A bio-lubricant is renew-
able and sustainable lubricants which is biodegradable, non-toxic, and emits net zero
greenhouse gas. This chapter deals the potential of vegetable oil-based bio-lubricant
for automotive application. In this chapter, the source, properties, as well as advan-
tages and disadvantages of the bio-lubricant has been detailed. Further, the future
prospects and challenges of bio-lubricants as potential alternative of conventional
lubricants has been elucidated.
Keywords Biolubricant · Automotive application · Tribology · Friction · Wear

11.1 Introduction

In recent years, researchers all around the world endeavored to make a product
which is environment friendly, durable, reliable and effective for energy utilization
in automotive applications (Singh et al. 2019). Innovation in technological resolutions
such as introduction of material having light weight, fuels which are harmless, fuel
combustion in controlled way, and more efﬁcient gas at exhaust after treatment, are
the possible ways to minimize the problems encountered to the environment through
industrial machines and vehicles (Gerbig et al. 2004). During the combustion process
in internal combustion (IC) engine, involvement of high temperature and pressure
conditions, result in direct force to the engine components such as pistons, to move
it by a certain distance, for achieving the mechanical energy by the transformation
of chemical energy (Singer and Williams 1954). In every engineering equipment,
the irregularities present in the surface of moving/working components result in the
loss of material due to abrasion wear. The possible ways of minimizing the wear
in the moving/working components are either by surface properties modiﬁcation
through surface engineering processes or by the application of lubricants (Panchal
et al. 2017). At the desired operating conditions, the effective lubrication of moving
components of an engine permits them to slide over other components smoothly, for
the safe and reliable automobile operation. Reduction of friction and wear during the
tribological interaction of automobile components helps in minimizing the energy
losses (Mobarak et al. 2014).

The process employed for reducing the wear between the surfaces moving relative
to each other is well known as lubrication. The major objectives of lubrication during
any application are: (i) to minimize the wear of contacting surfaces moving relative
to each other and along with reducing the wear it also helps in preventing the heat
loss, (ii) to create the environment which helps surfaces to become corrosion free and
oxidation resistant, (iii) to create the environment as an insulator for applications such
as transformer applications, (iv) to create the shielding environment for the surfaces
against the water, dust and dirt. Heat and wear both the terms are linked to the friction
occurred between the moving surfaces and can be minimized up to the signiﬁcant
levels by minimizing the coefﬁcient of friction between the moving surfaces with
the application of lubricants found in the solid, liquid and gaseous form. Among all
categories of available lubricants, the liquid, solid or semi-solid form of lubricants
are most widely used forms in the various applications (Panchal et al. 2017; Ahmed
and Nassar 2013; Iqbal 2014).

In an automobile application, at desired operational conditions the effective and
efﬁcient lubrication of working/moving parts is the mandatory requirement for safe as
well as reliable operation of an automotive vehicle which results in reducing the wear
and friction for drive-trains and engines (Singh et al. 2017a, 2019). The lubricants
obtained by mineral oils has been extensively used in automotive applications for a
very long time. Mineral oils are the byproduct of crude oil and is obtained by the
distillation process but the use of mineral oils is limited due to the limited availability
of reserves for crude oil. In addition to this, the disposing of mineral oils causes
the pollution in the aquatic as well as in the terrestrial ecosystems especially the
aquatic system (Ssempebwa and Carpenter 2009). Moreover, the use of mineral oils
in engine combustion as a lubricant lead to degradation of environment by emitting
the metal traces such as magnesium, phosphorous, zinc, iron nano-particles and
calcium (Miller et al. 2007). Furthermore, the current as well as the future prospects
of mineral oils in automotive engine applications as a lubricant were analyzed by Tung
and McMillan (Tung and McMillan 2004) and they predicted it as bleak for future
prospects. Therefore, there is a necessity for identifying the alternative resources to
mineral oils which are suitable for use as lubricant in automotive engines (Singh
et al. 2019).

11 Potential of Bio-lubricants in Automotive Tribology

199

The factors such as the limitation on availability of crude oil resources world-
wide, the increasing prices of oil, and most importantly the necessity of environment
protection against the pollution caused due to the use of lubricating oils focused
the attention of researchers towards the development as well as use of alternative
lubricants which can protect environment deterioration by replacing lubricating oils
(Mobarak et al. 2014; Ruggiero et al. 2017). The certain physico-chemical properties
of bio-based lubricant (Bio-lubricant) and their biodegradable properties has shown
great potential to use bio-lubricant as an alternative lubricant to mineral oils for
automotive application without causing any harm to the environment (Syahir et al.
2017). The bio-lubricant possesses the improved properties such as high ﬂash point,
high viscosity index, high lubricity and low evaporative losses in comparison to min-
eral oils (Asadauskas et al. 1996; Erhan and Asadauskas 2000; Jayadas et al. 2007;
Alves et al. 2013; Nagendramma and Kaul 2012). The existence of polar groups and
extended fatty-acid chain structure of plant-based oil-lubricant makes them suitable
for hydrodynamic and boundary lubrication based automotive sector applications
(Jayadas et al. 2007; Alves et al. 2013). The sources of plant-based oil-lubricants are
the seeds containing oil and are available in different forms through-out worldwide
(Nagendramma and Kaul 2012; Lathi and Mattiasson 2007). As per the available lit-
erature, worldwide about 350 distinct crops are identiﬁed with oil bearing properties
(Mobarak et al. 2014; No 2011; Agarwal 2007). Edible and non-edible are two cate-
gories of plant-based oil resources (Mobarak et al. 2014). In the available literature, it
is observed that non-edible plant-based oils are preferred to be employed as lubricant
in automotive applications speciﬁcally in CI engines over the edible plant-based oil
resources due to its effect on ecological systems by cultivating crops (Atabani et al.
2013; Adhvaryu et al. 2004). The sources of non-edible plant oils are jojoba, mon-
gongo, polanga, neem, castor, Jatropha curcas, mahua, karanja, coriander and hingan
(Singh and Singh 2010a; Singh et al. 2017b, 2018). In addition to this, the sources
of inedible oil include Sapindus mukorossi, linseed oil, Acrocomia aculeata, nahor
oil, Nicotiana tabacum, rubber seed oil, Crambe abyssinica, Sapium sebiferum, and
Euphorbia tirucalli (Hasni et al. 2017). In available literature, most of the researchers
reported use of plant-based oil as an engine fuel, only few researchers reported use
of plant-based oils as lubricant in automotive applications (Mobarak et al. 2014).

The main aim of this chapter is to provide speciﬁc information to readers, indus-
trialists, policy makers, researchers and engineers who are focused in bio-lubricant
based studies in automotive tribology. This study presents the comprehensive review
on potential use of bio-lubricants for automotive applications and this review includes
the studies from the extremely observed publications and most recent available pub-
lications.

11.2 Lubrication and Lubricants

Lubrication is the process of imposing the lubricant between the contacting inter-
faces of moving or working components. Lubrication helps in, reducing the wear,
friction, heat loss, oxidation, provides the corrosion prevention environment, pro-
vides the insulator environment, and also provides the protection of parts against

200

M. K. Pathak et al.

moisture, dirt and dust (Panchal et al. 2017; Mobarak et al. 2014). A good lubricant
must possess the properties such as its higher oxidation resistant environment, capa-
bility of providing corrosion prevention environment, lower value of freezing point,
higher value of viscosity index, higher thermal stability, and higher boiling point
values (Mobarak et al. 2014). Lubricants can be classiﬁed on the basis of physical
appearance, resources of base oil and applications.

i. On the basis of physical appearance, the lubricants can be categorized as solid,
semisolid and liquid lubricants: Manmade oils, animal oils, petroleum oils and
vegetable oils all comes in the category of liquid lubricants; the solid lubri-
cants are the lubricants which are composed of layers of organic and inorganic
compound like cadmium di-sulphide, molybdenum di-sulphide, and graphite;
the semisolid lubricants are the lubricants in which the liquid is ﬂoated in solid
matrix of thickener as well as the additives like grease (Mobarak et al. 2014).

ii. On the basis of resources of base oil, the lubricants can be categorized as reﬁned
oil, natural oil (also known as natural esters) and synthetic oil (also known as
synthetic esters): oil extracted from the petroleum as well as crude oil reserves are
comes under the category of reﬁned oils like aromatic, naphthenic and parafﬁnic
oils; oil which is the outcome of crop driven as well as the animal driven is
comes under the category of natural oils; oil which is the outcome of the end
product of reactions as per the requirement comes under the category of synthetic
oils and the examples are polyalphaoleﬁnes, synthetic esters, diesters, silicones,
polyglycols, ionic liquids, perﬂuoroalkylethers, genetically modiﬁed organisms
or any other man-made lubricant comprising chemical compounds (Mobarak
et al. 2014; Reeves et al. 2017).

iii. On the basis of applications, the lubricants can be categorized as automotive oils,
industrial oils and special oils: oil used in transportation and automobile sector
comes under the category of automotive oils like hydraulic as well as brake
ﬂuids, gear box oils, transmission oils and engine oils; oil used for industrial
purpose comes under the category of industrial oils like hydraulic oils, metal
working ﬂuid, compressor oils and machine oils; oil used for speciﬁc operation
with special purpose comes under the category of special oils like instrumental
oils white oils and process oils (Mobarak et al. 2014).

11.3 Bio-lubricants

The lubricants which are having the constituents or base which is based on bio-based
raw materials like animal fat, vegetable oils or any other environmentally benign
hydrocarbons is termed to be bio-lubricant (Reeves et al. 2017). Biodegradability
and non-toxicity of bio-lubricants to the human beings and to the other living organ-
isms is mainly due to its base constituents (Salimon et al. 2010). Globally, the demand
of bio-lubricants is rising due to its environmentally friendliness factor and the eco-
nomic factors such as prevention of toxic substances to the environment; depletion
of reservoirs of crude oil; hike in the prices of crude oil and the strict regulations

11 Potential of Bio-lubricants in Automotive Tribology

201

Table 11.1 Statics of oil-content in some non-edible and edible oil species (Reeves et al. 2017;
Usta et al. 2011; Singh and Singh 2010b; Moﬁjur et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2012; Li et al. 2012;
Kumar and Sharma 2011; Sharma and Singh 2010; Karaosmanoglu et al. 1999; Wang et al. 2011)

S. No. Non-edible species Oil content (% of

Edible species Oil content (% of

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Moringa

Linseed

Mahua

Castor

Karanja

Neem

Jatropha

Desert date

Niger

volume)

20–36

35–45

35–50

45–60

30–50

30–50

40–60

37–48

43–50

Coconut

Corn

Olive

Peanut

Palm

Rapeseed

–

–

–

volume)

63–65

48

45–70

45–55

30–60b

38–46

–

–

–

of government from time to time for the operation, use and disposal of petroleum
based oils (Deffeyes 2008; Goodstein 2005). In current scenario, the potential of
bio-lubricants in automobile sector makes them the best economical alternative to
the traditional petroleum-based lubricants.

Production of bio-lubricants is necessary for alternative energy applications due to
their numerous worldwide source availability. While looking from country to country
the type of feedstock for bio-lubricants may differ due to the different geographical
locations. In the literature, it is reported that number of oil-bearing crops are known
to be more than 350 among which only peanut oil, cottonseed, rapeseed, safﬂower,
coconut, sunﬂower, soybean, and palm oils are considered as alternative lubricants
which have the potential (Mobarak et al. 2014). Oil content statics of some edible
and non-edible seeds are shown in Table 11.1 (Usta et al. 2011; Singh and Singh
2010b; Moﬁjur et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2012; Li et al. 2012; Kumar and Sharma
2011; Sharma and Singh 2010; Karaosmanoglu et al. 1999; Wang et al. 2011). Oil
extracted from non-edible seeds such as karanja, neem and jatropha has received the
interest worldwide (Moﬁjur et al. 2012).

11.3.1 Bio-lubricant Properties

Bio-lubricants driven by vegetable oils reveals the suitable properties (Willing 2001).
Bio-lubricants possesses various practically preferable capabilities relative to the
petroleum driven lubricants (Munoz et al. 2012) or in other words we can say that
bio-lubricants possesses many useful and valuable physicochemical properties. Bio-
lubricants have high viscosity index, elevated lubricity, high ﬂash point and evap-
orative conditions which are minimum (Raj and Sahayaraj 2010; Usta et al. 2011;
Willing 2001; Asadauskas et al. 1996; Erhan and Perez 2002; Munoz et al. 2012; Das

202

Table 11.2 Comparative
study of properties of
vegetable and mineral oils
(Mobarak et al. 2014;
Johnson and Miller 2010)

Properties

Vegetable oils

Mineral oils

M. K. Pathak et al.

100–200
−20 to +10
Good

100
−15
–

890–970 (kg/m3)

840–920 (kg/m3)

Viscosity index (VI)

Pour point, 1 °C

Miscibility with
mineral oils

Density @20 °C
(kg/m3)
Flash point

Fire point

Hydrolytic stability

Cold ﬂow behavior

Sludge forming
tendency

Seal swelling
tendency

Shear stability

Higher

Higher

Poor

Poor

Poor

Slight

Good

Oxidation stability

Moderate

Biodegradability (%)

80–100 (%)

10–30 (%)

Lower

Lower

Good

Good

Good

Good

Slight

Good

Less

Solubility in water

Non-miscible

Non-miscible

Speciﬁc gravity

More

et al. 2012). Overall vegetable oil-based lubricants possess exhibits the superior prop-
erties than the mineral oil-based lubricants. Table 11.2 represents the comparative
analysis of properties of vegetable oil and mineral oil-based lubricants.

11.3.1.1 Viscosity

The most important property of oils is Viscosity which indicates the resistance to the
ﬂow. The higher value of viscosity indicates the higher resistance to ﬂow while the
lower value indicates the lower resistance to ﬂow. Viscosity of oils directly dependent
on pressure, temperature and formation of ﬁlm (Mobarak et al. 2014).

11.3.1.2 Viscosity Index (VI)

VI represents the measure in change of viscosity with the variation of temperature.
The higher value of VI represents the lower variation in the temperature while the
lower value of VI indicates the higher variation in temperature. This is the most
important property of bio-lubricants which ensures bio-lubricant to be more effective
at higher temperature ranges by maintaining the thickness of oil ﬁlm to be thick when
compared with the mineral oils. This property of bio-lubricants makes them most
suitable lubricants for wide variety of temperature ranges (Mobarak et al. 2014).

11 Potential of Bio-lubricants in Automotive Tribology

203

11.3.1.3 Pour point

The lowest temperature at which oil start to ﬂow or pours is known to be the pour
point of oils. This is one of the most important property of lubricants. The vegetable-
based oils are having the low value of pour point while comparing with the mineral
oils, which enables bio-lubricants as excellent lubricants for cold start applications
(Mobarak et al. 2014).

11.3.1.4 Flash Point and Fire Point

The minimum temperature at which lubricant must be heated before its vaporization
is known as the ﬂash point of the lubricant. While mixing of air with lubricant enables
it to ignite but not to burn. Fire point is the temperature at which the combustion of
lubricant continues. Lubricants volatility and ﬁre resistance properties are identiﬁed
on the basis of its ﬂash point and ﬁre point. These two factors play vital role during
the transportation of lubricants. The bio-lubricants generally have the higher value
of ﬂash point in comparison to mineral oils which reduces the risk of ﬁre due to the
leaked lubricant and provides the safety on shop ﬂoors (Mobarak et al. 2014).

11.3.1.5 Cloud Point

The temperature at which solid dissolves in oil is known as the cloud point. While
dropping of the temperature wax is crystallized and became visible. The prevention
of ﬁlter clogging can be ensured by maintaining the temperature above the cloud
point (Mobarak et al. 2014).

11.3.1.6 Acid or Neutralization Number

The amount of base content or acid required by a lubricant for neutralization can be
termed as neutralization number or acid number (Mobarak et al. 2014).

11.3.1.7 Oxidation Stability

Ability of lubricant to resist the oxidation forming tendency is known as oxidation
stability. With the rise of the temperature oxidation stability of lubricant increases.
The noteworthy contributors to oxidation comprise agitation, pressure, contaminants,
temperature, metal surfaces and water. The lower value of oxidation stability shows
that the oxidation of oil take place rapidly during the use if it is untreated, becomes
thick and polymerizes to a plastic-like consistency (Mobarak et al. 2014).

204

M. K. Pathak et al.

11.3.1.8 Rust and Corrosion Prevention

Chemical reaction between ferrous metals and water is known as rust while the chem-
ical reaction between metals and chemicals is known as corrosion. Bio-lubricants
are non-toxic in nature and does not react with ferrous metals, water and chemicals
when comparing with the mineral oils (Mobarak et al. 2014).

11.3.1.9 Anti-wear Properties

Vegetable oil-based bio-lubricants indicates the improved anti-wear properties than
mineral oils. At low pressure and low speed applications lubricants performs sat-
isfactorily. In case of boundary lubrication, when the oil viscosity is not sufﬁcient
to provide the surface contact prevention, the inclusion of additives with anti-wear
property provides the defensive ﬁlm at surfaces on contact to minimize the wear
(Mobarak et al. 2014).

11.3.1.10 Hydrolytic Stability

The ability of lubricant to offer the resistance to cleavage or attack of water molecule
or vapor of water is known as the hydrostatic stability. This property of a lubricant
strongly depends on the synthetic ester and the fatty acid ester structure of bio-
based ﬂuids due to the reason that the chemical reaction for these molecules is an
equilibrium reaction. In hydrolysis process the bio-based ﬂuids cleave into their acid
and alcohol components and inﬂuences the ester bond directly. This is known to
be hydrolytic splitting process which takes place until the restoration of chemical
equilibrium (Totten et al. 2019). Chemical structure is the key factor which inﬂuences
the hydrostatic stability of an ester. Bio-lubricants have the high degree of hydrostatic
stability which are derived from saturated esters with straight chain components in
comparison to the branched or unsaturated esters.

11.3.2 Biodegradability

Now a days, the industries as well as the automotive sectors are moving towards the
use of green lubricants, which prerequisites the two major properties to be within
the bio-lubricants: (i) highly biodegradable and (ii) lower ecotoxicity. The major
advantage involved with the use of bio-lubricant is their inherent biodegradable
property and the lower toxicity towards the environment. The chemical dissolution
process through which the organic materials/substances are broken down with the
help of enzymes originated from the living organisms is known as the biodegradation
process. In other words, we can say that the bio-lubricants based on raw materials
which are renewable and derived from H2O and CO2 via. process of photosynthesis,

11 Potential of Bio-lubricants in Automotive Tribology

205

Table 11.3 Biodegradability
of some bio-lubricants base
stocks (Singh et al. 2019)

Base-stock types

Bio-degradability range (% loss at
21 days)

Non-edible vegetable oils

70–100

Diesters

Polyethylene glycols

Polyols

Aromatic esters

Alkyl benzenes

Mineral oils

55–95

10–75

5–95

0–90

5–20

15–75

Fig. 11.1 Life cycle of bio-based lubricants (Mobarak et al. 2014). Copyright (2014) Elsevier Ltd

after the application, at the end returns to environment in the form of H2O and CO2 by
the process of biodegradation (Johansson and Lundin 1979). Table 11.3 represents the
bio-degradability of some bio-lubricant base stocks (Singh et al. 2019). Figure 11.1
shows the life cycle of the bio-lubricants.

11.3.3 Merits and Demerits of Bio-lubricant

Bio-lubricants can be used in their natural form as a lubricant. They have various
merits and demerits while considered for industrial, automotive and any other appli-
cations.

206

M. K. Pathak et al.

Table 11.4 Beneﬁts of
bio-lubricants (Mobarak et al.
2014)

Higher viscosity index

Wide range of temperature

Higher boiling temperatures

Lower emissions

Lower volatility

Higher lubricity

Higher ﬂashpoints

Higher detergency

Oil-mist and oil-vapor
reduction

Rapid biodegradation

Better skin compatibility

Decreased exhaust emissions

Lower friction losses, better
fuel economy

Higher safety on shop ﬂoor

Eliminating the requirement
of detergent additives

Helps in preventing the
oil-mist into lungs during
breathing

Reduced toxicological and
environmental hazards

High cleanliness and less
dermatological at worplace

The merits of bio-lubricants that they have an excellent lubricity while compar-
ing with the mineral oils and they have high viscosity index, high ﬂash point. The
properties such as biodegradability, less-toxic nature and renewable nature makes
them more attractive for industrial and automotive applications. The increased vis-
cosity also helps in reducing the operational temperature which contributes in saving
the energy for automotive applications. The above-mentioned properties make it as
the better alternative for industrial and automotive applications as compared to the
petroleum-based oils. Beneﬁts of few bio-lubricants are shown in Table 11.4.

The negative side of bio-lubricants is its low oxidation stability which requires
the treatment of bio-lubricant before the use for better performance. Bio-lubricants
are having the low temperature limitations such as its unpleasant smell, lower com-
patibility with sealants and paints, ﬁlter clogging tendency and ﬂushing propensity
due to the low viscosity.

11.3.4 Bio-lubricants in Automotive Tribology

The best alternative available to the mineral oil-based lubricant is the bio-based lubri-
cants in industrial as well as in the automotive sector due to the excellent inherent
qualities of bio-lubricants. The advantages involved with the use of bio-lubricants
are their environmentally friendliness property towards the sensitive environments
which helps in the preventing the pollution. Now a days, bio-lubricants applications
can be seen in the industrial as well as in the automobile sector. The most impor-
tant applications of bio-lubricants are: automotive oils like engine oils, gear box
oils, transmission ﬂuids, brake and hydraulic ﬂuids; industrial oils such as machine
oils, hydraulic ﬂuids, metal working ﬂuids, compressor ﬂuids; and special oils like
instrumental oils, white oils and process oils. Figure 11.2 shows the major bene-
ﬁts involved with the application of bio-lubricants (Mobarak et al. 2014) whereas

11 Potential of Bio-lubricants in Automotive Tribology

207

Fig. 11.2 Major beneﬁts involved with the application of bio-lubricants in an industry (Mobarak
et al. 2014). Copyright (2014) Elsevier Ltd

Fig. 11.3 shows the wide areas of application of bio-lubricant in automotive sectors
(Mobarak et al. 2014). These oils fruitfully take the place of mineral oils as com-
pressor oils, hydraulic oils, engine oils, aviation oils, metal working oils, insulating
oils, general/multi-purpose oils, grease and lubricants for tractors, gears, pump sets
generators etc. Table 11.5 shows the work done by various researchers on vegetable
oil-based bio-lubricant in different applications.

Fig. 11.3 Requirements of lubrication for a pick-up truck in an automotive sector (Mobarak et al.
2014). Copyright (2014) Elsevier Ltd

208

M. K. Pathak et al.

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

.
l
a

t
e

h
g
n
i
S

,
)
1
1
0
2
(

h
g
n
i
S

d
n
a

h
g
n
i
S

,
)
4
1
0
2

,
1
1
0
2
(

s
e
m
a
h
T

,
)
3
1
0
2
(

i
l
o
m
a
h
C

e
n
a
h
u
S

,
)
9
9
9
1
(

u
Y
d
n
a

d
n
a

g
n
i
T

,
)
2
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

d
n
a

n
a
h
u
a
h
C

,
)
1
1
0
2
(
n
e
h
C

)
3
1
0
2
(

r
e
b
b
i
h
C

s
e
i
t
r
e
p
o
r
p
y
t
i
c
i
r
b
u
l

d
e
c
n
a
h
n
E

t
n
i
o
p
h
s
a
ﬂ
d
n
a
y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
v

h
g
i
H

s
e
s
s
o
l

e
v
i
t
a
r
o
p
a
v
e
m
u
m
i
n
i
M

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p
r
e
t
t
e
B

y
c
n
e
d
n
e
t

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f

t
i
s
o
p
e
d

r
e
w
o
L

x
e
d
n
i
y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
v

r
e
h
g
i
H

y
t
i
l
i
t
a
l
o
v
w
o
L

,
)
1
0
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

s
o
l
u
o
p
o
t
s
a
n
A

,
)
0
0
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

e
u
q
e
l
a

M

)
7
9
9
1
(

e
u
q
e
l
a

M

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

r
e
w
o
L

e
r
u
t
a
n

e
v
i
s
o
r
r
o
c
w
o
L

s
e
i
t
r
e
p
o
r
p

,
)
2
1
0
2

,
1
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

l
a
z
a
F

,
)
3
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

s
a
v
e
d
e
b
e
L

,
)
0
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e
b
e
e
s
a
H

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
s
m
ﬁ

l

t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

r
e
g
n
o
r
t
S

n
i
a
h
c

n
o
b
r
a
c
o
r
d
y
h

d
e
t
a
r
u
t
a
s
n
U

g
i
r

t
s
e
t
g
n
i
t
a
c
o
r
p
i
c
e
r

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
-
h
g
i
H

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
e
r

l
e
e
t
s
–
l
e
e
t
s

)
t
a
ﬂ
-
n
o
-
l
l
a
b
(

,
)
0
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e
k
e
l
u
S

n
o
i
t
a
d
i
x
o

d
n
a

n
o
i
s
o
r
r
o
c
-
i
t
n
a

r
e
t
t
e
B

s
t
c
a
t
n
o
c

r
i
a
p

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

t
l
u
s
e
R

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c
/
d
o
h
t
e
m
g
n
i
t
s
e
T

r
o
f
n
e
k
a
t

t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
L

s
t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
l
-
o
i
B

)
4
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

k
a
r
a
b
o
M

;
9
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

h
g
n
i

S
(

t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
l
-
o
i
b

d
e
s
a
b
-
l
i
o
e
l
b
a
t
e
g
e
v

n
o

s
r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

y
b

y
r
a
m
m
u
s

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

s
u
o
i
v
e
r
P

.

5
1
1
e
l
b
a
T

0
5
W
0
2
E
A
S

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r

l
i
o
m
l
a
P

s
e
i
t
r
e
p
o
r
p
r
a
e
w

-
i
t
n
a

r
e
h
g
i
H

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

r
e
w
o
L

)
7
0
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

s
a
d
a
y
a
J

s
e
i
t
r
e
p
o
r
p
y
t
i
c
i
r
b
u
l

d
e
c
n
a
h
n
E

r
e
t
s
e
t

l
l
a
b
-
4

0
5
W
0
2
E
A
S

l
i
o

t
u
n
o
c
o
C

)
1
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e
m
a
l
a
K

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

r
e
w
o
L

r
e
h
g
i
h
s
i
y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
V

f
o

d
o
h
t
e
m
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
s
h
t
i

w

t
i
n
u
g
n
i
t
s
e
t
-
o
b
i
r
t

l
l
a
b
-
4

0
4
E
A
S

l
i
o
m
l
a
p

e
t
s
a

W

g
n
i
t
s
e
t

e
v
i
s
n
e
p
x
e

s
s
e
L

g
n
i
t
s
e
t

f
o

d
o
h
t
e
m
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
s

)
d
e
s
a
b

r
e
p
a
e
h
c

d
n
a

y
l
d
n
e
i
r
f
-
o
c
E

h
t
i

w
s
r
e
t
s
e
t
-
o
b
i
r
t

s
u
o
i
r
a
V

m
u
e
l
o
r
t
e
p
(

s
l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
M

,
r
e
w
o
ﬂ
n
u
s
(

s
l
i
o
e
l
b
a
t
e
g
e
V

,
n
a
e
b
y
o
s

,

m
l
a
p

,
t
u
n
o
c
o
c

a
h
p
o
r
t
a
j

,

m
e
e
n

,
a
j
n
a
r
a
k

,
r
o
t
s
a
c

,
e
v
i
l
o

,
a
u
h
a
m

)
.
c
t
e

)
0
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

h
g
n
i
S

r
e
h
g
i
h
s
i
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

t
n
a
d
i
x
o
i
t
n
A

t
i
n
u
g
n
i
t
s
e
t

r
a
e
w

l
l
a
b
-
4

)
d
e
n
ﬁ
e
r

r
e
p
u
s
(

l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
M

l
i
o
r
o
t
s
a
C

11 Potential of Bio-lubricants in Automotive Tribology

209

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

s
e
i
t
r
e
p
o
r
p
y
t
i
c
i
r
b
u
l

d
e
c
n
a
h
n
E

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

r
e
w
o
L

c
i
x
o
t
-
n
o
N

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

d
n
a

r
e
t
e
m
a
i
d

r
a
c
s
-
r
a
e
w

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

d
n
a

e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
r

,

y
l
d
n
e
i
r
f
-
o
c
E

y
t
i
l
i
t
a
l
o
v

r
e
w
o
L

e
l
b
a
d
a
r
g
e
d
o
i
b

t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
d
a
r
g
e
d

r
a
e
w
e
c
a
f
r
u
s

r
e
w
o
L

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

r
e
w
o
L

x
e
d
n
i
y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
v

r
e
h
g
i
H

r
e
w
o
l

s
e
s
s
o
l

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
F

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

d
a
o
l

m
u
i
d
e
m
d
n
a

h
g
i
h
t
a

s
n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

,
)
7
9
9
1
(

.
l
a

t
e

s
a
k
s
u
a
d
a
s
A

)
5
0
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

u
y
r
a
v
h
d
A

r
e
p
a
e
h
c

d
n
a

y
l
d
n
e
i
r
f
-
o
c
E

t
i
n
u
g
n
i
t
s
e
t
-
o
b
i
r
t

l
l
a
b
-
4

m
u
e
l
o
r
t
e
p
(

s
l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
M

l
i
o

n
a
e
b
y
o
S

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r

)
d
e
s
a
b

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

t
l
u
s
e
R

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c
/
d
o
h
t
e
m
g
n
i
t
s
e
T

r
o
f
n
e
k
a
t

t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
L

s
t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
l
-
o
i
B

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

.

5
1
1
e
l
b
a
T

m
a
r
i
r
S
d
n
a
m
u
g
u
m
u
r
A

r
a
e
w
d
n
a
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

)
2
1
0
2
(

s
e
i
t
r
e
p
o
r
p
y
t
i
c
i
r
b
u
l

d
e
c
n
a
h
n
E

,
)
3
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

i
ﬂ
i
k
l
u
Z

f
o

e
c
r
o
f

,
t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

r
e
w
o
L

e
n
i
h
c
a
m
c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

0
4
W
0
2
E
A
S

l
i
o
r
o
t
s
a
c

d
n
a

l
i
o
m
l
a
P

)
6
0
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

n
a
h
r
E

f
o
s
m
r
e
t
n
i

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

g
n
i
t
n
e
v
e
r
p
r
a
e
w

r
e
t
t
e
B

e
n
i
h
c
a
m
g
n
i
t
a
c
o
r
p
i
c
e
r

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
-
h
g
i
H

0
4
E
A
S

)
d
e
s
a
b
l
i
o
m
l
a
p
(

r
e
t
s
e
P
M
T

)
8
1
0
2

,
b
7
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

h
g
n
i
S

m
u
m
i
n
i
m
s
d
a
o
l
d
e
i
l
p
p
a

l
l
a

t

A

e
n
i
h
c
a
m
c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

0
4
W
0
2
E
A
S

l
i
o

a
i
m
a
g
n
o
P

)
8
1
0
2

,
b
7
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

h
g
n
i
S

s
e
i
c
n
e
d
n
e
t

g
n
i
m
r
o
f

t
i
s
o
p
e
d

r
e
w
o
L

t
i
n
u
g
n
i
t
s
e
t

r
a
e
w

l
l
a
b
-
4

0
4
W
0
2
E
A
S

l
i
o

o
g
n
o
g
n
o
M

C
E
S
B
m
u
m
i
n
i
m
d
n
a
E
T
B

t
s
e
h
g
i
H

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
i

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
m
o
c

,

n
o
i
t
c
e
j
n
i
-
t
c
e
r
i
d

,

d
e
l
o
o
c
-
r
e
t
a
w

e
n
i
g
n
e

,
)
8
9
9
1
(

.
l
a

t
e

e
u
q
e
l
a

M

)
2
1
0
2
(

t
a
h
B
d
n
a

l
a
k
e
B

n
o
i
s
s
i
m
e

e
t
a
n
i
m

i
l
e
y
l
e
t
e
l
p
m
o
C

,
r
e
d
n
i
l
y
c
-
e
l
g
n
i
s

,
e
k
o
r
t
s
-
4

0
4
W
0
2
E
A
S

l
i
o

a
i
m
a
g
n
o
P

210

M. K. Pathak et al.

)
3
1
0
2
(

a
e
n
a
h
u
S
d
n
a

a
n
i
a
J

s
s
o
l

t
h
g
i
e
w
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
c

r
e
w
o
L

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

r
e
w
o
L

d
e
ﬁ

i
d
o
m
y
l
l
a
c
i
m
e
h
C

s
s
o
l

r
a
e
w

r
e
w
o
L

f
o
s
m
r
e
t

n
i

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

d
o
o
G

f
o

e
c
r
o
f

d
n
a

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
w
o
ﬂ
d
l
o
c

r
e
t
t
e
B

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
s

e
v
i
t
a
d
i
x
o
r
e
t
t
e
B

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

s
e
i
t
r
e
p
o
r
p
y
t
i
c
i
r
b
u
l

d
e
c
n
a
h
n
E

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

r
e
w
o
L

s
d
e
e
p
s

h
g
i
h
t
a

r
a
e
w
w
o
L

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
-
h
g
i
H

g
n
i
t
a
c
o
r
p
i
c
e
r

e
n
i
h
c
a
m

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
-
h
g
i
H

g
n
i
t
a
c
o
r
p
i
c
e
r

e
n
i
h
c
a
m

)
3
1
0
2
(

m
a
r
i
r
S
d
n
a
m
u
g
u
m
u
r
A

e
g
r
a
l
y
l
e
m
e
r
t
x
e
y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
V

c
i
t
e
h
t
n
y
s

t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

l
i
o

n
a
e
b
y
o
s

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

)
4
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

l
a
w
a
r
g
A

y
l
d
n
e
i
r
f
-
o
c
e

d
n
a

e
l
b
a
d
a
r
g
e
d
o
i
B

e
n
i
h
c
a
m
c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

0
4
E
A
S

l
i
o

d
e
e
s
n
o
t
t
o
C

)
2
1
0
2
(

t
a
h
B
d
n
a

l
a
k
e
B

e
n
i
h
c
a
m
c
s
i
d
-
n
o
-
n
i
P

l
i
o

a
h
p
o
r
t
a
J

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

t
l
u
s
e
R

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c
/
d
o
h
t
e
m
g
n
i
t
s
e
T

r
o
f
n
e
k
a
t

t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
L

s
t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
l
-
o
i
B

0
4
W
0
2
E
A
S

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

.

5
1
1
e
l
b
a
T

0
4
W
0
2
E
A
S

)
t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
l
-
o
i
b
(

l
i
o
d
e
e
s
e
p
a
R

11 Potential of Bio-lubricants in Automotive Tribology

211

11.4 Conclusion

The bio-lubricants based on non-edible oils are biodegradable and eco-friendly.
Biodegradability of bio-lubricant makes them most suitable lubricant alternative
for the automotive sector applications. Alternative to mineral oil-based lubricants in
the form of bio-based lubricants in an automobile sector offers a reasonable solu-
tion for obtaining the renewable and environment friendly lubricants with respect to
the environmental concern. The non-edible oil-based bio-lubricants are the poten-
tial contender for the automotive sector applications. Their inherent characteristics
of bio-lubricants such as increased equipment service life, elevated lubricity, high
ignition temperature, viscosity, good anti-wear property, high load carrying abil-
ity, elevated viscosity index, lower emission of metal trace to atmosphere, higher
biodegradability, excellent coefﬁcient of friction and lower evaporation rates makes
them better alternative to the mineral-oil based lubricants. But in current scenario,
bio-lubricants have not substituted the petroleum-based lubricants completely due
to the inappropriate chemical conﬁguration of bio-lubricants, which does not allow
them to use in different odd situations. The problems researchers facing in this area
is to improve certain characteristics of vegetable oils without damaging the environ-
mentally as well as the tribologically signiﬁcant properties. Chemical alteration can
help to change the chemical conﬁguration of vegetable-oil to make them suitable for
automotive sector applications. This area needs to be focused by the researchers to
ﬁnd the solution to the problems associated with non-edible oil-based lubricants to
be used as bio-lubricant. This work only explores the potential of bio-lubricants as an
alternative to mineral oil-based lubricants in the automotive tribological applications.
Abstract The chapter highlights the investigations on the friction reduction capa-
bility of a pre-determined sized hemispherical dimples of 3 mm diameter, taking into
consideration the fact of easy availability of the tool (ball nose end mill) for industrial
applications. The dimples were created using CNC milling machines on EN 31 disc.
A pin-on-disc tribometer was used to investigate the tribological behavior of the var-
ious textured density surface (7.5, 15 and 22.5%) against EN 8 steel under various
loading conditions (120, 140, and 160 N) and very harsh lubricating conditions: dry,
partial lubrication (lubricant supplied 54 mL dropwise at a ﬂowrate 1 mL/s) and
starved lubrication (10 mL lubricant spread over the disc before the experiment). A
signiﬁcant decrease of 12% reduction of coefﬁcient of friction (COF) was observed
with 15% texture density under 120 N while the COF increased by 40–60% at texture
density of 22.5% and high loads. In dry condition there was no signiﬁcant change
in COF but the speciﬁc wear rate decreased by 64.69% in 22.5% texture density.
In the present set of experiments carried out at lighter load (120 N), both 7.5 and
15% texture densities exhibited better results as compared to 22.5% texture densities
(under partial lubrication). Surface characterizations by optical microscopy revealed
that the friction reduction of the dimpled surface was primarily due to the lubricant
retaining capability by the dimples which acted as oil reservoirs, but high texture
densities intensiﬁed the friction.
Friction is energy consuming, its reduction being one of the most important tasks con-
tinuously aimed by industries. The enterprises which provide the wear and friction
reduction solutions always look forward for inexpensive remedies without compro-
mising the performance of the product. Friction reduction by surface texturing is one
such methods which is very popular in different industries. Surface textures can be
made using various processes, such as chemical etching (Pettersson and Jacobson
2003), laser texturing (Etsion 2005; Kovalchenko et al. 2005; Borghi et al. 2008;
Etsion 2004), lithography (Stephens et al. 2002), and pellet pressing (Yan-qing et al.
2009). Zenebe Segu and Hwang (2015) discussed the effect of multi-shaped laser
surface texturing on tribological properties of materials. It was found that the multi-
shaped dimples gave better results than single shaped dimples. Among the different
combinations of circle-ellipse, circle-triangle, and circle-square, the circle-ellipse
combination gave the best results under dry and lubricated long sliding conditions.
Bhaduri et al. (2017) reported results of tests on the ball-on-disc tribometer with recip-
rocating sliding motion, presenting the functional response of the textured surfaces
with different designs that incorporate arrays of micro-dimples and grooves produced
on tungsten carbide blocks by employing laser machining, which were rubbed against
stainless steel. It was observed that the micro-arrays and dimples acted as traps for
the asperity wear products (third body). Greco et al. (2009) discussed the potential
application of vibro-mechanical texturing (VMT) for the generation of dimples on
the aluminium and hardened steel on inner cylinder, outer cylinder, and ﬂat end face
geometries using a CNC lathe machine. It was found that the VMT method was much
more adaptable to the process capabilities, cost effective, and a faster way to create
dimples. An error of 1–11% was found on aluminium and 8–9% on hardened steel
surface which was attributed to the elastic restoration of the material.

The performance of textured surfaces depends on various factors such as the shape
of the textures, arrangement of the textures, materials in contact, load etc. Vilhena
et al. (2010) created the surface textures using the LST (Laser Surface Texturing)
technique and the tribological tests were conducted for various running parameters.
It was found that the tribological behavior of the surface majorly depends upon
the dimple depth, or indirectly on aspect ratio (constant diameter), local lubricat-
ing conditions, and operating parameter. At more depths and higher sliding speeds
the dimpled area has proven to be most beneﬁcial. The most signiﬁcant result was
obtained at a dimple depth of 16.5 microns and 0.45 m/s sliding speeds giving out
a COF value as low as 0.006. Olver et al. (2016) prepared specimens of fused sil-
ica with small surface modiﬁcations in terms of creating small pocket sized micro
dimpled geometries and tests were conducted to compare the difference between the
textured and the non-textured samples. A reduction of 70% was observed in coefﬁ-
cient of friction (COF) with the textured surfaces. Furthermore, an improvement in
ﬁlm thickness was also observed using textured surfaces. An important result was
found that, as the sum of the dimples increased along the length of the stroke, better

12 Inﬂuence of Surface Texturing on Friction and Wear

219

frictional and wear properties were observed. It was also inferred that the individ-
ual dimple geometry had a very little effect on the properties as long as the overall
effect remains positive. Kovalchenko et al. (2011) performed experiments on ball
on disc tribometer to determine the effects of surface texturing on the disc surfaces
for different oils of various viscosities, combined with different dimple densities
with varying depths. The results showed that the increased dimple density caused an
increase in wear rates of ball end but a decrease in COF values. The method has been
suitably suggested for industrial applications. Yu et al. (2009) studied the effect of
different shape dimples on the tribological properties. Different shapes like circles,
ellipses, and triangles were made on the surfaces. Each shape was tested in different
orientations for several loads and speeds. For example, when the pin slide against the
ellipse shape perpendicular to the major axis gave the best results. Triangle is also
tested with changing the orientation like sliding towards apex and sliding towards
base. Optimized dimple parameters with ellipse shape orientated perpendicular to
its major axis gave the best results. After ellipse, circle shape was found to give
good results. Etsion and Burstein (1996) developed a model to analyze and com-
pare the contactless seals in lubricated conditions with hemispherical pores. It was
investigated if better performances can be achieved with proper selection of dimple
size and aspect ratio. They found that the best and optimum dimple size depends on
viscosity, contact pressure, and aspect ratio. The hydrodynamic performances were
increased at the pore areas on the mechanical seals. Adjemout et al. (2017) stud-
ied the inﬂuence of real dimple shapes on the performances of the mechanical seals.
Numerical solution is used to determine the optimum surface texturing and geometry,
the mechanical imperfections being avoided. The real dimple shapes are analyzed
and considered within the hydrodynamic lubrication model. The roughness and the
bottom surface of the dimples inﬂuenced the leakage of oil through the seals. It was
also found that enhanced results were obtained if the sides of the triangle were bent
towards the center of the dimple. Etsion et al. (1999) developed an analytical model
to investigate the performance of the mechanical seals having micro pores on its sur-
faces, machined using laser surface texturing. Optimization was performed for the
spherical shaped pores. It was found that the effect of the pores depth over diameter
ratio that is the aspect ratio was very signiﬁcant. If the hydrostatic forces suppressed
the hydrodynamic ones, the performances of the laser textured seals were far better
than the conventional mechanical seals. Resendiz et al. (2015) studied the directional
friction effects by creating asymmetrically shaped dimpled surfaces on an aluminum
work piece using an inclined micro ﬂat end milling tool. When compared with the
ﬂat surfaces, the dimpled surfaces resulted in lower friction coefﬁcient values. Also,
the asymmetrical textures gave a sliding direction dependent response in terms of
measured frictional forces and the coefﬁcient of friction. Jana et al. (2018) studied the
frictional behavior and surface properties of tool under textured conditions. Differ-
ent shapes of texturing were done in tetragonal and hexagonal patterns. Dimple like
depressions and S shaped grooves were showing around 40% reduction in coefﬁcient
of friction. The tests were conducted in a ring test rig. Other shapes such as circular
grooves and spherical dimples when oriented radially towards the sliding load gave
better results in coefﬁcient of friction. Shen and Khonsari (2015) tried to develop

220

S. Bhaumik et al.

and adopt a numerical approximation method to ﬁnd the most appropriate size of
the textures or the dimples which would lead to the highest load bearing capacity
of the textured surface. Numerical problems have been solved and then the method
is validated and experiments were conducted creating the optimized dimples. The
results were then compared with the regular shape dimples. The optimized shape was
a chevron shape for unidirectional sliding and trapezoidal shaped dimples for the bi-
directional sliding motion. Amini et al. (2016) studied the tribological behaviors of
two micro textured surfaces and compared it with that of smooth surface. Pin on disc
reciprocating set up is used for testing. Two surfaces that is micro surface textured
(MST) and micro furrowed surface (MFS) was tested under load conditions from 20
to 160 N and under boundary lubricated condition. Here both MST and MFT showed
better results than the smooth surface. The complex cutting movement is caused by
ultrasonic vibrations. The results indicate that proper micro texture by Ultrasonic
vibration-assisted milling (UAVM) can improve the load bearing capacity. Li et al.
(2014) studied the frictional behavior and wear rates of a textured surface made by
laser peen texturing. Texture densities with 5, 13 and 35% are tested by pin-on-disc
tribometer and compared with the untextured surface under the load condition from
20 to 400 N. In this case, 13% texture density samples demonstrate better results in
friction performance and wear rate. Schneider et al. (2017) studied the inﬂuence of
aspect ratio, texture pattern, and dimple parameters under mixed lubrication regimes.
The texture density was varied from 5 to 30% in different patterns like cubic, hexag-
onal and random arrangement. The depth to diameter ratio was also varied from 0.1
to 0.2. The lubricant used was POA. Results illustrate that those patterns arranged in
hexagonal arrays performed well under the texture density of 10% with aspect ratio
of 0.2. Around 80% reduction in friction coefﬁcient was observed in this condition.
Varenburg et al. (2002) studied the role of oxide wear debris in fretting wear. The
wear rate varies according to the roughness of the material. Here micro dimples act
as traps for debris. As the pin is sliding, wear debris gets deposited on the dimples
which helps in further reduction in wear rate. They also found that 84% reduction
is there due to the dimples acting as pores. Multi dimples with different patterns
were created and tribological properties were evaluated and tested to collect data for
wear and coefﬁcient of friction values by Tang et al. (2013). The results show that
surface texturing is essential and an important method for reducing friction and wear.
Amendments in the area fractions and the aspect ratios can signiﬁcantly improve the
tribological characteristics, COF and the wear rates. A signiﬁcant reduction of 38%
in COF and 72% in wear rates were observed under the area fraction of 5% which
was increased due to hydrodynamic pressure in the interfacial contacts between the
surfaces. Podgornik et al. (2012) investigated the tribological effects of surface tex-
turing under starved, boundary and mixed lubrication regimes. The experiments were
conducted with LST technique on pin on disc apparatus and compared the results
with varying lubricant viscosity, normal load, sliding speed, dimple/groove size,
dimple/groove density, dimple depth and different lubrication regimes. The results
show that LST surfaces with lower dimple/groove size and density has less friction
under boundary lubricated conditions. Further the largest dimple depth under full

12 Inﬂuence of Surface Texturing on Friction and Wear

221

ﬁlm lubricated conditions gives the lowest friction. Hua et al. (2017) studied the fric-
tional behavior of the contact surfaces lubricated with grease by using disc on ring
tribometer. Various parameters like texture density, load, sliding speed and sliding
time were varied. The lubrication regime was mixed lubricated regime. The results
show that inﬂuence of texture density is a signiﬁcant factor in controlling the tribolog-
ical properties. Here a texture density of 15% is found to give the best results. Also,
the major reason for control of friction is the hydrodynamic effect of the lubricant.
Ogawa et al. (2010) investigated the tribological properties of slideways by laser
texturing method. Different types of dimples and grooves were made for testing. The
dimple width varied from 50 μm to 1 mm. The optimum dimple parameters were
found after the test. The textured surface was found to give less friction coefﬁcient as
lubricant reservoirs were created inside the dimples. Jahanmir (1985) experimented
and observed that the process of wear particle formation is greatly affected by the
tangential stresses. Keeping the normal stresses constant and varying the tangential
stresses with the COF, it was observed that the wear particles are formed due to
deformation of the surface asperities signiﬁcantly due to plowing and delamination
process. It was also concluded that friction modiﬁers can inﬂuence the wear rate
and its mechanism. Wear rate can be reduced by reducing the COF value below the
threshold limit. Plowing and delamination are one of the causes that inﬂuence the
wear rate. Under starved lubricating conditions the adhesive wear is predominant.
Wang et al. (2017) investigated about the wear and friction performance of three
different types of polymer on steel surface using ring on plane device. Texturing of
different density values was done on steel surfaces. Polymers of various composition
are tested under diverse texture densities and depths. The best results were obtained
in dimples with depth of 5 μm rather than dimples with a depth of 10 μm. The wear
debris found for non-textured surface were smooth and at higher wear the nature of
debris was lumpy and at lower wear rate the nature was like twisted. Zhang et al.
(2012) studied and conducted experiments on textured and untextured surfaces of
UHMWPE under water lubrication using ring-on-disc tester. The textured surfaces
shows a reduction in the COF as much as 66.7–85.7% on different load and speed
conditions. The textured UHMWPE with an area density of 29.9%, diameter 50 mm,
and depth 15 mm presents a signiﬁcant effect of wear resistance, being reported
as optimized result. It was observed that the micro-scaled surface textures show a
greater wear resistance and lower COF values. Chowdhury et al. (2011) investigated
the behavior of friction and wear under varying sliding speed, normal load and rel-
ative humidity. The experiments were conducted on pin-on-disc tribometer, where
disc was made of aluminum and pin was of stainless steel. The results show that as the
sliding speed increased, friction decreased and wear rate increased, as aluminum has
the property of reacting with air and forming oxides. It forms a layer on the surface
reducing metal to metal contact, hence reducing friction. From the above cited works,
it can be seen that surface texturing has been used since a long time in various ﬁelds
to control the friction. The recent work reported by Chen et al. (2019) showed that
the load bearing capacity of a separator plate enhanced after texturing. In this case
the cylindrical and cuboidal textures performed better than hemispherical textures at
low speed. They also reported that the geometrical features of the dimples played a

222

S. Bhaumik et al.

major role in enhancing the load bearing capacity. A decrease of over 20% wear rate
in textured samples made of Ti alloys was reported by Yuan et al. (2019). In another
work involving the investigation of tribological properties of Ti alloy reported by
Kummel et al. (2019), it was observed that the melt bulges formed around the sides
of the channels created using laser were active sites for solid solution of interstitial
elements such as oxygen and nitrogen which helped in enhancing the tribological
properties of Ti6Al4V.

Thus, it can be seen that surface engineering is an established ﬁeld in controlling
friction and wear and many works have been reported but very few systematic work
has been done on dimples created using milling machines. Almost no work has been
reported involving extreme harsh conditions of lubrication of dimpled surface. This
chapter focuses on the performance of the dimpled surface in highly sparse lubricant
condition where very minimal quantity of lubricant with discontinuous ﬂow has been
used. Milling machines (vertical) which are very common in any manufacturing unit
were used to create the dimples. The cost of creating dimpled surfaces by milling is
less expensive and easy to make for any industry. The size of the dimple was also
chosen in such a way that the tool necessary for making the dimple is not expensive
and easily available in the local market. Thus, the present work will be helpful for
process industries in combating wear using dimpled surfaces created by milling
process.

12.2 Texturing on Tribo Surface Using Milling Operation

A disc of EN 31 steel with 165 mm diameter, thickness 8 mm and hardness 38 HRC
was used. Circular dimples were created on the disc surface with a ball end mill
cutter in a CNC milling machine (Make: Lakshmi Machine Works, Model: LV45) at
a constant feed rate of 120 mm\rev. The dimples on the surface of the specimen were
uniformly arranged in a circular orientation as shown in Fig. 12.1. Hua et al. (2017)
studied the frictional behavior of the contact surface lubricated with grease by using
disc on ring tribometer and reported that the texture density of 15% exhibits least
coefﬁcient of friction. Thus, for the present work three dimple densities, namely 7.5,
15 and 22.5% were considered. The design texture density (T d) was calculated using
Eq. 12.1 (Hua et al. 2017)

Td = Ad
As

× 100% =

π × D2

2 × θ (r 2
1

− r 2
2

)

× 100%

(12.1)

where

Td
Ad
As
r1

is the texture area ratio (texture density);
is the area of the dimple (Ad = πD2/4)
is the sector area between the dimple As = θ(r 2
is radius of the bigger sector

1

)

−r 2
2
2

12 Inﬂuence of Surface Texturing on Friction and Wear

223

Fig. 12.1 a 7.5% texture density, b 15% texture density, c 22.5% texture density, d three-
dimensional image of dimples

is radius of the smaller sector

r2
D is dimple diameter.

The bulges or burrs which formed around the dimple during the machining process
were removed by polishing. This reduces the negative effect on the tribological
performance of contacting surfaces (Etsion 2004). A cylindrical EN 8 pin (diameter
10 mm, length 30 mm and hardness 31HRC) was used against the EN 31 disc.

In this work circular dimples were developed keeping in mind the following:

i. Ease of availability of the 3 mm diameter ball nose milling tool in local markets.
ii. Ellipse and circular dimples exhibited better tribological properties (Yu et al.

2009).

iii. Textured surfaces with curved bottom were found to show better tribological
properties than ﬂat bottom surfaces, sharp angles and straight edges (Qiu et al.
2013).

224

S. Bhaumik et al.

12.3 Investigating the Tribological Properties Using

Pin-on-Disc Tribometer

Pin-on-disc tribometer was used to investigate the tribological properties of the tex-
tured surface (disc of EN 31). The counter part was the EN 8 pin. SAE 10W30
lubricant was used during the tests and three different loads were considered (120,
140, and 160 N) at a constant speed of 4.2 m/s under the inﬂuence of the following
lubrication condition:

i. Dry condition: no lubricant was used.
ii. Partial lubrication condition: lubricant was supplied between the interface of
the pin and disc in a drop wise manner (amount of lubricant used: 54 mL with
a ﬂow rate of 1 mL/s).

iii. Starved lubrication condition: about 10 mL of the SAE 10W30 lubricant was
poured over the textured surfaces before the start of the experiment. It was
ensured that the lubricant fully covers the disc. The test was started after ﬁve
minutes ensuring the lubricant to settle in the dimples. No further lubricant was
added during the entire duration of the tribo experiment.

Each combination of trials was repeated thrice and an average of the friction
coefﬁcient and wear rate has been reported in the work. The experimental parameters
are shown in Table 12.1.

The average coefﬁcient of friction for all the experiments are shown in Fig. 12.2a.

Here the same chronology is maintained as shown in Table 12.1.

Dry condition: From Fig. 12.2a it can be seen that the COF in dry condition is
more than the lubricated conditions. When it comes to partial and starved lubrica-
tion condition, a decrease in COF is observed. The highest COF is experienced in
experiment number 4 (i.e. load 120 N, texture density 22.5% and dry lubrication
condition) while the least value is obtained in experiment number 27 (i.e. 120 N, tex-
ture density 15% and partial lubrication condition). But in higher loading conditions
such as 140 and 160 N performed under partial lubrication the least coefﬁcient of
friction is observed in texture density of 7.5%. Figure 12.2b depicts the variations of
the wear rates under different testing. It can be seen that the wear rate decreases with
the increase in texture density. Same goes with the next 2 sets of intervals (Experi-
ment 5 to Experiment 8; Experiment 9 to Experiment 10). A slight increase in the
last experiment (Experiment 8 and Experiment 12) of each set corresponding to the
highest texture density in that set.

Lubricated condition: Fig. 12.2c shows the trend and variation of wear rates
with changes in the experiment conditions which includes changes in loads, lubri-
cating conditions and texture densities. Experiment 13–24 correspond to the starved
lubrication under different texture densities and Experiments 25–36 corresponds to
the partial lubricating condition. The highest wear rate can be seen in experiment
number 36 (160 N, texture density 22.5% and partial lubrication condition) while
the least wear rate is observed in experiment number 15 (load 120 N, texture density
15% and starved lubrication condition). In starved lubrication, a decreasing trend for

12 Inﬂuence of Surface Texturing on Friction and Wear

225

Table 12.1 Experimental parameters

Experiment No.

Load (N)

Texture density (%)

Lubrication condition

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

120

120

120

120

140

140

140

140

160

160

160

160

120

120

120

120

140

140

140

140

160

160

160

160

120

120

120

120

140

140

140

140

160

160

160

160

22.5

22.5

22.5

22.5

0

7.5

15

0

7.5

15

0

7.5

15

0

7.5

15

0

7.5

15

0

7.5

15

0

7.5

15

0

7.5

15

0

7.5

15

22.5

22.5

22.5

22.5

22.5

Dry

Dry

Dry

Dry

Dry

Dry

Dry

Dry

Dry

Dry

Dry

Dry

Starved

Starved

Starved

Starved

Starved

Starved

Starved

Starved

Starved

Starved

Starved

Starved

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

226

S. Bhaumik et al.

Fig. 12.2 a Coefﬁcient of friction, b wear rate in dry condition, c wear rate in Lubricated conditions

the ﬁrst 3 experiments in 1st set (Experiment No. 13–15) and increasing trend for
the last 3 experiment in the 3rd set (Experiment No. 22–24) are obtained. This goes
for all the intervals (Experiment 29 to Experiment 36). But a nonlinear variation for
all experiments in the 2nd set (Experiment No. 17–20) and 7th set (Experiment No.
25–28) is observed. The 4th experiment on each set is always seen to be increasing
in each interval similar to dry condition.

From Fig. 12.2, it can be seen that at 140 and 160 N load, the COF and wear rates
increased with an increase in texture densities. The lowest COF and wear rate were
obtained at 120 N load conditions. The wear rates were high at 140 and 160 N as
compared to 120 N of applied load. Figure 12.3 shows the COF and wear rates plotted
against texture density at 120 N load conditions performed under various lubricated
conditions. A decreasing trend in COF with increasing texture density under par-
tial lubricating regime can be seen in Fig. 12.3a whereas, in starved lubrication the
coefﬁcient of friction decreases till 7.5% texture density and then increases. Further-
more, 7.5% texture density exhibited lowest COF (15 and 18% decrease in 0 and
15% texture densities under starved lubricating regime respectively) while in partial
lubrication the 15% dimple density have shown beneﬁciary results as the COF was

12 Inﬂuence of Surface Texturing on Friction and Wear

227

Fig. 12.3 Optimized textured densities in various lubrication conditions

13% less than 0% and 3.6% less than 7.5% texture densities. Thus, a decreasing trend
of COF in lubricating conditions indicates the advantage of the presence of dimples
on the surface. Figure 12.3b shows the variations between the wear rates and texture
density with constant loading conditions and different lubrication regimes (starved
and partial lubrication). It can be seen that during starved lubrication condition, there
was no signiﬁcant change in the wear rates at 0 and 7.5% textured density while a
signiﬁcant decrease in wear rate by 64–65% was observed at 15% texture density as
compared to the wear rates of 0 and 7.5% texture densities. In partial lubrication, a
slight decrease of 9% wear rate was observed at 7.5% as compared to untextured but
it increased at 15% texture density. Unlike the COF variations, the least wear rate is
found in the texture density of 15% under starved lubrication condition. Figure 12.3c
shows the trend of COF with varying texturing density in dry environment and under
120 N loading conditions which exhibited that the COF in non-dimpled and dimpled
surface were almost equal, however a signiﬁcant 61% decrease in wear rate in case
of textured surface can be observed as seen in Fig. 12.3d.

From above discussions it can be seen that the COF is less in the case of partial
lubrication as compared to dry and starved lubrication conditions. Figure 12.4 shows
the COF against texture densities at different load conditions (120, 140 and 160 N)
performed under partial lubricated condition. In case of 120 N with partial lubricated

228

S. Bhaumik et al.

Fig. 12.4 Frictional trend at various loads in partial lubrication condition, a 120 N, b 140 N, c 160 N

condition (Fig. 12.4a), a gradual decrease in the COF was observed till 15% texture
density but there was a 60% decrease in COF at 15% as compared to 22.5% texture
density while in 140 and 160 N with partial lubricated conditions (Fig. 12.4b, c),
a slight decrease in friction coefﬁcient was observed at a texture density of 7.5%
as compared to texture density of 0% and further increasing the texture density the
COF increased. It is to be noted that for all loads, an increasing trend of COF was
observed with increase in texture density.

12 Inﬂuence of Surface Texturing on Friction and Wear

229

12.4 Understanding the Mechanisms Involved During

Tribo Tests

12.4.1 Lubricant Reservoirs Leading to Friction Reduction

Figure 12.5 shows the arrangement of the pin and the dimple in a lubricated condition.
During the test, the pin surface fully covered the dimple region at an instantaneous
moment while sliding. The dimple served as the lubricant reservoir while running in
starved lubricating conditions, but in dry sliding condition the dimples behaved as
the wear debris storage and prevented the wear debris to affect the overall surface
morphology, thus making the surface more wear resistant (Varenberg et al. 2002;
Yamakiri et al. 2011). Friction between tribo pairs are less when the lubricating
ﬁlm is thicker than the average surface roughness value or the average height of the
asperities but under high loading conditions, the lubricant oozes out of the rubbing
track or the frictional zone, leading to the reduction in the ﬁlm thickness to less
than the average asperity height causing greater asperity contacts and ultimately
leading to higher frictional force and wear (Bart et al. 2013). In case of textured
surfaces, the region where the pin comes in complete contact with the dimple, the
thickness of the lubricant ﬁlm increases due to the presence of lubricant in the dimple.
The depth of the dimple helps in retaining the lubricant which in turn increases the
thickness of lubricant ﬁlm leading to an increased hydrodynamic pressure exerted by
the lubricant. This results in the increase of load bearing capacity, which ultimately
reduces wear (Kovalchenko et al. 2005). It has been reported that increased dimple
depths have beneﬁcial effects on the reduction of friction and wear (Ogawa et al.
2010). Furthermore, in hydrodynamic lubricating conditions the effects of surface
texturing have also contributed in improving the tribological characteristics (Mo et al.
2017; Qu et al. 2013).

The three-dimensional image of the dimples, shown in Fig. 12.6, clearly depicts
that there was no contact between the pin and the base of the dimples, as no major

Fig. 12.5 a Schematic diagram of pin rubbing against the dimple in lubricated conditions, b a real
time photo of a dimple with entrapped lubricant after the test

230

S. Bhaumik et al.

Fig. 12.6 Three-dimensional image of dimple in lubricated condition: a before test, b after test

deterioration of the surface can be observed, thus indicating the presence of lubricants
in the dimples as shown in Fig. 12.6b.

12.4.2 Presence of Third Bodies in the Dimples (Dry

Condition)

In 120, 140 and 160 N dry condition no signiﬁcant difference in friction coefﬁcient
is observed but the wear rate was less in textured surfaces as compared to the non-
textured surface. This may be due to the debris entrapment in the dimples which
helped in preventing the direct contact of the tribo pairs and thus reducing the wear
(Bhaduri et al. 2017; Varenberg et al. 2002; Fukagai et al. 2019; Yamakiri et al. 2011).

12.4.3 Increase in COF with the Increase in Load

and Texture Density

As discussed in Sect. 12.3, in partial lubricated conditions COF gradually decreased
as the texture density increased, but over 15% the COF increased again. In dry
conditions, surface texturing in general will lead to increased friction (Fig. 12.2a),
with every dimple acting as obstacle to the sliding motion (Podgornik et al. 2012).
The increase in the texture density to 22.5% exhibited an increase in wear rate as
compared with texture density of 7.5 and 15%. In the case of 22.5% texture density,
the presence of large dimples made the surface less uniform which affected the
uniform asperity peaks (Hua et al. 2017) increasing the COF. Furthermore, the heat
generated led to localized welding of the small wear debris on the wear track (Elsevier
1987). This continuous welding and accumulation of the wear particles at a high load
contributed to an increased frictional property.

12 Inﬂuence of Surface Texturing on Friction and Wear

231

At 120 N and partial lubricating conditions, as the texture density was increased
the coefﬁcient of friction decreases until texture density of 15%. The dimples acted
as a lubricant reservoir and enhance the hydrodynamic action (Ogawa et al. 2010;
Yamakiri et al. 2011). Further increasing the texture density to 22.5%, drastic increase
in COF was observed. The space between each dimple acted like peaks, which
affected the ﬁlm distribution, thus resulting in higher friction (Hua et al. 2017). Also at
higher dimple densities, the surface becomes highly non-linear leading to a turbulent
lubricant ﬂow on the surface affecting the shear properties of the interface (Qu et al.
2013). In case of starved lubrication condition as the texture density was increased
the COF decreased until texture density of 7.5% and then increased with the increase
in texture density. The change of lubrication regime from a partially hydrodynamic
condition to very localized boundary conditions resulted in high asperity contacts (Li
et al. 2014) during starved lubrication condition which resulted in gradual decrease
in ﬁlm over a period thereby, increasing the COF.

In 140 and 160 N under partial lubricated condition, the COF was less in textured
surface as compared to un-textured surface but the increase in COF was similar to
that of 120 N, as texture density increased the COF also increased. This is because at
higher loads there is always a portion of area coming in contact and as a result, the edge
of the dimple perpendicular to sliding direction lead to high stress generation at the
edge of dimple (Zhang et al. 2012), thus affecting friction and wear. In 140 N, starved
lubricated condition, in un-textured surface the lubricant after certain time drains out
and thus, favoring high asperity-asperity contact increase the COF. Furthermore, in
case of 7.5% texture density, the number of dimples were less as compared to 15%
texture density and hence, more lubricant was retained in 15% texture density as
compared to 7.5% texture density. Thus, COF for 7.5% was slightly more than texture
density of 15% but further increasing the texture density to 22.5% conducted to
augmentation of COF. The increase in COF and wear in high density textured surfaces
were primarily due to the ploughing action exhibited by the dimples (Jahanmir 1985).
Therefore, the exact number of dimples which is required to control wear and friction
also depends on the amount of load applied.

12.4.4 Understanding the Severity of the Wear

on the Counter Surface Against the Textured Surface

The scanning electron microscope images of the counter body (pin) after the tribo
test has been shown in Fig. 12.7 which clearly identiﬁes the severity of the wear
during the process. As seen from Fig. 12.7a, b, the surface for dry conditions is more
damaged than those of the lubricated condition as seen in Fig. 12.7c (non-textured)
and Fig. 12.7d (15% texture density). High abrasive wear can be seen in both cases of
dry condition in Fig. 12.7a, b, thus indicating that texturing may not be a good idea in
dry condition but as seen in Fig. 12.7c, d, the surfaces are less damaged as compared
to Fig. 12.7a, b. Close observation of Fig. 12.7c revealed the formation of grooves in

232

S. Bhaumik et al.

Fig. 12.7 SEM images of the pin after tribo test with 120 N, a dry non dimpled, b dry dimpled,
c lubricated non dimpled, d lubricated dimpled (120 N, 15% texture density)

several places and depression were also found as indicated. The formation of such
deep grooves and depressed surfaces are due to the ﬁlm breakage which resulted in
high metal to metal contact. Moreover, it is to be noted that the lubrication condition
considered for the present work was discontinuous and was supplied in drop wise
condition making the situation quite severe, thus the possibility of ﬁlm breakage is
quite certain but looking into Fig. 12.7d (the surface of the pin whose counter body
i.e. the disc was having dimples showed almost negligible damage) as compared to
those of dry condition and lubricated condition (without dimples, Fig. 12.7c).

12 Inﬂuence of Surface Texturing on Friction and Wear

233

12.5 Conclusion

The chapter initially discusses the work which was reported by various researchers
and then focused on the tribological properties of micro dimpled surfaces. The results
showed that texturing may not be effective in dry condition in reducing coefﬁcient of
friction but signiﬁcant decrease in wear rate can be achieved using the correct textured
density (in this case 7.5%). The friction and wear reduction capability of textured
surfaces primarily depends on the regime of lubrication, applied load and texture
densities. However, the creation of micro sized dimples with CNC end mill ball nose
cutters is an easy process and is quite capable of reducing the friction under severe
conditions. This solution can be adopted by industries as an economical process to
control friction and wear.
Abstract The chapter deals smart ﬂuid i.e. Magneto Rheological ﬂuid which is
gaining interest of researcher as the range of application is vast. This book chapter
starts with introduction of MR ﬂuid, constituents of MR ﬂuid and detailed study of
each constituent. Also, discussing about the present necessity of MR ﬂuid technology
we discuss the operational modes of MR ﬂuid. MR devices function basically on
three operational modes of MR ﬂuid i.e. ﬂow mode, shear mode and squeeze mode.
Every mode possess its own characteristics in high performance application system.
Further Mathematical modelling of various rheological parameters and MR ﬂuid is
carried out, there after the detailed synthesis process and characterization of MR ﬂuid
is discussed. At last overview of MR ﬂuid application is discussed and in detailed
progress in MR brakes and clutch system is discussed.
Keywords Magneto rheological ﬂuid · Synthesis · MR brake and clutch

13.1 Introduction

Magneto rheology is the branch of tribology dealing with response of smart material
when they are subjected to external magnetic ﬁeld. Rabinow (1951) discovered mag-
netorheological ﬂuid (Rabinow 1951; Hardy 2014). The Magneto Rheological (MR)
ﬂuid is the dispersed phase of non-colloidal, magnetically soft and multi-domain
particles with particle size ranging from 0.05 to 10 μm in carrier ﬂuid. Under “off
state” i.e. nonmagnetic condition the MR ﬂuid appears to be similar to that of car-
rier ﬂuid with increased viscosity and darker in appearance and exhibits lower shear
rate. Under the inﬂuence of external magnetic ﬁeld i.e. “on state” the ﬂuids apparent
viscosity changes drastically (106 times) with a reaction time of few milliseconds on
application of magnetic ﬁeld. The ﬂuid recovers viscosity changes completely and
reverts back once applied magnetic ﬁeld is turned off.
Fig. 13.1 Schematic representation of magnetic particle under “off state” and “on state” of magnetic
ﬁeld

Under on state condition the particles dispersed in carrier ﬂuid acquire dipole-
dipole moment this dipole interactions among the particles leads to form chain like
structure intern enhancement in apparent viscosity as demonstrated in Fig. 13.1.
Once the magnetic ﬁeld is de-energized the particles loses its dipole moment and
again gets disposed in carrier ﬂuid bringing back the viscosity to the original value.
Wide range of metal alloys and ceramic metals have been proposed in order to
synthesize MR ﬂuid, the only criteria to fulﬁll by the magnetic particles is to exhibit
low level of coercivity and multi domain magnetic properties. On the other hand,
the properties such as particle shape, size, size distribution, density, cursive ﬁeld and
magnetic saturation plays critical role in deciding the characteristics of MR ﬂuid.
Not only the magnetizable particle properties plays role in deciding the overall per-
formance, also the carrier ﬂuid, additives for anticorrosion and surfactant properties
plays vital role in deciding the re-dispersibility and stability of the synthesized MR
ﬂuid.

13.1.1 Constituents of Magneto Rheological Fluid

The constituent of MR ﬂuid plays critical role in the behavior of ﬂuid under applied
magnetic ﬁeld, hence selection and quantifying the constituent is of great importance.
Main constituents of MR ﬂuid are Magnetizable particles or dispersed phase, carrier
or base ﬂuid or continuous phase, surfactants and additives.

Magnetizable particles or dispersed phase. The magneto rheological ﬂuid also
called smart ﬂuid is gaining popularity and researchers are ﬁnding various methods
and applications to incorporate the MR ﬂuid technology. Under such conditions
the magnetic particle present in ﬂuid plays vital role and preferred, the materials
high magnetic saturation and low coercivity, which enables the ﬂuid to return to its
demagnetized state soon after magnetic ﬁeld is deactivated in terms of milliseconds.

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

239

Highly pure carbonyl iron powder could be preferable magnetic particle selection
for most of the particle applications because of its high magnetic saturation and low
coercivity. Iron particles synthesized by decomposing iron pentacarbonyl (Fe(CO)5)
(Japka 1988) using CVD method is considered to be opposite of the synthesis via
electrolytic or spray atomization process. Since carbonyl iron powder is considered
as chemically unadulterated with spherical particle distribution, which is considered
as mesoscalar nature, shape anisotropy can be eliminate. The mesoscalar nature
ensures multi magnetic domains. Chemical purity level, which is usually greater
than 99.7% results lower domain pinning defect. Also, spherical shape of particle
helps in reducing magnetic shape anisotropy. Impurities presence in magnetic particle
causes magnetic hardness, as a result of confrontation of dislocation motion, resulting
in harder magnetic particles. In MR ﬂuid-based applications nonabrasive ﬂuid is
preferred. Hence the particle with spherical shape with higher level of purity iron
powder is preferred as dispersed media in the continues media for the synthesis of
MR ﬂuid.

Attempts have been made to synthesize ferrimagnetic materials like nickel-zinc
ferrite and manganese-zinc ferrite with 3 μm particle size. Magnetic saturation for
the ceramic ferrites is comparatively lower i.e. 0.4–0.6 T (Fang et al. 2009) hence
yield stress value for the ﬂuid drops down. Phule reported that a magnetic ﬂux of
15 kPa results in yield stress of 15 kPa. Hence, carbonyl iron powder is selected as it
offers magnetic softness and higher magnetic saturation of 2.1 T at room temperature.

Dispersed phase, Carrier or Base Fluid or Continuous Phase. Dispersed phase
being the major constituent of the MR ﬂuid is also termed as carrier, base ﬂuid or
continuous phase. The properties of the base ﬂuid are prominent under off state
condition though the viscosity and appearance are affected by magnetizable particle
in MR ﬂuid.

The basic function of carrier ﬂuid is to furnish a nonmagnetic and lower per-
meability base ﬂuid where in magnetically active particles are dispersed, also the
ﬂuid should possess lower permeability to facilitate particle polarization with max-
imum effectiveness. Thus, magneto rheological effect enhancement. Some of the
commonly employed carrier ﬂuids are silicon oils, parafﬁn oils, mineral oils etc.
Silicon oil being the popular carrier ﬂuid followed by hydrocarbon oil. Silicon oil
with viscosity of 100 cSt is employed in order to maintain lower “off State” viscosity
for the MR ﬂuid synthesis.

The carrier ﬂuid is nonmagnetic ﬂuid in which magnetizable metal particles of
micron size are suspended. The carrier ﬂuid possesses inherent damping and lubri-
cation properties. In order to have effective implementation of MR ﬂuid technology,
the viscosity of the carrier oil should be as low as possible and should be independent
of temperature. The lower viscosity ensures better MR effect i.e. viscosity variation
as a function of applied magnetic ﬁeld dominates the normal viscosity variation
(Kolekar 2014a). Presence of dispersed magnetic particles in carrier ﬂuid increases
the viscosity of the base oil. Commercially mineral oil, silicon oil and hydrocarbon
oil are used as carrier ﬂuid in most of the applications.

240

Table 13.1 Properties of
carrier oils

R. Jinaga et al.

Properties

Synthetic oil Mineral oil

Silicone oil

Viscosity @40 °C

0.1068

Flash point

Fire point

Density @25 °C
(kg/m3)
Speciﬁc gravity

Pour point (°C)

Cloud point (°C)

0.028

171–185

260–330

230

350

873–894

825

0.817
0.818–0.95
−30 to −50 −25 to 50
−20

−15

0.1100

>300

500

760

0.9124

50
−20

In order to enhance MR effect viscosity of synthesized ﬂuid should not be a factor
of temperature and also as low as possible, carrier ﬂuid being the major constituent
of MR ﬂuid i.e. from 50 to 80% by volume. The generally used carrier ﬂuid are
synthetic and mineral oil. In case of mineral oil rate of viscosity change as a function
of temperature is high, thus limiting the use of mineral oil as base ﬂuid in low
temperature MR applications. The inherent properties of synthetic oils such as high
ﬂash point, non-thickening of oil at elevated temperatures, high shear strength, high
viscosity index and low friction value (Jinaga et al. 2019). Good temperature stability,
oxidation resistant, heat transfer, high ﬂash point and low vapor pressure are the
important properties of silicon oil which makes it a best choice for carrier ﬂuid. On
other hand difﬁculty to seal the oil is one of the disadvantages of silicon oil. The
change in physical properties of silicon oil over temperature range of −40 to 290 °C
is negligible which is evident from ﬂat viscosity versus temperature slope. Various
properties of commonly used carrier oils are evaluated in Table 13.1.

Carrier ﬂuid being the major constituent of MR ﬂuid i.e. from 50 to 80% by
volume, which contributes to a great extent in deﬁning the rheological properties of
MR ﬂuid. The basic function of carrier ﬂuid is to furnish a nonmagnetic and lower
permeability medium where in magnetically active particles are dispersed under
nonmagnetic condition. The selection of base ﬂuid in MR ﬂuid may vary according to
application, working condition and accuracy of the application. In literature, various
base ﬂuid has been experimented for the synthesis of MR ﬂuids. silicon oil (López-
López et al. 2009), naphtha thickened kerosene and polyvinyl butyl (Guo et al. 2013),
light and white grade mineral oil (Chiriac et al. 2009), combination of water, synthetic
oil, and organic liquids (Kuzhir et al. 2010) etc. commercially MR ﬂuid which uses
silicon oil, hydro carbon oil as base ﬂuid are also available but non economical for
a local application.

While selecting carrier oils. The following points to be noted

(1) Lower viscosity
(2) Lower density
(3) Lower freezing point
(4) Easily available
(5) Lower cost

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

241

(6) High ﬂash point
(7) High ﬁre point
(8) Good thermal stability

Surfactants and Additives. The third important constituent of MR ﬂuid being addi-
tive and surfactant. The dipole-dipole formation in dispersed magnetic particles is
not inﬂuenced by addition of surfactant and additives. Hence the use of additives to
enhance the magnetic properties of particles dispersed in the ﬂuid. The properties
such as

• Reducing the coagulation tendency of particles.
• Reducing the sedimentation of particles over period.
• To enhance re-dispersibility of particles by providing coating.
• To enhance anti oxidation property.

In order to control pH value of water-based MR ﬂuids, liquid additive is used.
The generally used Surfactants for the preparation of MR ﬂuid are as follows.

1. White lithium-based grease
2. Soy lecithin
3. Citric acid
4. Tetra methyl ammonium hydroxide
5. Oleic acid

Additives acting as critical composition of MR ﬂuid are used to serve many
purposes like reducing the sedimentation of particles over period, reducing the coag-
ulation tendency of particles, enhance anti oxidation property and enhancing the
re-dispersibility of particles by providing coating. Sedimentation of magnetisable
particles being critical aspect as the MR effect is directly proportional to active ﬂoat-
ing magnetic particles. The desirable value for sedimentation ratio is zero which is
practically impossible hence attempts are made to maintain the sedimentation rate
to the possible lowest value.

The high viscous material such as thixo-tropic, grease or other additives is
employed to enhance the sedimentation stability. Also, Ferrous oleate or ferrous
naphthanate can be employed as a dispersant and the metal soap like sodium stearate
or lithium stearate as thixo-tropic additive. The dispersed magnetic particles coated
with material such as gaur gum, polystyrene, etc. to ensure non coagulation of CI
particles, resulting in no lump formation and ﬁnally improved particle density i.e.
enhanced sedimentation stability (Viota et al. 2005).

Reduction in sedimentation rate of magnetic particles being critical aspect in
quality of synthesized MR ﬂuid. Over the time of application sedimentation rate
largely inﬂuences characteristics of MR ﬂuid as density of magnetizable particle is
higher than that of carrier ﬂuid (Bednarek 2003). Some of the additives supplementing
MR ﬂuid to bring down sedimentation rate are surfactants such as silica gel, xanthan
gum, carboxylic acids and stearates also thixo-tropic agents. The thixo-tropic network
interrupts ultra-low shear rate ﬂow, leading to high viscosity. On the other hand, ﬂuid
thins as shear rate value is increased.

242

R. Jinaga et al.

The stearates develop a network of inﬂamed strands when deployed in combi-
nation of synthetic ester and mineral oil which restricts the motion of particles by
entrapping it. Carbon ﬁbers has also been experimented in this regards, presence
of these ﬁbers enhances the viscosity value via physical enlargement, also because
of shear induced alignment the ﬂuid exhibits shear thinning (Rodríguez-arco et al.
1984; Kim and Choi 2011). In these ways presence of appropriate additive con-
tributes towards suspension of magnetic particles in carrier ﬂuid. By addition of
additives and surfactants synthesized MR ﬂuid undergoes minimal properties degra-
dation over the time. Concluding the literature study, considering the application,
mode of operation and operating conditions MR ﬂuid should be specially designed.
As every application has its own shear rate, yield stress, temperature stability and
acceptable sedimentation rate.

13.1.2 Operational Mode for Magnetorheological Fluid

The application range of Magneto-rheological ﬂuid being wide engineering applica-
tions, the working principle or modes of operations of MR ﬂuid is categorized into
three classes (Fang et al. 2009), as shown in Fig. 13.2 “ﬂow mode” is represented
where the ﬂow of the ﬂuid is along the constrained surface also normal to that of
externally applied magnetic ﬁeld as demonstrated in Fig. 13.2(i). whereas the “shear
mode” is categorized with one of the surface moving with a velocity in one direction
along the ﬂow with other surface ﬁxed and the ﬂow is normal to applied magnetic
ﬁeld as demonstrated in Fig. 13.2(ii). Kim et al. (Kim et al. 2012) also the “squeeze
mode” quite same as shear mode with a difference of the surface moving with velocity
is along the normal to other surface and also parallel to externally applied magnetic
ﬁeld as demonstrated in Fig. 13.2(iii).

The Magneto-Rheological ﬂuid offers solution wide range of engineering appli-
cation. The development of MR ﬂuid technology is evident in numerous specializa-
tions, extending from structural building and automotive to biomedical designing
applications. Innumerable Experimental has been reported which distinguish the

Fig. 13.2 Modes of operation; (i) ﬂow mode, (ii) shear mode, (iii) squeeze mode

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

243

advantages or utilizing MR gadgets in different ﬁelds (Mazlan et al. 2008). This all-
around reported achievement of MR ﬂuids keeps on persuading present and future
uses of MR ﬂuid.

Signiﬁcant achievement of MR ﬂuid gadgets is generally because of progres-
sions in ﬂuid innovation. The present MR ﬂuids are ﬁt for accomplishing yield
stresses more than 80 kPa which implies the great scope of ﬂuid dynamic range and
controllability. The ﬂuids have additionally showcased enhanced particle stability
characteristic. Besides, the strength and life of the ﬂuid have grown with the end
goal of commercialization of MR ﬂuid in local market (Guo et al. 2013). Execution
of present MR ﬂuid is the result of extraordinary experimentation and study of MR
ﬂuid which helps in characterization. There are many numbers of studies and exper-
imentations with works identiﬁed with the conduct of MR ﬂuid or the execution of
particular MR ﬂuid gadgets (Kuzhir et al. 2010). In various study the information
of the execution of the MR gadget goes be-fore an exhaustive comprehension of the
conduct, of the ﬂuid functioning in the gadget.

The MR gadgets scheduled for one speciﬁc application frequently discovers use
in a different MR application where in which the working states of ﬂuid contrast
enormously com-pared to primary designed application. Similar case of this kind
“acquired” innovation of numerous uses of Lord Corporation developed Motion
MasterTM damper. The design of damper, initially proposed for transports spe-
cially deployed in trucks, has found its way in prosthetic appendages and structural
designing applications (Susan-Resiga et al. 2010). In these various applications,
the operation-al mode of ﬂuid changes considerably. Maybe more outrageous case
where in utilization of MR car dampers, designed for automobile essential damping
in shocks or impact loading application.

13.2 Need for Magneto Rheological Fluid

The modern engineering challenges can be made easy by employing MR ﬂuid tech-
nology. The accomplishments of MR technology in various ﬁeld, ranging from
biomedical engineering to structural and automotive engineering challenges (Olabi
and Grunwald 2007). The investigations and efforts are count-less identifying the
beneﬁts and showing futuristic advantages of employing the technology. Hence the
research and experiments are well driven by the amazing effect and results of past
ﬁnding over implementation of MR technology.

Substantial Achievement of devices working on MR ﬂuid technology is essentially
due to development of MR ﬂuid synthesis technology. Present day MR ﬂuid can
attain yield stress more than 90 kPa, implying inspiring dynamic range and ﬂuid
controllability. Along with impressive yield stress behavior the ﬂuid demonstrates
high particle stability. Considering life and durability of the developed ﬂuid that
the ﬂuid can be employed commercially (Bica et al. 2013). The high-quality ﬂuid
synthesis technology is motivating researchers to develop MR devices in order to
resolve given engineering problem. Vast number of studies have been carried out to

244

R. Jinaga et al.

identify characteristics of MR ﬂuid also ways to enhance to performance of ﬂuid. In
literature we encounter many research works relating to behavior of a speciﬁc MR
device under magnetic conditions or characterization of MR ﬂuid. In case many MR
devices through understanding of MR ﬂuid constituents and its behavior under off
and on state of magnetic ﬁeld is essential (Bica 2007).

Solid matrices in this ﬁeld also is considered as advantage as the sedimentation
of particles reduces to almost zero (Yang et al. 2010; Yu et al. 2015). Also, bounding
of MR ﬂuid is not necessary as its leakproof (Liu et al. 2015; Ge et al. 2013). The
material of Primary MR based elastomer is viscoelastic and non-magnetic, in which
the magnetic particles are distributed uniformly and is processed to a rubber product
via curing process (Qin and Brosseau 2012). Out of MR elastomers the soft magnetic
particle based elastomers are widely used for its high permeability, low coercivity,
high magnetic saturation and low magnetic remanence (Tian et al. 2011; Zhu et al.
2018; Qi et al. 2018).

Hence the higher permeability and magnetic saturation leads to stronger inter
interactions, ﬁnally leading to stronger aggregations and chain structures (Tian et al.
2011; López-López et al. 2008). Interaction rate between the particles largely on par-
ticles shape and size. Also, the particle interaction because of enhanced ﬁeld intensity
can result in larger particle aggregates. Natural rubber being common material matrix
for MR elastomers (Yu et al. 2015; Hajalilou et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2017). Polyisobuty-
lene rubber (Kim and Choi 2011), polyurethane (PU) (Yu et al. 2015; Gong et al.
2013), and silicon rubber (Puente-Córdova et al. 2018).

The devices employing MR ﬂuid designed for speciﬁc application usually satisﬁes
the necessary conditions to ﬁt in alternative application where in working condition
are varied completely from primary application.

13.3 Mathematical Modelling

13.3.1 Magnetic Properties of Suspended Particles

In addition to magnetic behavior of isolated magnetic particles, static magnetic prop-
erty of the MR ﬂuid characterized by M-H and B-H hysteresis ﬁnds its importance.
Hypothetical model for ﬂuid and device working on MR ﬂuid requires magnetization
as input value (Park et al. 2001). The magnetic properties will aid in forecasting MR
response on application of external magnetic ﬁeld by current supplied to device. The
induction value of MR ﬂuid subjected to various ﬁeld is quantiﬁed by different meth-
ods, such as Alternating Gradient Magnetometer, Vibrating Sample Magnetometer
and other induction measuring techniques.

At a given lower magnetic ﬁeld value, the dipole moment developed magnetically

in particles suspended in MR ﬂuid is given by (Japka 1988)

m = 4π μ0R3βH

(13.1)

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

245

(13.2)

(13.3)

β =

μp − μf
μp + 2μf

m = 4
3

π μ0R3Ms

where R, is magnetic particle radius and μf and μp are the relative permeability of
the ﬂuid and the particle, respectively (Burda et al. 2005).

At higher ﬁeld values where magnetization of the particle reaches its saturation
value, the magnitude value for moment becomes independent of applied ﬁeld value
and is given by

where μ0Ms is magnetic saturation.

The magnetic saturation of ﬂuid, μ0Mf is connected to the magnetic saturation

of bulk magnetic solid, μ0Ms, through volume fraction (cid:4) of the solid present

μ0Mf = (cid:4)μ0Ms

(13.4)

Ginder and Phulé reported two kind of ﬂuid demonstrating static magnetic prop-
erties employing personalized hysteresis graph. The ﬂuid with 36 percent volume
fraction of Fe particles, μ0Mf was recorded 0.75 T and for 35 vol% fraction it read
approximately 0.14 T. Bulk magnetic saturation for ferrite it is 0.4 T and for Fe is
2.1 T.

13.3.2 Viscous Incompressible Flow with Pressure Gradient

Before discussing the mathematical modelling of the Magneto Rheological ﬂuids
lets understand the ﬂow behaviour of a Newtanian ﬂuid long pair of parallel plate
through pressure gradient (Cho et al. 2004). The parallel plate ﬂow can be closely
correlated to ﬂow as ﬂuid ﬂow in a damping application as ﬂuid ﬂows through the
perforations of the piston. The ﬂow between parallel plates with pressure gradient is
also called as Poiseuille Flow.

Consider an incompressible, laminar viscous two-dimensional ﬂow along the two
parallel plates separated by a distance of 2 h as shown in Fig. 13.3 where, plates are
ﬁxed however the pressure ﬂuctuates along x-axis. It is accepted that the plates are
too wide and long so the ﬂow is basically axial i.e. (u (cid:2)= 0, v = w = 0). Utilizing
continuity equation, it prompts a similar end that u = u(y). Additionally, v = w = 0
and gravity is dismissed, the momentum equations in the axis is deduced as;

We have Navier Stroke equation as

(cid:2)

ρ

∂u
∂t

∂u
∂x

∂u
∂y

(cid:3)

∂u
∂z

+ u

+ v

+ w

= ρgx −

+ μ

∂p
∂x

(cid:2)

∂ 2u
∂x2

+

+

∂ 2u
∂y2

∂ 2u
∂z2

(cid:3)

(13.5)

246

Fig. 13.3 Viscous
incompressible ﬂow along
parallel plates

R. Jinaga et al.

We have,
Y Momentum

∂p
∂y

= 0, z momentum

= 0; p = p(x).

∂p
∂z

X-momentum μ

∂ 2u
∂y2

=

∂p
∂x

= dp
dx

(13.6)

In the x momentum equation, it might be noticed that the left-hand side contains
the variation with uy whereas the right-hand side demonstrates the variation with px.
It must prompt a same constant else they would not be independent to each other.
Since ﬂow needs to conquer the wall shear stress and pressure must decrease toward
ﬂow direction, the constant must be negative value. This kind of pressure driven ﬂow
is called as Poiseuille ﬂow which is especially basic in the water driven frameworks,
brakes in automotive and so on. The last type of equation got for a pressure gradient
ﬂow along two ﬁxed parallel plates is given by.

μ

∂ 2u
∂y2

= dp
dx

= Constant < 0

By double integrating Eq. 13.7 the solution can be obtained as
(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:4)

(cid:5)

u = 1
μ

dp
dx

y2
2

+ c1y + c2

The constants are determined by no-slip condition

At y = +h; u = 0 ⇒ c1 = 0 and c2 = − dp
dx

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

h2
2μ

The general solution is obtained by substituting and solving as

(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:4)

(cid:5)

u = 1
μ

−

dp
dx

h2
2μ

1 − y2
h2

(13.7)

(13.8)

(13.9)

(13.10)

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

247

The ﬂow demonstrated by the equation follows Poiseuille parabola at constant

curvature also maximum velocity umax along centerline y = 0

(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:4)

(cid:5)

umax = 1
μ

−

dp
dx

h2
2μ

Volume ﬂow rate q ﬂowing between the parallel plates per unit depth is given by

h(cid:6)

(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:4)

1
2μ

q =

−h

(cid:5)
(cid:7)
h2 − y2

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

(cid:8)
dy = 2h3
3μ

dp
dx

dp
dx

The pressure-drop between two point (cid:7)p at a distance l along x direction, then
(cid:4)

(cid:5)

q = 2h3
3μ

(cid:7)p
l

Average velocity is expressed as

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

uavg = q
2h

= h2
3μ

(cid:7)p
l

= 3
2

umax

The shear stress obtained from Newtonian ﬂuid is given by

τw = μ

τw = ±

(cid:4)

(cid:4)

∂u
∂y
dp
dx

(cid:5)

= μ

+

∂v
∂x
(cid:5)
h = ± 2μumax

y=±h

∂
∂y

h

(cid:9)(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:10)

− dp
dx

h2
2μ

1 − y2
h2

y=±h

The above equation represents shear stress for parallel plate pressure inﬂuenced

Newtonian ﬂuid ﬂow. Now let us try modeling and analysis of MR ﬂuids.

(13.11)

(13.12)

(13.13)

(13.14)

(13.15)

13.3.3 Magneto Rheological Fluid Models

Magneto Rheological (MR) ﬂuid modeling plays a very critical role in synthesis of
MR ﬂuid and the applications working on these ﬂuids, as many properties and factors
are responsible for the behaviour. Under so many variables governing the behaviour
of the ﬂuid it becomes very important to model and analyse a mathematical model
which can simulate and predict the performance of the magneto rheological ﬂuid
(Chin et al. 2001).

The following study deals with two model for operation of the MR ﬂuid, the
ﬁrst model describes visco-plastic behavior using two mathematical model, also

248

R. Jinaga et al.

using Navier-Stokes equations a quassi-steady state model for MR ﬂuids through
ﬁxed parallel plate. The development of this equation can be used to validate latter
experimental results.

Visco Plastic Model. The model which is usually used to elaborate ﬁeld-dependent
characteristic of the MR ﬂuid is Bingham-plastic model. The Bingham model is
expressed as

τ = ±τ0 + μγ

(13.16)

where τ0—yield stress, γ—shear rate and μ—viscosity.

The ﬂuid starts ﬂowing at a point where the yield stress is overcome by shear
stress i.e. for τ < τ 0 ⇒ γ = 0. In Fig. 13.4 displays the Bingham-plastic model,
which effectively represents the behavior of magnetic ﬁeld dependent yield stress.

The other model which can replace the Bingham model with almost same is
Herschel Bulkley model which deals with post yield shear thinning characteristic of
MR ﬂuid. Herschel Bulkley model is expressed as (Noroozi et al. 2013)

T = ±τ0 + K|μ| 1

m

(13.17)

where m and K are ﬂuid characteristics.

Shear thinning of the ﬂuid when m takes the value greater than unity whereas the
when m takes the value less than unity the equation represents shear thickening, also
for the value m equals unity the equation reduces to Bingham-plastic model.

The Bingham and Herschel-Bulkley models have been utilized in number of
models used to portray the conduct of particular MR ﬂuid applications. Numerous
such models are gotten from the work done by Phillips. A few experimental studies
have stretched out Phillip’s work to axisymmetric damper models (Sawalkar et al.
2015; Kuzhir et al. 2003). As a rule, the gap size is very small in contrast with
the annulus diameter, the axisymmetric problem is deduced to the parallel plate

Fig. 13.4 Visco-plastic
models often used to
describe MR ﬂuids

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

249

approximation (Sawalkar et al. 2015). It has been demonstrated that the most of the
errors between the parallel plate approximation and axisymmetric model is under
5% (Kuzhir et al. 2003). The effortlessness of the parallel plate model and the small
error legitimizes its utilization in 20 most-damper models. Besides, MR ﬂuid parallel
ﬂow forms the reason for modeling of MR ﬂuid device working in shear mode or
valve mode.

Quasi-Steady Parallel Flow of MR Fluid. The essential material science of ﬂuid
ﬂow can be explained by the conditions of momentum and mass conservation. The
equation of movement for a Newtonian, incompressible i.e. constant density and
single-phase ﬂuid can be composed as Eq. 13.5.

MR ﬂuid comprise of three essential elements, in particular, carrier ﬂuid or base
ﬂuid, magnetic particles and additive or stabilizer to improve the dispersion of the
magnetic particles in the carrier ﬂuid for better execution of the ﬂuid when exposed
to given application. In any case, MR ﬂuids without an applied magnetic ﬁeld acts
like that of a Newtonian ﬂuid, when the ﬂuid is exposed to an applied magnetic ﬁeld
leads to yield stress development and the ﬂuid behaves as a Bingham ﬂuid which can
be expressed by the relation (Gabriel and Laun 2009)

τ = ±τ0 + μ du
dy

(13.18)

where τ0—the yield stress ﬁeld dependent, μ—the viscosity, and du/dy—the shear
rate.

Figure 13.5 demonstrates quasi steady ﬂow of MR ﬂuid through constrained
parallel plates. Note that this ﬂow behaviour is regularly used to describe the ﬂuid
course through a MR valve. The ﬂow response shown in Fig. 13.5 can be distinguished
into three particular sections. Review that the beginning of ﬂow does not happen until
the point when the yield stress has been surpassed. In this manner, the ﬂow with in
the channel can be distinguished into three distinct sections. In section I and II, where
the shear rate is extensive, the ﬂuid ﬂows much like the Newtonian ﬂow. Whereas

Fig. 13.5 MR ﬂuid ﬂow
through ﬁxed parallel plates

250

R. Jinaga et al.

in area III, be that as it may, the ﬂuid is moving as a strong or ﬁtting through the
channel. In this area, the yield stress τ0, has not been surpassed and subsequently the
ﬂuid isn’t being sheared.

With a speciﬁc end goal to decide an articulation for the pressure drop caused by
the ﬂow characteristic as shown in Fig. 13.5. The technique illustrated starts with the
Navier-Stokes equation (Chin et al. 2001). By implementing boundary conditions
on both the shear rate and velocity, in terms of the channel geometry the velocity
proﬁle is calculated. A moment balance of ﬂuid results in plug geometry and takes
into consideration in decrease of the velocity proﬁle. At last, a cubic articulation for
the pressure gradient is found from the mean velocity and ﬂow rate. The cubical
equation solution is expressed in closed form.

The reduced form can be written as
(cid:5)

(cid:4)

ρ

∂u
∂t

+ u

∂u
∂x

= ρgx −

+ μ

∂p
∂x

∂ 2u
∂y2

Considering horizontal and developed ﬂow, momentum equation is written as

Integration the above equation and applying the boundary conditions

∂ 2u
∂y2

= 1
μ

dp
dx

du
dy

du
dy

du
dy

(ha) = 0 0 ≤ y ≤ ha

= 0 ha ≤ y ≤ hb

(hb) = 0 hb ≤ y ≤ h

du
dy

du
dy

= 1
μ

= 1
μ

dp
dx

dp
dx

(y − ha) 0 ≤ y ≤ ha

(y − hb) hb ≤ y ≤ h

Hence, we have equations for shear rate. Also the shear rates for region I and II

are expressed using Eqs. 13.21 and 13.23 as

Whereas the shear rate, velocity in various sections can be determined by inte-

grating again against y and applying the following boundary conditions

u(0) = 0 0 ≤ y ≤ ha

(13.26)

(13.19)

(13.20)

(13.21)

(13.22)

(13.23)

(13.24)

(13.25)

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

u = up ha ≤ y ≤ hb

u(h) = 0 hb ≤ y ≤ h

251

(13.27)

(13.28)

Using Eqs. 13.26 and 13.28, the velocity proﬁle in the regions I and II are deter-

mined in terms of the plug geometry as

dp
dx

u = 1
2μ
(cid:11)(cid:7)

(cid:8)

u = 1
2μ

dp
dx

y(y − 2ha) 0 ≤ y ≤ ha

(13.29)

y2 − h2

− 2hb(y − h)

hb ≤ y ≤ h

(13.30)

(cid:12)

Plug Geometry. To determine velocity proﬁle completely the unknowns up, ha and
hb has to be determined. Using either of the equations i.e. 13.29 or 13.30, the plug
velocity can be determined using the conditions uI (ha) = up or uII (hb) = up. Assess-
ing the velocity proﬁle in region I at y = ha, we have the expression given for the
plug velocity as (Walikar et al. 2015)

up = − h2
a
2μ

dp
dx

(13.31)

To obtain the expression for plug thickness δ = hb − ha, is calculated by applying
equilibrium condition on the plug. Considering ﬂuid element as shown in Fig. 13.6.
The forces acting on ﬂuid element are the shear forces and the pressure gradient.

Force balance over ﬂuid element shown in Fig. 13.6 hence,

(cid:7)pdydz = −2τ0dxdz

(13.32)

Fig. 13.6 Force balance over ﬂuid element in plug selection

252

R. Jinaga et al.

The clockwise rotation of element is due to shear stress is expressed as positive
(Bednarek 2003). Also, in terms of the plug section, Eq. 13.32 can be expressed as

(13.33)

(13.34)

(13.35)

(13.36)

(13.37)

(13.38)

(13.39)

The plug thickness is then

dp
dx

δ = −2τ0

dp
dx

δ = hb − ha = − 2τ0
dp/dx

ha = h
2
hb = h
2

+

−

τ0
dp/dx
τ0
dp/dx

The velocity proﬁle being symmetry we have hb = h − ha and thus from Eq. 13.34

we estimate the values as

In terms of τ o and h the velocity proﬁles can be rewritten as

y(y − h) −

y 0 ≤ y ≤ ha

u = 1
2μ

dp
dx

u = 1
2μ

dp
dx

τ0
μ

τ0
μ

y(y − h) +

(y − h) hb ≤ y ≤ h

Similarly, the plug velocity can be written as
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

up = − 1
8μ

dp
dx

h2 −

τ0
2μ

h +

τ0
dp/dx

By integrating the velocity proﬁle along thickness of channel mean velocity can

be written as

um = 1
h

udy = 1
h

h(cid:6)

0

ha(cid:6)

⎡

⎣

hb(cid:6)

h(cid:6)

⎤

⎦

udy +

udy +

udy

(13.40)

0

ha

hb

Substituting the expression for ha from Eq. 13.33, we have

um = − 1
12μ

dp
dx

h2 − hτ0
4μ

+ 1
3μh

τ 3
0
(dp/dx)2

(13.41)

Also, it can be seen that for τ0 = 0, Eq. 13.41 deduces the mean velocity for the
Newtonian ﬂow. Also, by knowing τ0 and um, the above equation can be written in

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

253

third order equation for pressure gradient.

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

3

(cid:4)

dp
dx

+

12umμ
h2

+ 3τ0
h

(cid:5)(cid:4)

(cid:5)
2

dp
dx

− 4τ 3
0
h3

= 0

Again for τ0 = 0, Eq. 13.39 follows Newtonian ﬂow

Also considering opposite sides where ﬂow does not occur because of plug for-
mation of width h. When δ = h, Eq. 13.43 we can be expressed as critical pressure
drop

Which is the lowest pressure gradient which can still propagate ﬂow along parallel
plates. Hence, in order to have a ﬂow along parallel plates the following condition
must be satisﬁed:

Pressure Gradient Solution. For solving Eq. 13.45 for pressure gradient, we must
normalize with respect to Newtonian ﬂow (Omidbeygi and Hashemabadi 2013)

(cid:4)

dp
dx

/ dp
dx N

(cid:5)
3

(cid:4)
1 + 3τ0h
12umμ

−

(cid:5)(cid:4)

dp
dx

/ dp
dx N

(cid:5)

2

(cid:4)

+ 4

τ0h
12umμ

(cid:5)

3

= 0

(13.46)

Also, the two non-dimensional parameters (Bednarek 2003)

dp
dx

= − 12umμ

h2

dp
dx c

= − 2τ0
h

dp
dx

≥ dp
dx c

P = − dp
dx

T =

h2
12umμ
τ0h
12umμ

(13.42)

(13.43)

(13.44)

(13.45)

(13.47)

(13.48)

Equation 13.43 reduces to the form presented by Phillips (Bednarek 2003).

P 3 − (1 + 3T )P 2 + 4T 3 = 0

(13.49)

The above equation can be written as

P 3 + aP 2 + b = 0

(13.50)

254

R. Jinaga et al.

where a = −(1 + 3T ) and b = 4T 3

Substituting and solving Eq. 13.50 we have

(13.51)

(13.52)

(13.53)

(13.54)

(13.55)

m = 1
3
(cid:2)

θ = cos−1

(1 + 3T )2

(cid:3)

54T 3
(1 + 3T )5/2

g = − 2
3

(1 + 3T )

From the transformation, we ﬁnd the solution for P
(cid:2)

(cid:4)

(cid:4)

P(T ) = 2
3

(1 + 3T )

cos

cos−1

1 −

1
3

(cid:5)(cid:5)

(cid:3)

54T 3
(1 + 3T )5/2

+ 1
2

The solution for the non-dimensional pressure gradient, P is expressed by
Eq. 13.54 in terms of the non-dimensional yield stress, T . Also, along the solu-
tion, an equation for pressure drop in the ﬂow channel can be written in terms of the
channel geometry as

(cid:7)Pτ = 12Pumμ

Lmr

h2

Equation 13.55 represents pressure drop developed in the MR ﬂuid ﬂowing along
two ﬁxed plate. The pressure drop is responsible for the controllability of the MR
ﬂuid ﬂow.

13.4 Magneto Rheological Fluid

Magneto rheological ﬂuid being the hope of future technologies in various ﬁelds
of engineering applications. The ﬂuid which is acting as control system for devices
working on MR ﬂuid. As the properties of ﬂuid plays critical role in overall func-
tioning of MR system, the constituents and the mode of synthesis are of great impor-
tance. Also, the behavioral study of the synthesized ﬂuid under applied magnetic
ﬁeld enables us to predict behavior of MR ﬂuid-based systems (Hajalilou et al. 2016;
Walikar et al. 2015). The sedimentation rate of magnetic particles in ﬂuid being
deciding criteria for accuracy, consistency and life of MR ﬂuid, it is important to
study sedimentation rate of ﬂuid.

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

255

13.4.1 Synthesis and Characterization

Synthesis of MR ﬂuids is basically a process of mixing the constituent thoroughly
using any mechanical agitation process before starting the synthesis process one
should know the quantities of all constituents of MR ﬂuid. In order to prepare MR
ﬂuid, one should know appropriate amount of additives, which can be combination
of antioxidant, anti-wear, antirust, anticorrosion, and friction modiﬁer to help in
improving the characteristics of synthesized MR ﬂuid (Kamble and Kolekar (2015),
Kamble et al. (2015), Kolekar (2014b), Kolekar et al. (2014) Gong et al. 2013;
Puente-Córdova et al. 2018; Park et al. 2001; Burda et al. 2005). To the measured
quantity of base oil this additive combination is added and thoroughly mixed for
20 min using stirrer. The magnetic metal particles of known quantity are added to
the mixture so as to disperse the particles thoroughly in the ﬂuid. The obtained
homogenized mixture is stirred using mechanical stirrer at 1000 rpm for duration
of 24 h to obtain homogeneously dispersed MR ﬂuid. Flow chart representing the
process incorporated in synthesis is shown in Fig. 13.7.

Characterization plays very critical role in determining the ﬁeld of application
of MR ﬂuid various plots detailing properties of MR ﬂuid could be plotted using
magneto rheometer, Parallel plate rheometer standard gap of 1 mm is used separating
the parallel plate. The electric coils are incorporated to generate magnetic ﬂux lines
which are normal to parallel plates (Zhang et al. 2010). The MR attachment is so
designed to generate continuously varying magnetic ﬁeld, which is applied parallel
to sample,

Experimentation is carried out by maintaining constant temperature of 25 °C for
each sample, also the shear rate is kept constant for 5 s till measured shear stress
value reaches steady state, the rpm is maintained constant so is to obtain consistency
in measurement (Zhang et al. 2010).

The following tests can be carried out

Fig. 13.7 Flow chart for
synthesis route

256

R. Jinaga et al.

(1) Shear rate, Shear stress, viscosity and strain using Magneto rheometer

(i) Rheological properties under controlled shear rate

Shear stress versus shear rate, Shear viscosity versus Shear rate, Shear
Viscosity versus shear stress, under different magnetic ﬁeld conditions

(ii) Oscillatory Shear Test (Dynamic Test)

(a) Amplitude sweep results at different magnetic ﬁeld

(b) Frequency sweep results at different magnetic ﬁeld

(i) Loss modulus versus Strain
(ii) Storage Modulus versus Strain

(i) Loss modulus versus Strain
(ii) Storage Modulus versus Strain

(2) Yield stress measurement under different magnetic ﬁeld conditions

Yield stress versus Magnetic ﬁeld strength.

13.5 Sedimentation Test

Sedimentation is the afﬁnity of the particles in a colloidal solution to come to rest at
the bottom after they are scattered in a ﬂuid. This is the result of Brownian movement
within the ﬂuid in response to the forces acting over the particles. The cause of forces
may gravitational force, magnetic ﬁeld or centrifugal forces. The rate of sedimenta-
tion, in the MR Fluid is measured by ignoring the magnetic force on the MR Fluid
particle (Sherje 2016). Also, the characteristic difference in density of carrier ﬂuid
and iron particle leads to particle sedimentation, resulting in upper clariﬁed volume
designated as supernatant ﬂuid above the mud line (Tan et al. 2010). The mud lines
form the boundary in between supernatant ﬂuid and turbulent part in colloidal solu-
tion so developed. The observations are recorded followed by visual observing the
position change in the sedimentation in MR ﬂuid sample.

The setup employed for the observation and data collection is shown in Fig. 13.8.
The setup consists of a clear graduated test-tube and a graduated ruler to record the
level of supernatant ﬂuid. The level of supernatant ﬂuid increases and the turbid part
decreases as time elapses.

Sedimentation levels are recorded after visual inspection during daytime in order
to have a clear observation made to record the turbid part and height of supernatant
of MR ﬂuid. Synthesized ﬂuid is ﬁlled in glass test-tube up to 10 cm and allowed
to rest for few hours at vertical position. Using stopwatch and ruler the supernatant
ﬂuid height (Hs) is measured after a ﬁxed interval of time lapse.

Sedimentation ratio is the ratio of the supernatant ﬂuid height to test height of the

MR ﬂuid taken for observation and is expressed as (Fang et al. 2009)

SR = Hs
HT

× 100%

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

257

Fig. 13.8 a Measurement of sedimentation and b pictorial clariﬁcation used for determination of
sedimentation-ratio

where, SR is the sedimentation ratio,

HT is total height of ﬂuid taken in test-tube for observation
Hs is the height of supernatant ﬂuid.

13.6 Applications of MR Fluid

Potential utilizations of MR ﬂuids are in gadgets which require brisk, reversible
change and persistent in rheological properties (Wang and Gordaninejad 2006).
Magneto rheological gadgets have picked up an awesome enthusiasm amid the most
recent decades, since a magneto rheological ﬂuid puts mechanical gadgets in coordi-
nation with an electronic framework, subsequently empowering persistent assurance
of mechanical attributes of the device. A portion of these gadgets which use magneto
rheological ﬂuids are another age of clutches, brakes and dampers (Fang et al. 2009).
Magneto rheological dampers particularly as shock absorber are the most utilized
gadgets of this kind. Power steering pumps, control valves, artiﬁcial joints, alterna-
tors, engine mounts, chemical sensing, sound propagation applications and others are
a portion of these precedents. Medication conveyance and tumor treatment strategies
in solution are some cutting edge uses of magnetic suspensions.

In a generally thorough examination, Bica et al. Examined the potential utilizations
of magneto rheological dampers. They distinguished vital variables inﬂuencing the
execution of MR ﬂuids in an application (Susan-Resiga et al. 2010; Bica et al. 2013).
In another examination, Wang and Meng assessed different attributes and utilizations
of magneto rheological ﬂuids. Their study demonstrated that the three primary issues
against across the board utilization of MR ﬂuid innovation in numerous advanced
gadgets are their non-settling ability, durability and the cost factor (Bin Cheng et al.

258

R. Jinaga et al.

2009; Wang and Meng 1948). Having no case to cover every one of the applications,
the followings quickly talk about probably the most vital uses of magneto rheological
ﬂuids. Kciuk and Turczyn contemplated fundamental properties of MR ﬂuid and their
broad applications in different ventures. In another investigation (Kciuk and Turczyn
2009; Kciuk and Turczyn 2006), Olabi and Grunwald contemplated properties of
magneto rheological ﬂuids and additionally their applications (Mazlan et al. 2008;
Olabi and Grunwald 2007).

As indicated by their overview, promising highlights of MR ﬂuids innovation like
quick response, basic interface between electrical power input and mechanical power
yield and furthermore exact control capacity, settle on them the following innovation
decision for some applications (Iglesias et al. 2012).

MR ﬂuid can be synthesized rendering to a speciﬁc engineering application due
to large variation of process and design parameters. Major area of application for
MR ﬂuid application are MR brakes, MR clutch MR dampers, MR journal bearing,
MR surface ﬁnishing (Kciuk and Turczyn 2009; Kumbhar et al. 2015).

13.6.1 Magneto-Rheological Brake and Clutch System

Two modes of operation are employed in designing of MR ﬂuid brake and clutch
system namely ﬂow and shear mode (Park et al. 2009). In the brake system design
the core is deployed to rotate and casing is stationary, whereas in clutch system
inverse technic is employed. Magnetic ﬁeld intensity which is intern controlled by
input current is the governing factor for torque levels in brake and clutch system
(Wang and Meng 1948). Hence, precise controlling of stopping torque and torque
transmission is achieved by effective MR ﬂuid devices.

A generalized MR braking and clutch system is shown in Fig. 13.9, the MR
breaking and clutch system comprising of housing and core separated by narrow
gap for MR ﬂuid, which have relative rotational motion during operation deploying

Fig. 13.9 Schematic representation of magneto rheological braking system

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

259

Drive
(AC to DC Converter) 

Driver 
(DC Motor) 

Display Unit

Actuator 

Coupling  

Fig. 13.10 Fabricated prototype MR ﬂuid brake measurement system

ﬂow and shear mode. The disk is designed to have relative rotational motion within
MR ﬂuid which is ﬁlled up in the narrow slit between stator and rotor (Kciuk and
Turczyn 2006). The rotor rotates along the ﬂuid imparting very low resistance to the
rotor, as the magnetic ﬁeld is activated increases the viscosity intern increasing yield
stress due to shear resisting rotation and hence breaking or clutching phenomenon is
achieved (Kumbhar et al. 2015). Literature shows studies that braking effect can be
achieved with in 65 ms which make the system a quick and reliable (Ashtiani et al.
2015). The system for investigating the torque developed by MR ﬂuid-based braking
system is shown in Fig. 13.10.

In the year 2013, the designs of MR brake and clutches ca be categorized into four
types namely multi-plate, multi-disc, multi-pole and multi-gap. The design of these
systems being simple fabrication of MR system is easy as it includes only coil and
the disc (Bica et al. 2013). In year 2014, modiﬁcation in the MR brake was proposed
by Nguyen, wherein the casing design was changed in order to optimize magnetic
ﬁeld lines. This modiﬁed design can be called as initial breakthrough in innovative
design of MR ﬂuid devices with respect to casing material and optimization. The
designed system resulted same level of torque value as that of conventional, whereas
the manufacturing cost was brought down drastically.

In year 2015, new model for MR brake was developed by Nguyen with provision
of interchangeable structure of magnetic and electric coils. This was achieved by
placing electric coils outside of housing. In the year 2016, combination of MR ﬂuid
and permanent magnetic was employed in the design proposed by Yu. The results
so obtained showed that performance of system in torque controlling was enhanced,
wherein practical application of the system was difﬁcult because of large casing and
magnet size. Moreover, maintenance of each component in the assembly was not
easy.

In the year 2017, new method for MR clutch system was proposed by Rizzo in
which a permanent magnet was deployed in order to control magnetic ﬁeld lines of
the MR clutch system. The position of magnet was varied in order to vary torque
magnitude. Under nonmagnetic conditions, the position of magnet was maintained

260

R. Jinaga et al.

to not to connect to MR ﬂuid region with the help of spring. Under the inﬂuence
of applied magnetic ﬁeld, part of permanent magnet is moved to MR ﬂuid region
again via spring. Thus, the rotational motion of connected MR ﬂuid devices can be
controlled effectively. The unique One feature of this design is at the same level of
applied magnetic ﬁeld the torque value can be increased resulting in prevention of
block up phenomenon where in motion of MR ﬂuid is not occurring (Li et al. 2017).
During year 2018, there was no major design conﬁguration for MR clutch and brake
systems were proposed. Though, research on bringing down the Magnetic saturation
of magnetic materials has been experimented with various combinations.

13.7 Classiﬁcation of MR Fluid Based Braking System

The special characteristics of MR ﬂuid such as high dynamic range, better stability
control and low sensitivity towards foreign impure particles makes it best suitable
for MR brake and clutch application. Considering the various characteristics of MR
ﬂuid various combination of rotary brakes and its geometry is developed, these MR
brake systems are classiﬁed basically into ﬁve types (Avraam et al. 2010). Major
variation in these different types of braking systems are the physical properties such
as rotor shape and ﬂuid gap between rotor and stator.

Basic types of MR braking systems are:

Inverted drum type.

a. Drum type.
b.
c. T-shaped type.
d. Disk type.
e. Multiple disk type (Avraam et al. 2010).

The classiﬁcation widely depends on mode of operation and physical appearance
of braking system. The characteristics such as weight, design complexity, manufac-
turing cost, braking torque required, material type, etc. are the factors considered for
distinguish MR braking system.

13.7.1 Drum Brake

One of the easiest design of a MR braking system could be drum type braking
system. Figure 13.11 demonstrates the alignment of this type braking system, the
system consists of a cylindrical rotor. In this system the applied magnetic ﬁeld is
in radial direction (Avraam et al. 2010; Imaduddin et al. 2013). Stator of system,
which is stationary during the functioning of braking system is in cylindrical shape
and usually made of nonmagnetic material. The interior of braking system consist of
cylindrical rotor mounted over a shaft, which is intern connected to driving system
for brake (Avraam et al. 2010).

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

261

Fig. 13.11 Drum rotor MR
braking system

A small gap between the rotor and stator of braking system is maintained which
is ﬁlled up with MR ﬂuid. As the braking torque is produced by the MR ﬂuid which
is the function of current input to system. The positioning of stator and rotor is
taken care with the help of housing. The magnetic coil which is responsible for the
generation of magnetic ﬁeld is placed between rotor and housing. Usually the gap
between rotor and stator is maintained considerably small (Avraam et al. 2010; Jolly
et al. 1999). Hence in order to achieve greater torque value one should maintain gap
as small as possible.

13.7.2 Inverted Drum Brake

Modiﬁed version of drum type MR ﬂuid braking system is inverted drum type.
Figure 13.12 displays arrangement of various components in the system. The inertia
of this system is considerably high because of large rotor size. Apart from minor
changes such as arrangement of rotor and design, basic operation of the system
remains similar to drum type brake system (Avraam et al. 2010).

The rotor of the system is inverted and is mounted over the shaft at the ends.
The rotor is not completely mounted as in drum type braking system. The design of
this system being more compact because of hollow arrangements. Magnetic coil is
embedded inside the core. The complications related to hollow arrangement, compact
design and embedded arrangements adds up to the manufacturing cost and intern
overall cost of the system (Avraam et al. 2010).

262

Fig. 13.12 Inverted drum
rotor MR braking system

R. Jinaga et al.

13.7.3 T-Shaped Rotor Brake

The improved version of the MR braking system with respect to performance is T
Shape rotor braking system, the cross section of rotor of the system is in the shape
of T. the actuating system comprises of magnetic coil, core and MR ﬂuid. The gap
between rotor and stator is divided into two parts as displayed in Fig. 13.13. The
design of this braking system deals with increasing the radial gap by incorporating
two smaller magnetic circuit. In this system the shaft is equipped with a locking
mechanism in order to connect the rotor, and stator being outside of braking system
(Avraam et al. 2010). The two magnetic circuit generates two different magnetic
ﬁeld on both the side of core. To achieve maximum torque value in T shaped braking
system rotor is usually made of soft iron, screwed and glued to central portion. The
magnetic coil is wounded over plastic support in order to rectify eddy current under
operation (Avraam et al. 2010). The coils are covered using soft iron magnetic core,
with optimized design to for achieving low weight of braking system and uniform
distribution of magnetic ﬁeld.

Manufacturing of T shaped braking system being compact is quite difﬁcult in
manufacturing (Avraam et al. 2010; Güth et al. 2011). The performance of braking
system encourages its use over others braking systems, on other hand at some instance
the undesired vibrations are developed in the system.

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

263

Fig. 13.13 T-shaped rotor
MR braking system

13.7.4 Disk Type Brake

Disk type braking system is the widely used MR braking design. The braking system
consist of disk as rotor which is mounted over driving shaft. Stator of the system
surrounds the rotor assembly as demonstrated in Fig. 13.14. The gap is ﬁlled with
MR ﬂuid between rotor and stator (Avraam et al. 2010; Jun et al. 2005; Smith et al.
2007). Magnetic ﬂux generated by the magnetic circuit acts perpendicular to the rotor

Fig. 13.14 Disk rotor MR braking system

264

R. Jinaga et al.

of the system which is a thick solid disc. Magnetic coil in the system are placed in
vertical direction between the rotor and the stator, as demonstrated in Fig. 13.14.

Like that of drum rotor MR braking system, this system needs to enhance the
effective area in order to bring up the performance of braking system. The working
principle of the disc rotor MR braking system is based on friction under active
magnetic ﬁeld condition (Avraam et al. 2010; Tian et al. 2003). Increasing effective
surface area, torque value and stability of system along shear is improved.

13.7.5 Multiple Disk Brake

In multiple disk MR braking system is the improved design of disk type rotor braking
system multiple disc are assembled one over other to form central core of braking
system. The rotor of the braking system can be either single piece with slots for
stator or multiple disk combination with MR ﬂuid between disks. This arrangement
of the multiple disks is mounted centrally over the shaft with locking arrangement.
Stator of the system is placed outside the rotor system maintaining minimal gap as
demonstrated in Fig. 13.15, the gap between stator and rotor is ﬁlled with MR ﬂuid
and the vertical positioning of magnetic coil, similar to that of disk type rotor braking
system. (Avraam et al. 2010). The concentric arrangement of rotor disk makes design
compact and enhances the structural design.

In this type of braking system, the design has compact structure with restricted
space. This system primarily ﬁnds its application in automobiles with requirement
of high braking torque i.e. greater than 50 N m (Avraam et al. 2010).

Fig. 13.15 Disk MR brake

13 Magneto Rheological Fluid Based Smart Automobile Brake …

265

13.8 Summary

The implementation of smart systems in the applications of Engineering have revo-
lutionized the development. MR ﬂuid being one of its kind, the development dates
back to 1949 by Jacob Rabinow. Since then the development of ﬂuid, characteriza-
tion, optimization of magnetic parameters, applications and optimizing operational
characteristics of MR ﬂuid-based device. This chapter focuses on the development
of MR ﬂuid along the timeline also considering its applications, focusing on the
performance dependence over particle size/shape, additive and carrier ﬂuid. Also,
various additives employed for enhancing rheological characteristics of magnetic
ﬁeld-dependent solid and matrices based MR materials.

Mathematical model has been explained considering various parameters, further
the detailed methodology for the synthesis of MR ﬂuid is explained. The characteris-
tics of MR ﬂuid being critical aspects in performance of MR based devices, various
tests considered to evaluate ﬂuid has been discussed along with sedimentation test
in order to evaluate sedimentation ratio. Sedimentation being one of greatest hurdles
for a good MR ﬂuid understanding the phenomenon and its measurement helps in
reducing its effect resulting in a stable MR ﬂuid.

MR brake and clutches ﬁnd wide application in any mechanical system, an attempt
is made to explain basic working principle of MR brake and clutch. Also, output
measurement of MR based devices in terms of torque in case of brake and clutch
is demonstrated by the assembled prototype as shown in Fig. 13.10. At the end of
chapter various types of MR brakes employed is demonstrated with exploded view
of each braking system.
Abstract Effect of shot peening on high stress abrasive wear behavior of medium
carbon steel (AISI 6150 steel) at varying applied load and abrasive size has been
studied. The shot peening leads to sub-surface work hardening and surface denting.
The extent of work hardening and denting increases with increase in shot peening
intensity. The experiments are performed on shot peening machine under two con-
ditions of applied load, abrasive size and shot peening intensity as 7 N, 90 μm and
0.486 mm Almen “A” and 1 N, 30 μm and 0.117 mm Almen “A”, respectively. The
wear rate decreases by 20–30% due to shot peening to a level of 0.117 mm Almen “A”
from the un-peened state. Further increase in peening intensity does not lead to any
signiﬁcant improvement in wear resistance. The wear rate decreases with increase
in sliding distance due to work hardening and degradation of abrasive media.
Keywords Shot peening · Wear · Work hardening

14.1 Introduction

Medium carbon steels are widely used as agricultural implements especially for soil
engaging components. These components are subjected to severe abrasive condi-
tions which resulting in greater extent of wears. As a result, the life of component
becomes considerably less (one to two season). This becomes more problematic, as
no standard composition or heat treatment or procedures is followed for manufac-
turing these components. Thus, it is expected, that selection of suitable composition,
heat treatment schedule and manufacturing procedure would be very important for
considerations in manufacturing of such components. The uses of medium carbon
manganese steels include shafts, couplings, crankshafts, axles, gears and forgings.
Steels in the range 0.40–0.60% C are also used for rails, railway wheels, and rail
axles.
Shot peening is another method in which the surface is work hardened with the
peening action of shots on the specimen surface. Shot peening does not alter the
microstructure signiﬁcantly. It just create some amount of residual compressive stress
on the surface and vis-à-vis surface gets work hardened due to generation of higher
dislocation density. The surface characteristics of the shot peened materials primarily
depends on the shot peening intensity, which again depends on shot size, type of shots,
impact of shots and amount of shots. Because of generation of compressive stress
on the surface, the component should have higher fatigue life.

A Shot peening process is a procedure in which spherical shots made of glass or
metal is impacted on the surface of a metallic part. As the shot strikes the surface
of the metallic portion it results in a slight depression due to the radial stretching
and plastic ﬂow of the metal at the surface of the contact. Thereby, shot peening
method results in increase in the fatigue strength of the parts. If used judiciously
it can give a part with improved performance most economically. Attempts have
been made to explore the possibility of shot peening on agricultural components
to improve their performance. Buckley, reported that the abrasive wear was related
to their relative hardness (Buckley 1971). In general abrasive wear behaviour of
materials is proportional to the load applied to the surface in contact, and the sliding
distance but inversely proportional to hardness. Raval and Kaushal reported that the
abrasive wear of under grinding wheel reduced after hard facing (Raval and Kaushal
1990). They described various wears possible in agriculture machinery. Out of these,
abrasive wear as most dominating.

Khruschov and Babichev found that wear resistance of steels was proportional
to hardness (Khrushchov and Babichev 1962). Richardson said that the increase in
surface hardness and its effect on microstructure make the material superior abrasion
resistant (Richardson 1967). Modi et al., studied the abrasive wear behaviour of high
carbon steel (Modi et al. 2003). They observed that wear rate was a strong function of
inter lamellar spacing. They also found that wear rate remained practically unchanged
by the abrasive size up to 25 μm. Rautaray, in his Ph.D. thesis on “fatigue and
wear characterization on shot peened rotavator blade materials” reported that fatigue
life of shot peened specimens exhibited much longer lifetime than the unpeened
specimens. He also reported an optimum shot peening intensities for the optimum
range of fatigue life of specimens (Rautaray 1997). Similarly, the study further reveals
that at optimum range of the peening intensity the wear resistance was maximum.
Saxena and Sharma (Saxena and Sharma 2001), in their article “Wear of shot peened
thresher peg” reported the economical beneﬁts acquired through shot peening over
bulk hardening in low carbon steel (EN-8). They reported a higher ratio of relative
wear resistance to relative cost ratio (1.77) in bulk harden shot peened compare
to bulk harden low carbon steel. Saxena in his Ph.D. thesis on “Metallurgy and
process development for thresher peg” investigated the effect of bulk hardening of
medium carbon, medium carbon-low alloy steel and high carbon steel for thresher
peg (Saxena and Sharma 2001). Foley, reported that the cutting points of the soil
working components of agriculture machineries are subjected to both abrasive wear
and impact loadings (Foley and McLees 1986).

14 Shot Peening Effects on Abrasive Wear Behavior of Medium …

271

Friction and wear are not the intrinsic material properties. They are dependent on
both the properties of materials and the working conditions. Widely varied wearing
conditions cause wear of materials by various mechanisms (Pürçek et al. 2002; Lee
et al. 1987). Small changes of load, speed, frictional temperature or along with the
microstructures, properties of materials cause signiﬁcant variations in the wear of
contacting surfaces (Blau 2005).

There is in our hands now, the physical ability to produce mechanical pre-stressing
of parts by several means, at established cost, and often with the background expe-
rience that indicates the beneﬁts to be gained. The one most important drawback is
our inability to measure accurately the depth, intensity and distribution of the cold-
worked effect (dimples) on the production part without destructive examination.

Shot peening is a cold working method in which the surface of a part is blasted
with small spherical media called shot (Champaigne 2001; Meguid et al. 1999). Each
piece of shot striking the metallic surface acts as a tiny peening hammer, producing
to the surface a small depression or dimple (Diepart 1994; Saritas et al. 1999). The
dimples are formed due to yielding of surface ﬁbers in tension. The dimples are
hemispherical cold-worked material which are highly stressed in compression, and
are formed below the surface. The ﬁbers restore the surface to its original shape as
shown in Fig. 14.1. The overlapping depressions try to develop an even layer with
residual compressive stresses.

It is well established that cracks initiation and propagation is delayed in a com-
pressive stressed zone (Cary 1981). The fatigue and stress corrosion failures emerge
at the surface of a part, compressive stresses induced by shot peening provide signif-
icant resistance to fatigue and thus, enhance the life of the parts. On comparing the
compressive residual stresses at or under the surface with the material being peened,
it is at least greater than half the yield strength (Waisman and Phillips 1952). The
surface hardness of the material results into increase of cold working effect due to
shot peening (Gao 2011).

Fig. 14.1 Impact of shot creating dimple on the surface with the cold worked material highly
stressed in compression

272

N. Kumar and J. Singh

The present work is a part of larger work. The work deals with the detailed
study of the different shot-peening intensities on the steel samples for varying load,
sliding distance and abrasive size. These parameters inﬂuence the wear rate and wear
resistance of the samples, which have been studied in detail.

14.2 Experimental Details

14.2.1 Specimen Preparation for Shot Peening

Specimens for shot peening (45 mm × 45 mm × 4.5 mm) were prepared from medium
carbon steel plates and polished according to standard metallographic techniques
up to 400 μm abrasive size. The chemical composition, physical properties and
mechanical properties of the investigated steels is shown in tables below. Both the
surfaces are made parallel and polished. Chemical composition of the as received
materials used in the present study were evaluated using Sparkmet at RRL, Bhopal.
Chemical composition of AISI 6150 steel is Table 14.1.

14.2.2 Shot Peening

The samples are shot peened at Central Institute of Agricultural Engineers (CIAE),
Bhopal, using the shot peening machine, model: PB-150120.

Figure 14.2, clearly indicates the positions of nozzle assembly and the lightening
arrangement inside the working chamber. Position of nozzle height from the working
surface i.e., standoff height can be changed as shown clearly, by just loosening and
tightening of few bolts at the assembly. Figure 14.2b, shows the front panel of the
machine, which incorporates all the controls. Window over the two large holes, from
where the positions of the samples while shot peening can be controlled, is there to
see the condition of the samples during the shot peening operation.

Table 14.1 Chemical
composition of AISI 6150
steel

S. No.

Component

wt% of AISI 6150 steel

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

C

Cr

Mn

P

S

Si

V

Fe

0.53

0.98

0.8

0.035

0.04

0.23

0.15

97.235

14 Shot Peening Effects on Abrasive Wear Behavior of Medium …

273

Fig. 14.2 Photographic view of shot peening machine—a side view and b front view

14.2.2.1 Shot Peening Machine Speciﬁcations

The speciﬁcations of machine are shown below. The abrasive storage capacity is 42 L.
The electrical speciﬁcations are 3-phase, 415 V AC, 50 Hz, 2.5 A. The dust collector
includes fan motor of 1.5 HP and with the capacity of 22.6 m3/min. The dimensions
for blast host size and blast nozzle oriﬁce are 19 mm and 6 mm, respectively. The
other parameters are mentioned in Tables 14.2, 14.3, 14.4, 14.5 and 14.6.

Shot peening at 6 kg/cm2 (0.589 MPa), for 10 s gives the shot peening intensity
value of 0.117 mm Almen “A” and at 60 s, the shot peening intensity which we get is

Table 14.2 Overall
dimensions

Speciﬁcations

Dimensions (mm)

Table 14.3 Opening
speciﬁcations

Speciﬁcations

Dimensions (mm)

Height (D)

Width (E)

Depth (P)

Width (G)

Height (H1)
Height (H2)

2170

1665

2730

1100

290

800

274

N. Kumar and J. Singh

Table 14.4 Working chamber size

Speciﬁcations

Height (A)

Width (B)

Depth (C)

Dimensions (mm)

900

1500

1200

Table 14.5 Shot peening
parameters

S. No.

Peening parameter

Critical value

Peening pressure (MPa)

Peening nozzle diameter (mm)

Shot size (mm)

Shot hardness (HRC)

Standoff height (mm)

Average mass ﬂow rate (t/h)

Angle of peening (°)

Almen strip used

Surface coverage (%)

0.589

6.00

0.825

45

154.00

0.400

90

Almen “A”

98–100

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1

2

Table 14.6 Peening time and
intensity

S. No.

Peening time (s)

Peening intensity (mm
ALMEN“A”)

10

60

0.117

0.486

0.486 mm Almen “A”. Working pressure for all the experiments is kept at 6 kg/cm2
(0.589 MPa).

14.2.3 Abrasive Wear Test

Anyone while investigating friction and wear of metals is faced with a large number of
variables to control. One of the ﬁrst choices to make is the selection of a suitable wear
testing machine. It has become axiomatic that the best wear test is one that closely
approximates the actual conditions encountered in service. However, here high stress
abrasive wear tests are done using SUGA (NUSI, JAPAN) abrasion testing machine.
Schematic view of the machine is shown in Fig. 14.3.

Two body abrasive wear tests were conducted on 45 × 45 × 4.5 mm3 size spec-
imens using Suga Abrasive Tester (Model: NUSI, Japan). A schematic diagram of
the test apparatus is shown in Fig. 14.3. The equipment consisted of a stage with a
locking arrangement for holding the specimens in position against a 50 mm diameter,

14 Shot Peening Effects on Abrasive Wear Behavior of Medium …

275

Fig. 14.3 Two body abrasive wear testing machine

12 mm thick metallic disc. Emery paper embedded with silicon carbide particle was
cut into sizes and ﬁxed on a wheel with the help of double sided tape to serve as the
abrasive medium. The locking arrangement was used to ﬁx the specimen with the
abrasive medium. The stage was attached with a motor; the latter imparted to and
fro motion to the specimens along with facilities to display the stage. The equip-
ment was attached with facilities to display the number of strokes. It also had an
end buzzer to signal the ﬁnishing of test. Cantilever mechanism was used to apply
load on the specimen. Under the reciprocating motion, the specimen was subjected
against abrasive medium. After completion of each stroke, with the corresponding
sliding distance of 0.0675 m, the emery paper changes its position which enables
the exposure of fresh abrasive to the specimen on each stroke. Weight loss of the
specimen was measured after each 400 strokes (each cycle consists of one forward
and one backward movement of the sample over the wheel and each revolution of
wheel corresponds to 27 m linear distance).

Prior to and after each test, the samples were washed and cleaned with acetone
and weighed (up to the accuracy of 0.01 mg using Mettler microbalance). The wear
rate was estimated from the weight loss measurement and expressed in the terms of
volume loss per unit sliding distance i.e. in m3/m.

276

N. Kumar and J. Singh

Wear rate (Wr) is calculated using the following formula:

Wr = (Wi − Wf)/(ρ.D)

where, Wi is the initial weight of specimen before the start of each test, Wf is the
ﬁnal weight of specimen after the completion of wear test, ρ is the density of the test
specimen material and D is the sliding distance (i.e., 27 m, 54 m, 81 m and 108 m
after 400 strokes, 800 strokes, 1200 strokes and 1600 strokes respectively). For each
experiment, values after the 1600 strokes were taken for the calculation and analysis
purposes.

14.2.4 Micro-hardness Measurements

The subsurface of peened samples were polished, using standard metallographic
practices i.e. wheel grinding, polishing in emery papers (110, 210, 310 and 410
grade sizes) and ﬁnally cloth polishing was done. The polished samples were etched
with Nital reagent.

Micro-hardness was measured using Vickers’s hardness tester of LEICA make
and model VMHT 30A. Load was kept at 25 gf and dwell time kept at 15 s for
all measurements. Micro-hardness was taken on the polished surface from peening
surface towards the center.

14.3 Results and Discussion

14.3.1 Materials and Microstructure

The investigated material is received in the form of plates of 8 mm thickness.
It contains around 0.53-wt% carbon. Accordingly it should give ferrito-pearlitic
structures, where pearlitic colonies are surrounded by network of ferrite, and the
steel is in annealed condition. The volume fraction of ferrite and pearlite would be
approximately 30% and 70% respectively. When the steel is in normalized condi-
tion, the eutectic point shift towards lower carbon content and thus the steel should
exhibit around 80–85% pearlite. The investigated steel exhibits near pearlitic struc-
ture conﬁrming that the steel plates received are in normalized condition. The typical
microstructure of AISI 6150 steel is shown in Fig. 14.4.

14 Shot Peening Effects on Abrasive Wear Behavior of Medium …

277

Fig. 14.4 Microstructure of
AISI 6150 steel

14.3.2 Microstructure After Shot Peening

Typical microstructures of shot peened samples are shown in Fig. 14.5a, b for AISI
6150 steel for 0.117 mm Almen “A” and 0.486 mm Almen “A” intensities, respec-
tively. These ﬁgures clearly indicate formation of dimples on the peened surface

Fig. 14.5 AISI 6150 steel samples a 0.117 mm Almen “A” and b 0.486 mm Almen “A”

278

N. Kumar and J. Singh

and the size of dimple increases with increase in peening intensity. It is further evi-
dent from these microstructures that dimple density also increases with increase in
peening intensity. At higher intensity micro-cracks are also observed.

14.3.3 Micro Hardness

The variation of the micro-hardness as a function of distance from peening surface
is shown in Fig. 14.6 for AISI 6150 steel. It is evident from the ﬁgure that average
hardness values decreases with increase in distance from the peened surface and
reaching to a constant value representing the bulk micro-hardness of the materials.
Higher hardness values in the peened surface indicates work-hardening due to peen-
ing and development of compressive stresses on the specimen surface (Maawad et al.
2012).

For AISI 6150 steel at high peening intensity (0.486 mm Almen “A”), micro-
hardness at the interface i.e. MHi is 250 VHN, bulk value i.e. MHb is 150 VHN and
at low peening intensity (0.117 mm Almen “A”), micro-hardness at the interface i.e.
MHi is 200 VHN and bulk value is 150 VHN respectively. So the residual stress for
AISI 6150 steel at high peening intensity (0.486 mm Almen “A”) is 140 MPa and
at low peening intensity (0.117 mm Almen “A”), the residual stress is 70 MPa. The
depth of peening is around 350 μm for high intensity and 300 μm for low intensity
(Table 14.7).

The residual stress was calculated using the following relationship (Ray and

Mondal 1991):

σr = {(MHi − MHb) × 10}/7.1

(14.1)

Fig. 14.6 Micro-hardness variation for AISI 6150 steel

14 Shot Peening Effects on Abrasive Wear Behavior of Medium …

279

Table 14.7 Residual stresses at different peening intensities

S. No.

Shot peening intensity (mm Almen “A”)

Residual stress (σr) for AISI 6150 steel
(MPa)

1

2

0.117

0.486

70

140

14.3.4 Wear Behaviour

Wear rate of a material is a function of several parameters such as applied load,
abrasive size, sliding speed, hardness of the material, temperature and environmental
conditions. In present study, high stress abrasive wear behaviour of medium carbon
steels has been investigated. In this study the wear rate is considered as the response
variable. This response variable has been examined as a function of applied load,
abrasive size and shot peening intensity.

14.3.4.1 Effect of Sliding Distance on Wear Rate

Figure 14.7, represents variation of wear rate with sliding distance under varying
applied loads, abrasive sizes and shot peening intensities, for AISI 6150 steel. It is
evident from this ﬁgure that the wear rate increases with increase in applied load and

Fig. 14.7 Effect of sliding distance on wear rate for AISI 6150 steel. The legend represents load
(N)/abrasive size (μm)/shot peening intensity (mm Almen “A”)

280

N. Kumar and J. Singh

Fig. 14.8 Effect of abrasive size on wear rate

abrasive size but decreases with increase in shot peening intensity. The wear rate in
general decreases with increase in sliding distance and approaching to a stable value.
The extent of reduction in wear rate with sliding distance is most prominent at higher
applied load and coarser abrasive size.

The decrease in wear rate with sliding distance is attributed to: Modi et al. (2003)
Work hardening of the surface, blunting of abrasives, capping of the abrasives, clog-
ging between the abrasive particles and attrition of the abrasive particles.

14.3.4.2 Effect of Abrasive Size on Wear Rate

The variation of wear rate of the shot peened steels at an applied load of 1 N and
an intensity of 0.486 mm Almen “A”, as a function of abrasive size, is reported in
Fig. 14.8. It is evident from the ﬁgure that the wear rate increases with increase in
abrasive size.

The increase in wear rate with abrasive size is primarily attributed to deeper
and wider groove formation during abrasion. The wear mechanism at ﬁner abrasive
size dominated by ploughing and rubbing type of wear, whereas at coarser abrasive
size, the dominating wear mechanisms were micro-cutting associated with micro-
cracking. It is interesting to note that with increase in abrasive size the number of
abrasives per unit area decreases, as a result the load shared by individual abrasives
increases. This should lead to deeper penetration of the abrasive to the specimen
surface and resulting in deeper and wider abrasive grooves.

14.3.4.3 Wear Resistance

The wear resistance of the material is deﬁned as:

14 Shot Peening Effects on Abrasive Wear Behavior of Medium …

Wear Resistance = 1/Wear Rate

281

(14.2)

The corresponding wear rate with the type of peening intensity is demonstrated in
Fig. 14.9. The wear rate is considered for unpeened, low and high peened surfaces.
Figure 14.10 also demonstrate that the wear resistance increases with increase
in peening intensity. Increase in wear resistance with peening intensity attributed
to the fact of surface work hardening and generation of compressive stress ﬁeld
on the specimen surface. The work hardening increases the surface hardness of the
specimens whereas the compressive stress reduces the tendency of micro cracking
during abrasive wear.

Fig. 14.9 Wear rate of AISI 6150 steel. Where, Unpeened means virgin sample, low peening means
peened with 0.117 mm Almen intensity and high peening means peened with 0.486 mm Almen
intensity

Fig. 14.10 Wear resistance of AISI 6150 steel at the load of 1 N with the sliding distance of
0.0675 m

282

N. Kumar and J. Singh

Fig. 14.11 Effect of shot peening intensity on wear rate with the sliding distance of 0.0675 m

14.3.4.4 Effect of Shot Peening Intensity on Wear Rate

The wear rate of the material at an applied load of 7 N and abrasive size of 30 μm,
for AISI 6150 steel as a function of peening intensity is shown in Fig. 14.11. It is
evident from this ﬁgure that the wear rate decreases drastically when the material is
subjected to peening intensity of 0.117 mm Almen “A”, from the virgin state. Further
increase in peening intensity leads to only marginal decrease in wear rate.

14.3.4.5 Worn Surface Analysis

There exhibits continuous as well as discontinuous wear grooves. In some regions the
dimples generated due to shot peening are observed, which signiﬁes that the wear is
taking place due to removal of materials from the boundary of the dimples and ﬁnally
the dimples are getting removed. This also signiﬁes that the contact area of the peened
sample also plays important role in the abrasive wear of the specimen. Initially, there
is a possibility of greater degree of interlocking between abrasives and the dimpled
region of the shot peened specimen, which causes greater extent of material removal
at the initial stage. Sharp regions of the dimples also subjected to higher stress ﬁelds
during testing and this also responsible for greater degree of material removal. As
time progresses the surface becomes smoother and the abrasives also degraded and
thus, the contact due to interlocking decreases, which in due course leads to less
material removal at later stage.

At higher load and higher abrasive size there is also possibility of surface cracking
as shown in Fig. 14.12, which leads to more fragmentation of material on the wear
surface. Under the same applied load but at higher peening intensity (0.486 mm
Almen “A”), the wear surface looks to be slightly different indicating more dimples as
compared to that observed in earlier ﬁgures at low intensity. It strongly recommends
that the wear is taking place through progressive removal of dimples and ﬁnally
reaches to a smoother surface. Thus, deeper dimples and greater work hardening

14 Shot Peening Effects on Abrasive Wear Behavior of Medium …

283

Fig. 14.12 SEM micrographs of the worn surfaces of a lower higher load and lower abrasive size
and b higher load and higher abrasive size

Fig. 14.13 SEM micrographs of worn surfaces of a low peened and b high peened surface

effects gets nulliﬁed by the surface cracking (Fig. 14.13). So at considerably higher
peening intensity level only marginal improvement in wear resistance is noted.

14.4 Conclusion

The outcome of the present work can be summarized in following points:
(cid:129) The wear rate decreases by 20–30% due to shot peening to a level of 0.117 mm
Almen “A” from the un-peened state. Further, increase in shot peening intensity
does not results into signiﬁcant improvement in wear resistance.

284

N. Kumar and J. Singh

(cid:129) Wear rate increases with increase in applied load and abrasive size.
(cid:129) The combined effect of applied load and abrasive size on the wear rate is quite

signiﬁcant.

(cid:129) The wear rate decreases with increase in sliding distance due to work hardening

and degradation of abrasive media.

(cid:129) The shot peening leads to sub-surface work hardening and surface denting. The
extent of work hardening and denting increases with increase in shot peening
intensity.

(cid:129) The converted residual stress from micro hardness values demonstrate that the
residual stress in the shot peened steel is of the order of 70–160 MPa depending
on peening intensity.

Abstract Presently, worldwide research is focused on energy efﬁciency to meet
the requirement of greenhouse gas emission and economic reasons. The substan-
tial amount of energy is consumed mainly in industrial, transportation and power
generation sectors. The leading source of energy consumption is friction. Friction
causes wear of the machine components and their replacement. Therefore, to min-
imize energy consumption the friction reduction is a foremost objective. Potential
mechanisms for the reduction of friction are modiﬁed lubricants, coatings, and sur-
face texture. In comparison with other mechanisms, surface texturing is a feasible,
promising and well-established technique to improve the tribological performance
of machine components for more than two decades. Surface texture decreases an
area of contact, act as a reservoir and improves hydrodynamic effect in dry, mixed
and hydrodynamic lubrication regime respectively. All of this contributes to reduc-
ing the friction coefﬁcient. In addition to this, the surface texture improves the load
capacity, dynamic stability and noise intensity of the bearings. It develops additional
hydrodynamic effect and minimizing ﬂuid leakage in oil and gas seals. Also, in auto-
mobile components such as piston rings, cylinder liner and wet clutch, the texture
geometry is considered to be micro-pocket. Lubricant retained in the micro-pocket
can be released to surrounding areas of texture to improve the tribological perfor-
mance. This article outlines the recent advancement in texture design for different
automotive components, their mechanisms, key ﬁndings and future roadmap. Also,
the challenges in the fabrication of surface texture for automotive components are
discussed in detail.
Keywords Surface texture · Lubrication regimes · Frction and wear ·
Micro-pocket
The growing global population, societal needs, and enlargement in automotive
(industrial and transportation) sectors are increasing the energy demand rapidly.
In addition, limited oil resource, and environmental pollution are nowadays seri-
ous issues. At present, about one-third of the global energy resource is consuming
to overcome the friction (Holmberg and Erdemir 2017). Especially in automotive
engines, approximately 50–60% frictional loss comes from piston ring-cylinder sys-
tem (Zhan and Yang 2014). This causes millions of tons of CO2 emission per year
(Braun et al. 2014). Additionally, friction causes wear and tear which leads to fail-
ure of the automotive components. Reducing friction in the automotive system can
therefore improve the life of components, energy consumption, fuel efﬁciency, and
hence gas emission.

In general, two surfaces in relative motion cause friction. It is desirable in gener-
alized applications such as holding an object, walking on the ﬂoor, applying brakes,
etc. However, in automotive components such as bearings, piston-cylinder arrange-
ment, etc. friction is undesirable. As friction is associated with wear and lubrication,
tribology plays an important role. Tribology is basically a science evolving friction,
wear, and lubrication. To improve the tribological performance of automotive com-
ponents the majority of research consisting of modiﬁcation in (1) lubrication, and
(2) surface engineering as follows (Blau and Qu 2004):

1. Lubrication
(cid:129) Lubricants
(cid:129) Lubricant ﬁltration and supply

2. Surface engineering

(cid:129) Surface treatment: Coating
(cid:129) Surface topography: Surface texturing.

However, the modiﬁcation in surface engineering speciﬁcally surface topography is
found to be the most effective and reasonable technique. Surface topography includes
surface texturing on the surface. The intentional creation of well deﬁned identical
features on the surface is called surface texturing. Surface texture on the surface
is not a new concept to improve the tribological characteristics. In 1966, Hamilton
et al. (1966) have proposed that surface micro-irregularities can reduce the friction
between parallel surfaces. But in the following three decades the little attention was
paid by the researchers on the textured surface. The new momentum was gained
by Etsion’s group in 1996. Since then extensive research on surface texturing is
going on. At present, it is a well-established and promising technique to improve the
tribological performance of automotive components such as bearings, seals, piston
ring, wet clutch, cylinder liner, etc. Adopting surface texture on these components
can improve the load carrying capacity, ﬂuid ﬁlm stiffness, friction, wear, leakage,
and noise intensity.

15 Tribological Performance of Surface Textured Automotive …

289

In recent times few review articles on the advancement of surface texture in bear-
ings (Gropper et al. 2016; Wang 2014), piston-cylinder systems and mechanical seals
(Ahmed et al. 2016) have been published. The theoretical modeling of these com-
ponents has been summarized by Etsion (2013). Etsion (2005) reviewed the effect
of surface texture on bearing sliders under different lubrication condition. Whereas
Shamsul Baharin et al. (2016) have presented the mechanism of surface texture to
improve the tribological characteristics at different lubrication regimes. In addition
to this, advancement in the fabrication of surface texture is nowadays a hot topic
of research (Ibatan et al. 2015; Gachot et al. 2017; Coblas et al. 2015). While spe-
cial attention is paid on laser surface texturing technique (Arslan et al. 2016; Patel
et al. 2018). However, the inﬂuence of texture design parameters on the tribological
performance of automotive components has not been discussed in detail so far. It is
therefore essential to summarize the texture behavior in automotive components that
affects energy consumption and environmental pollution. With this consideration, in
the present review article, the inﬂuence of texture design parameters on the tribologi-
cal performance of automotive components is presented. The recent advancement in
texture design is mainly discussed. Moreover, modern texture fabrication techniques
(both conventional and non-conventional), and their pros and cons are discussed.
Also, key ﬁndings and future roadmap to improve the tribological performance of
automotive components is presented.

15.2 Texture Design

Designing of surface texture is an essential part of surface topography. Extensive
research work on texture design characteristics is carried out. Still, there is no ﬁxed
rule for the selection of texture shape under the given operating condition for a
particular application. Though surface texturing has the potential to improve the
tribological characteristics, it may show an adverse effect if designed wrong. There-
fore, a clear understanding of texture design is necessary. Here, the texture design
is majorly classiﬁed based on geometrical characteristics and positional features as
shown in Fig. 15.1.

15.2.1 Texture Geometry

Texture geometrical characteristics such as shape (top proﬁle and bottom proﬁle),
and parameters are discussed in detailed as follows:

290

N. D. Hingawe and S. P. Bhore

Fig. 15.1 Texture design features

15.2.1.1 Texture Shape

Fig. 15.2 Textured parallel
slider a negative texture
b positive texture

Both negative (recessed) and positive (protruded) texture shapes can be generated
as shown in Fig. 15.2. While negative texture is majorly accepted due to advantages
in terms of lubrication and ease of manufacturing. Under hydrodynamic lubrication,
the negative texture shape is better for friction reduction. But from a leakage point
of view, the positive texture showed good results (Siripuram and Stephens 2004).
Texture shape is characterized by its top and bottom proﬁle.

15 Tribological Performance of Surface Textured Automotive …

291

Top Proﬁle

An extensive research work has been conducted on standard texture proﬁles. Siripu-
ram and Stephens (2004) considered the standard texture proﬁles viz. circle, square,
diamond (square-oriented), hexagonal, and triangular for studying the effect of geom-
etry on the hydrodynamic lubrication. They found that the friction coefﬁcient is
insensitive to these texture proﬁles.

However, Yu et al. (2010, 2011) investigated that elliptical texture proﬁle gives
better performance than square and circular proﬁle for friction reduction. The com-
monly used texture top proﬁles are shown in Fig. 15.3.

Motivated by triangular proﬁle, Uddin and Liu (2016) have observed that star
like (series of triangular spikes around the center) texture proﬁle performs better
than standard top proﬁles both in terms of ﬁlm pressure and friction coefﬁcient.
Under mixed lubrication condition, Ren et al. (2007) developed a numerical model
for non-standard texture proﬁles: triangular grooves, sinusoidal waves, ﬁshbone with
grooves, ﬁshbone with dimples, and honeycombs. The short grooves and sinusoidal
waves showed the strongest load carrying capacity. Galda et al. (2009) have inves-
tigated the tribological performance of newly developed texture proﬁles viz. short
drop, and a long drop. They found that spherical and long drop shapes are supe-
rior to short drop proﬁle. For the maximization of load capacity and minimization
of friction coefﬁcient in grease lubricated textured bearing, Yu et al. (2016) have

Fig. 15.3 Standard textured proﬁles a square b diamond c rectangle d triangle e cylinder f sphere
g elliptical h ellipsoidal

292

N. D. Hingawe and S. P. Bhore

found that triangular proﬁle performs better than the sphere, spheroid, and T shaped
grooved proﬁle. In micro-turbine bearings, Bompos et al. (2012) adopted the egg-
shaped texture proﬁle. In comparison with smooth bearing a substantial improve-
ment in hydrodynamic characteristics was observed for textured bearing. For the
gas lubricated parallel slider, Qiu et al. (2012, 2013) have found that texture shape
with a round edge (sphere, ellipsoidal and circle) performs better than straight-edged
proﬁles (triangle and chevron) to improve the hydrodynamic pressure, friction coef-
ﬁcient, and bearing stiffness. From the above discussion, it is observed that modiﬁed
(non-standard) texture proﬁles have better tribological characteristics than predeﬁned
simple geometries.

To further improve the results, the texture proﬁle needs to be optimum. Rah-
mani et al. (2010a), Rahmani and Rahnejat (2018) have optimized the standard
texture proﬁles: square, rectangle and isosceles triangle using an analytical approach
for maximization of load capacity and minimization of friction coefﬁcient. For the
maximization of load capacity, Fesanghary and Khonsari (2012) have optimized
the hydrodynamic ﬁlm in sectorial-shape thrust bearing using sequential quadratic
programming technique. The optimally designed bearing showed more than 100%
increase in load capacity than the conventional bearing. Fesanghary and Khonsari
(2013) developed the optimization model for grooved texture. The obtained “heart-
like” texture proﬁle was validated experimentally. Shen and Khonsari (2015) have
presented the numerical optimization of texture top proﬁle using sequential quadratic
programming (SQP) for maximization of load capacity. Under unidirectional and
bidirectional sliding, the optimum texture proﬁles were obtained as chevron-type
and trapezoid-like respectively. Also, Zhang et al. (2017) have optimized the irregu-
lar texture shape for minimum friction coefﬁcient and maximum load capacity using
a genetic algorithm (GA) optimization technique. The optimized fusiform texture
proﬁle showed a better result than elliptical and circular proﬁles. Wang et al. (2018a)
presented the numerical optimization of chevron-shaped grooved texture to maxi-
mize the load capacity of thrust bearing using hybrid (GA-SQP) technique. Experi-
mentally they conﬁrmed that optimum chevron-shaped grooved texture reduces the
friction coefﬁcient and temperature rise of the specimen. For gas mechanical seals,
Wang et al. (2018b) have modiﬁed the spiral grooved texture using multi-objective
optimization. The optimized grooved proﬁle showed better result than conventional
spiral grooved texture. From the above literature, it is conﬁrmed that the optimized
non-standard texture proﬁles performs better than simple proﬁles.

Bottom Proﬁle

Texture bottom proﬁle also signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the tribological characteristics.
The commonly used texture bottom proﬁles are ﬂat, curved, and asymmetric wedge
(see Fig. 15.4). With the cavitation effect, Nanbu et al. (2008) have analyzed the inﬂu-
ence of wedge-shaped texture bottom proﬁles on the hydrodynamic characteristics.
They found that texture bottom proﬁle strongly inﬂuences the pressure distribution
and ﬁlm thickness. Shen and Khonsari (2013) have observed that cavitation occurs

15 Tribological Performance of Surface Textured Automotive …

293

Fig. 15.4 Commonly used texture bottom proﬁles a ﬂat b curved c convergent wedge d divergent
wedge

in the divergent region of the texture, this leads to an asymmetric distribution of
pressure. For this mechanism, the load capacity generated by the rectangular bottom
proﬁle is larger than the triangular (oblique and isosceles) bottom proﬁles. Wang
et al. (2018c) compared the four different bottom proﬁles of grooved texture. They
observed that the location of cavitation region, the volume fraction of vapor phase
and the shape of vortex are inﬂuenced by the bottom shape of the groove texture in
thrust bearing.

Meng et al. (2015) have observed that the ﬂat (rectangle) and curved (spherical)
bottom proﬁle are the most commonly used texture bottom proﬁle to improve the
tribological characteristics. For taking the advantages of both rectangle and spherical
proﬁles, they combined these proﬁles to form the structure characterized by two-layer
pores deﬁned as compound texture. In which, ﬁrst and second layers are rectangle and
spherical, respectively. Compound texture showed improved load carrying capacity
and friction coefﬁcient than smooth and simple (rectangle) textured hydrodynamic
journal bearing due to its twice hydrodynamic effect. Further, they developed the
compound groove textures that reduce the acoustic power level of the journal bearing
than that of smooth and simple grooved bearings (Meng and Zhang 2018).

Without a cavitation effect, Han et al. (2011) have found that divergence and con-
vergence clearance in the symmetrical texture bottom proﬁle is balanced. However,
an asymmetrical bottom proﬁle showed more potential to enhance hydrodynamic
characteristics. Similarly, Schuh and Ewoldt (2016) investigated that asymmetric
bottom proﬁle generates the normal force, and reduces the shear stress and friction
coefﬁcient. Further, Lee et al. (2017) have obtained the signiﬁcant improvement in
hydrodynamic performance with arbitrarily shaped texture bottom proﬁle. Adopt-
ing an optimization approach, Lin et al. (2017) have optimized the arbitrary texture
bottom proﬁle using sequential linear programming (SQL) for increasing normal
force and decreasing friction force. Wang et al. (2017) used the hybrid (GA-SQP)
optimization technique for the grooved bottom proﬁle. The optimized proﬁle showed
better load capacity than common proﬁles such as micro wedge and step.

From the above discussion, it is observed that asymmetrical bottom proﬁles per-
form better than symmetrical bottom proﬁles. For top proﬁle also it is conﬁrmed

294

N. D. Hingawe and S. P. Bhore

that the modiﬁed proﬁle is preferable over simple proﬁles. However, the simulta-
neous modiﬁcation of both top and bottom proﬁle using the optimization technique
can appreciably improve the result is still lagging. This approach can be adopted in
different machine components including automotive components.

15.2.1.2 Texture Parameter

The surface texture has a certain size along the length, width, and depth. But it
is essential to form parameters that include all geometrical aspect of the texture.
For this, the non-dimensional parameters: texture density and the aspect ratio are
widely used in the literature. These texture parameters are sensitive to tribological
characteristics in most automotive components (Gropper et al. 2016).

Aspect Ratio

Aspect ratio is deﬁned as the ratio of texture depth (hb) and the characteristics length
(l) (see Fig. 15.5).

Aspect ratio, Ar = hb
l

(15.1)

Aspect ratio is described by (i) varying the texture depth and keeping length
constant and (ii) varying texture length and keeping depth constant. The former way
to deﬁne the aspect ratio is directly related to depth, and hence more popular. In some
literatures, the aspect ratio is also named as depth ratio.

Fig. 15.5 a Textured parallel slider and b square textured unit cell

15 Tribological Performance of Surface Textured Automotive …

295

Texture Density

Texture density is deﬁned as the ratio of texture area (l2) and the cell area (L2) as
shown in Fig. 15.5.

Texture density, Td = l 2
L 2

(15.2)

For entire surface, the texture density is expressed as the N times texture area to
the total surface area (see Fig. 15.5a). In some literature texture density is also known
to be area ratio.

15.2.2 Texture Position

Although texture shape and its geometrical characteristics inﬂuence the tribological
characteristics, the texture distribution pattern inﬂuences the result. This is because
the volume and position of lubricating oil accumulate generates the hydrodynamic
effect.

15.2.2.1 Texture Orientation

Texture shape can be oriented at different angles along the direction of motion. Yu
et al. (2010) have investigated that elliptical texture perpendicular to the direction
of sliding gives a better result for friction reduction than oriented along the direc-
tion of sliding. However, Ismail and Sarangi (2013) considered both positive and
negative textures for elliptical and triangular proﬁles. They found that the angular
orientation of negative texture is uncertain on hydrodynamic performance. But the
positive textures: 60° triangular orientation, and 90° elliptical orientation showed bet-
ter performance parameters than other orientations. In textured gas seals, Bai et al.
(2010) have investigated the inﬂuence of elliptical texture orientation on hydrody-
namic characteristics such as load capacity and slide leakage. They investigated that
texture oriented at 0° and 90° in the direction of ﬂow has less leakage, but the hydro-
dynamic effect is not signiﬁcant. However, at 40°–70°, the signiﬁcant improvement
in load capacity is obtained. But leakage is also found to be high.

15.2.2.2 Texture Arrangement

In most of the surface texture analysis as discussed above, the linear texture arrange-
ment has been adopted. In journal bearing, Lu et al. (2014) have modiﬁed the conven-
tional texture arrangement to the phyllotactic patterned. Experimentally they found

296

N. D. Hingawe and S. P. Bhore

20–30% less frictional coefﬁcient than the conventional linear textured arrange-
ment. Braun et al. (2014) have investigated the tribological behavior of sliding pairs
with spherical textures arranged in a hexagonal pattern in the mixed lubrication
regime of the pin-on-disk experiment resulted in decreasing friction coefﬁcient. Also,
Schneider et al. (2017) examined the different texture arrangements viz. hexagonal,
cubical and random for friction reduction. In comparison with plane surface, 82%
friction reduction occurred in a hexagonal arrangement. For cubical and random
arrangement, respectively 50 and 48% reduction in friction coefﬁcient than plane
surface was achieved.

15.2.2.3 Texture Zone

Surface texturing on the entire bearing surface does not necessarily improve the
hydrodynamic characteristics. Surface texture may show adverse results if designed
wrong. Kango et al. (2012) have observed that surface texture at different loca-
tions of the bearing surface helps in enhancing bearing the bearing performance.
Brizmer and Kligerman (2012) have investigated that texturing on the entire surface
is meaningless for both short and inﬁnite long oil lubricated bearings. Kango et al.
(2014) have found that surface texture (both dimple and groove) in the converging
zone of the bearing is a preferable arrangement. At variable process parameters such
as eccentricity ratio, clearance, journal speed and oil viscosity, Shinde and Pawar
(2017a) found that grooved texture in 90°–180° zone gives maximum load capacity.
However, the minimum frictional torque is achieved at 90°–360° texture zone. But
for multi-objective optimization, textured zone 90°–175° showed appropriate result
(Shinde and Pawar 2017b). Similarly, Zhang et al. (2018a) have done optimization
of texture position in the convergent zone of the journal bearing. The optimized
semi-elliptical shaped texture arrangement showed better bearing load and friction
coefﬁcient than half-textured and plane surfaces. They also optimized the texture
position numerically in bearing sliders for maximization of load capacity and mini-
mization of friction coefﬁcient. Experimentally they veriﬁed that optimized texture
position shows best performance than plane, fully textured, and conventionally par-
tial textured surfaces (Zhang et al. 2018b). Contrarily, Tala-Ighil et al. (2011) have
investigated that surface texturing in the divergent zone (185°–230°) improves the
bearing performance. Further, they observed found that texture arrangement is sensi-
tive to journal speed (Tala-Ighil and Fillon 2015). At lower operating speed, 0°-180°
textured position showed best result. Upon further increasing the speed, 185°–230°
texture zone obtained best performance. Also in piston ring, partial texturing shows
better results than full texturing Kligerman et al. (2005). Etison and Sher (2009) have
found that partial laser texture (symmetrical type) has obtained about 4% reductions
in fuel consumption. However, it is found to be insigniﬁcant for the effect of exhaust
gas. Also, noticeable difference in engine oil temperature and crank case pressure is
observed than plane surface.

From the above discussion, it is clear that texture shape, geometrical parameters,
position, zone, etc. have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on tribological characteristics. But the

15 Tribological Performance of Surface Textured Automotive …

297

detailed analysis by considering every parameter is time-consuming. Also, it is dif-
ﬁcult to predict the exact behavior of texture design parameters on output responses.
However, response surface methodology has the potential to address this issue. A
large number of parameters can be considered in a single design model for differ-
ent output responses. This approach can signiﬁcantly reduce the computation time
and experimental cost. Fu and Untaroiu (2017) have investigated the tribological
performance of surface textured thrust bearing using a design of experiment fol-
lowed by multi-objective optimization for optimal partially texture geometry with
an elliptical dimple. The output responses aimed to maximize the load capacity
and minimize the friction torque. The geometrical characteristics such as length of
major and minor axes, dimple depth, radial and circumferential space between two
dimples, and the radial and circumferential extent were parameterized and analyzed
using response surface methodology based central composite design of experiment
technique. Using this, the proper combinations of parameter were obtained. Further,
they (Fu and Untaroiu 2018) compare the rectangle and elliptical texture using a
design of experiment. Using the parametric study, a model was developed. Based on
this, they found that elliptical textures have more potential to improve tribological
characteristics than rectangular texture.

15.3 Surface Texturing in Automotive Components

Surface texture has signiﬁcant inﬂuence on tribological performance of automotive
components. In ﬂuid ﬁlm bearings, surface texture increases the ﬁlm thickness. The
increase in ﬁlm thickness at the convergent zone generates additional hydrodynamic
pressure to further separate the surfaces. This resulted in increasing load capacity
and decreasing local shear stress and hence friction (Gropper et al. 2016). Surface
texture on one of the mating faces in circumferential gas seal generates considerable
hydrodynamic effect which maintains the small clearance between shaft and seal
ring. This prevents the rubbing and hence decreases in friction and wear (Kligerman
and Etsion 2008). To improve the lubricant quantity in automobile components such
as piston rings and wet clutch, the texture geometry is act as micro-pocket. Lubri-
cant retained in the micro-pocket can be released to surrounding areas of texture
to improve the tribological performance (Kligerman et al. 2005; Yagi et al. 2015).
Adopting surface texture on the rake face of the cutting tool decreases the tool–chip
contact area. Also, the debris trapped in the texture and reduction of stiction at the
tool-chip interface takes place. This result in a decrease in friction, wear and hence
lesser heat generated in the cutting tool (Jesudass Thomas and Kalaichelvan 2018).
In case of an artiﬁcial implant, adopting surface texture decrease surface contact
under boundary lubrication and acts as a lubricant reservoir in elastohydrodynamic
lubrication (Ghosh and Abanteriba 2016). Surface texture has widespread applica-
tions in automotive components such as piston ring, cylinder liner, clutches etc. as
discussed in detail as follows.

298

N. D. Hingawe and S. P. Bhore

15.3.1 Cylinder Liner

A cylinder liner is serves as the inner wall of cylinder to be ﬁtted into an engine
block. It forms sliding surface for the piston ring while retaining lubricant within.
The main function of cylinder liner is to control the friction loss between piston ring
and cylinder liner, wear of piston ring and cylinder liner, consumption of lubricant,
emission of gases and fuel efﬁciency. To improve this, one of the feasible and possible
techniques is to modify topography of cylinder liner by honing scratches/grooves.
Dimkovski et al. (2012) have optimized the cylinder liner surface ﬁnish for base
honing pressure and plateau honing time. But, axial scratches occurred due to abrasive
wear are undesirable. Also, they studied on undesirable scratches on the liner which
increases the oil consumption and gas emission (Dimkovski et al. 2011). However,
Guo et al. (2013) have investigated that the lubrication performance of the cylinder
liner is sensitive to surface texture. Grabon et al. (2017) have considered different
surface textures were of cylinder liner. They found that increasing honing angle of
cylinder liner causes higher frictional resistance. However, at lower honing angle the
reduction of liner height was signiﬁcant. Kim et al. (2018) have found that valley
generated by honing functions is undesirable for the formation of dynamic pressure on
interacting surfaces. The different mark of plateau honing was compared for friction
and wear with those of randomly ground surfaces. They found that deep-grooved
honing marks produce larger amounts of wear than shallow-grooved honing. From
the tests with the deep-grooved honing marks, it was found that the severe interactions
due to asperity contacts and the formation of relatively thin ﬁlms produced larger
amounts of wear volumes than the test with the shallow-grooved ones.

15.3.2 Wet Clutch

In automatic transmission of automobile wet clutches are used. In wet clutch, paper-
based friction materials are used as sliding member. It requires high and stable fric-
tion at variable speed, wear resistant and heat resistant. To achieve this, researchers
have worked on material characteristics or modiﬁcations of paper-based wet clutch
such as optimization of material composition, different additives in the automatic
transmission of ﬂuid and pore characteristics of the paper (Kitahara and Matsumoto
1994; Matsumoto 1996; Kugimiya 2000). However, limited work has been done on
surface modiﬁcation of paper to improve the tribological characteristics. Yagi et al.
(2015) formed microscale texture in the form of microgrooves at variable depth and
pitch on the paper-based friction material using laser surface texturing. At low tem-
perature and low surface pressure conditions, the dynamic friction coefﬁcient was
improved due to microgroove. Also, they found that the dynamic friction coefﬁcient
is depends upon depth and pitch of the microgrooves. It can be controlled by properly
designing of microgroove pattern. However, adopting microgrooves was found to be
insigniﬁcant to improve static friction coefﬁcient.

15 Tribological Performance of Surface Textured Automotive …

299

15.3.3 Piston Ring

Piston ring is the major source of engine friction. Reducing friction occurred by
piston ring is an effective way to decreases fuel consumption and hence exhaust gas
emission. To improve the tribological characteristics of the piston ring by adopting
surface texture is largely studied by Etison and co-authors (Arslan et al. 2016; Ronen
et al. 2001; Ryk et al. 2002). They found that laser surface texturing is feasible and
most promising technique to improve the tribological characteristics of the piston
ring. Kligerman et al. (2005) developed the analytical model for partial laser surface
textured piston ring for friction reduction. This is veriﬁed experimentally by Ryk
et al. (2005). For symmetrical type partial laser texture, Etsion and Sher (2009) have
found that approximately 4% reduction in fuel consumption is obtained than smooth
surface. However, the effect on exhaust gas is found to be insigniﬁcant. Ahmed et al.
(2016) reviews the effect of texture geometrical parameters on piston ring. They
found that (i) aspect ratio is the most signiﬁcant parameter to improve the tribological
characteristics of piston ring (ii) for better performance maximum possible texture
density should be selected. (iii) Under starved lubrication condition higher texture
depth shows detrimental results. Also, optimum texture depth is depends on the
operating conditions. (iv) Partial texturing shows better result for friction reduction
than full texturing. Recently, Bifeng et al. (2018) have proposed a novel texturing
scheme on piston ring by modifying barrel-shaped ring scheme in the form of variable
texture depth. They found that average friction power for novel texture pattern is
10.04% lesser than normal texturing. While, in comparison with barrel shape, it has
obtained 16.85% lesser average friction power.

15.3.4 Engine Bearings

The plane and textured hydrodynamic journal bearing as shown in Fig. 15.6 is well
established. Although, limited research is carried out on engine bearings with texture
effect. Surface texture adopted in engine bearings can decrease the friction coefﬁ-
cient, noise intensity, fuel consumption and increase in load carrying capacity. This
ultimately reduces energy consumption to cause a decrease in fuel consumption and
engine emissions (Ligier and Noel 2015).

In modern times, surface texture analysis of tires in automobiles can be studied to
control the friction for safe driving at various road conditions. Furthermore, surface
texture can also be adopted in automotive components such as piston pin, cam and
follower, brake to improve the performance.

300

N. D. Hingawe and S. P. Bhore

Fig. 15.6 Hydrodynamic lubricated a plane bearing and b textured bearing

15.4 Texture Fabrication Techniques

Texture quality is largely affected by fabricating technique (Ibatan et al. 2015).
Surface textures can be fabricated by several conventional and non-conventional
machining processes (Ahmed et al. 2016). It is therefore essential to have a detailed
discussion on each fabricating technique along with pros and cons.

The conventional machining processes such as vibro-rolling and abrasive machin-
ing can be used to create grooves (Rahmani et al. 2010b). While embossing tech-
nique is capable of generating surface texture on plastically deformable materials
(Pettersson and Jacobson 2006). But this technique is not suitable for hard and brittle
materials. Jesudass Thomas and Kalaichelvan (2018) fabricated the surface texture
on the rake face of a single point cutting tool using surface indentation techniques viz.
Rockwell hardness tester, Vickers hardness tester, and diamond dresser. They found
that surface texturing using Vickers hardness tester has obtained better tribological
performance than other techniques. Also, standard texture proﬁles can be generated
using micro-grinding process. It is a simple, productive and inexpensive technique
to create surface texture on the surface (Stepien 2008). Moreover, Cannon and King
(2009) fabricated the surface-texture using micro-casting which is a relatively new
technique. This technique can create holes of about 10–100 µm diameter and aspect
ratio of 2:1. A vibromechanical texturing technique which is based on single point
turning process can produce surface texture. In the conventional turning process, the
controlled motion of cutting tool along the X-axis (rotation about spindle axis) and Y-
axis (across the length of the workpiece) can generate continuous spiral grooves along
the circumference of the workpiece. Adopting controlled motion (tunable oscillation
of the tool path) along the Z-axis, a variety of texture sizes can be machined. This
method is cost-effective, produces less surface damage, and is very precise (Greco
et al. 2009). To investigate the inﬂuence of texture bottom proﬁle in thrust bearing,
Schuh and Ewoldt (2016) developed the asymmetric-depth-proﬁle angled along the
normal surface. The asymmetric depth was achieved by tilting the workpiece with
respect to the end mill axis of rotation. Overall it is observed that surface texture using
conventional/traditional machining techniques are easier to fabricate. However, its
accuracy is affected.

15 Tribological Performance of Surface Textured Automotive …

301

Presently, non-conventional machining processes are most widely used to fabri-
cate surface texture. Wakuda et al. (2003) have considered abrasive jet machining to
fabricate the micro-texture. The textured surface showed an improved friction coef-
ﬁcient. However, the bottom proﬁle was affected. Different forms of etching can also
generate texture on the surface. Lu and Khonsari (2007) generated cylindrical and
elliptical texture shapes on the surface of the journal bearing using chemical etching.
The process includes imprinting of the pattern followed by etching. The texture depth
was controlled by etching time. Although etching is ﬂexible to generate complex tex-
ture geometries, it is a time-consuming process. Moreover, the proﬁle features of the
texture such as round shape cannot be controlled. The other etching techniques such
as reactive ion etching, UV lithography, photo-etching, physical vapour deposition
and UV photo-lithography can also produce a variety of texture shapes (Rahmani
et al. 2010b). In electrochemical machining (ECM) process, the material removal is
taking place by electrolysis process. ECM generates a very smooth surface without
heat affected layer with higher efﬁciency and at low cost. These advantages attract the
researchers to fabricate surface texture using this technique. Lu et al. (2014) devel-
oped the phyllotactic patterned surface texture on hydrodynamic lubricated bearing
surface using ECM. In comparison with conventional linear textured arrangement the
signiﬁcant improvement in friction reduction (about 20–30%) was obtained. Using
ultrasonic machining (USM), different texture shapes such as circle, rectangle, and
spherical texture shapes can be produced with high accuracy. Shin et al. (2015) have
created the surface texture on bearing steel surface using USM. They found that
the reduction in friction coefﬁcient is taken place at appropriate density and depth.
But this technique is limited to brittle material and it is not cost effective. Electric
discharge machining (EDM) is based on the mechanism: melting and vaporization
of the material. Using this technique the complex texture geometry with smooth
surface ﬁnish can be achieved with no mechanical stress on the workpiece (Pal
and Choudhury 2016). However, the material removal rate is low and heat affected
zone inﬂuences the tribological performance. Yamaguchi et al. (2016) developed the
whirling electrical discharge texturing (WEDT) to create microtextures on the inner
surface of a cylinder using single-pulse discharge. They conﬁrmed that it is an effec-
tive technique to reduce the friction coefﬁcient. Moreover, they found that based on
lubrication condition, the optimal texture-area ratio exists. These techniques can be
employed for surface texturing but laser surface texturing (LST) is the most efﬁcient
technique (Ahmed et al. 2016). LST is a promising technique based on its ﬂexibility
and speed (Arslan et al. 2016). It is clean to the environment and provides excellent
control of texture size. Earlier, LST was unable to produce complex texture geometry.
To achieve this goal, the direct laser interference patterning technique is employed
which use multiple laser beam interference. However, burrs or bulges are created
after machining is a limitation of this process.

302

N. D. Hingawe and S. P. Bhore

15.5 Concluding Remarks

In the present research review ﬁrst the texture design is presented in details for
automotive components. Then fabrication techniques for automotive components
are discussed in details. It is concluded that,
(cid:129) Texture design parameters have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the tribological perfor-

mance of automotive components.

(cid:129) To improve the tribological performance, the parametric analysis of texture design
parameter should be carried out for qualitative analysis. This signiﬁcantly reduces
the computation time and cost of the experiment without sacriﬁcing the accuracy.
(cid:129) Optimized texture parameters perform better than simple/standard texture shapes
to improve the tribological characteristics of automotive components. However,
the optimum process parameters depend on operating conditions and speciﬁc appli-
cation.

(cid:129) In the automotive system, majority of the research is focused on adopting surface
texture on piston-ring cylinder. It is essential to investigate the tribological per-
formance of surface textured crank case bearings, wet clutch, piston pin, cam and
follower and tires,

(cid:129) The conventional machining processes are cheaper and easier to generate the tex-
ture. But they are less accurate and it is very difﬁcult to produce complex texture.
While a variety of non-conventional texturing techniques can easily generate com-
plex texture geometries with accuracy. Especially laser surface texturing is most
famous, widely used and it provides excellent control on texture size.
Abstract The improvement of engine efﬁciency has been of utmost necessity for
automobile industries in order to control the increasing climate change and green-
house emissions. Hence, the fuel efﬁciency may be increased by minimizing the
energy losses from the engine. In spite of wide applications of reciprocating inter-
nal combustion (IC) engines in most of the ground and sea transport vehicles and
electrical power generations, they have several shortcomings. The IC engines pos-
sess low thermal and mechanical efﬁciencies due to increased loss of fuel energy
as heat and friction. They also release a substantial amount of particulate and NOx
(nitrogen oxide) emissions that gives rise to greenhouse effect. Amongst the various
approaches of improving engine efﬁciency, the tribologists and lubrication engi-
neers focused mainly on reduced engine friction as a vital and economic method.
The achievement of efﬁcient lubrication of moving engine components with least or
no unfavorable effect on the environment is important to lessen friction and wear.
The improvements in different tribological engine components and additives may
lead to reduced fuel consumption, exhaust emissions and maintenance along with
increased engine power outputs and durability. The tribological performance of an
engine can be improved by employing materials of superior tribological properties
for manufacturing different mechanical parts, improved surface coatings as well as
developed lubrication technologies. This chapter presents the details of various com-
ponents of reciprocating IC engines as well as the lubricants used and the remedial
measures to reduce the engine wear and friction.
Keywords Internal combustion engine · Tribology · Engine efﬁciency
In today’s world, the automotive engine technology is mainly governed by two fac-
tors, viz. environmental safety and consumer gratiﬁcation (Nakada 1994). Hence, the
development in the ﬁeld of automobile industry takes place based on the compatibil-
ity between efﬁcient energy use, safety measures and environmental impacts. Due
to increased environmental and safety issues, there exists various strict standards
for fuel efﬁciency, emissions, safety and durability. However, the ever-increasing
consumer demands on greater trustworthiness, reduced maintenance, better comfort
and reduced fuel consumption leads to the developments of newer technologies for
better fuel economy that satisﬁes both consumer and environmental issues.

The fuel efﬁciency can be increased and the amount of fuel required to drive a vehi-
cle can be decreased by minimizing the energy losses from the vehicle. The engine
performance is optimized by improving its tribological performance to improve fuel
efﬁciency as most of the energy is lost from the engine itself. The different tri-
bological engine components involving interacting surfaces are bearings, pistons,
transmissions, clutches, gears, wiper blades, tyres and electrical contacts. Moreover,
good lubrication between moving and interacting parts of an engine helps in improv-
ing the performance of an internal combustion (IC) engine. Recently, nano lubricants
are an emerging technology in the ﬁeld of automotive lubricants. The lubricants must
be able to resist high temperatures, and be stable under engine conditions. There is
a requirement of new tribo-materials for automotive components that runs at higher
temperatures and pressures. Furthermore, the tribological behavior of existing mate-
rials for various tribo-components can be improved by means of surface coating.

16.2 Automotive Tribology and Its Importance

The major power units in most petrol and diesel engines are the reciprocating IC
engines because of its extreme reliability and versatility characteristics. In spite
of this, it has several drawbacks that may inﬂuence the national and international
economies. The drawbacks are low thermal and mechanical efﬁciencies of the IC
engines due to loss of a signiﬁcant fraction of the energy of fuel as heat (Taylor
1998). As a result, a large amount of fuel needs to be consumed to overcome the
losses that lead to the emission of enormous harmful particulates, nitrous oxide and
hydrocarbon and can cause greenhouse effect. The mechanical losses are mainly
due to the frictional losses between the piston rings and the cylinder liner assembly.
The most of the chemical energy of the fuel gets converted into thermal energy
and then to mechanical energy in the cylinder and piston assembly of the IC engine
(Kumar et al. 2018). A little wear of material from the moving parts in IC engines can
decrease the performance or even entire breakdown of the engine. The consumption
of 12–13 MBBL/day of oil by nearly 250 million of vehicles on US road is lost
in overcoming engine friction (~10%) and friction in the driveline (~5%). Thus,

16 Applications of Tribology on Engine Performance

309

the petroleum consumption can be reduced from 150,000 to 200,000 BBL/day by
reducing the engine and driveline friction by 10% (Fenske 2014). Hence, the concepts
of tribology need to be developed to lessen the coefﬁcient of friction (COF) and wear
at the interfaces of various moving components of an IC engine.

The theories of tribology can be used to deal with a minor problem that may
arise at the level of structural integrity of the moving parts of an IC engine. Oth-
erwise, the consequences of the damage of the moving components itself may lead
to the entire failure of the engine. A signiﬁcant development in tribology leads to
systematic design and performance analysis based on the stress-strain study of the
various moving components of an IC engine. At present, the engine components are
not required to be lubricated with oil or grease very often and that has been possible
due to the proper understanding of the working of the tribological components and
their design analysis. It is achievable due to the better understanding of the effect
of viscosity and the mechanism of generation of effective lubricant ﬁlm thickness
between the moving contacts. The tribology can be successfully applied to each and
every engineering component in moving contact and hence can be used for enhanc-
ing the performance of engines. The beneﬁts of improved tribological performance
includes low fuel intake, high engine output, reduced harmful exhaust emissions and
maintenance to design highly durable and reliable engines.

16.3 Components of IC Engine Subjected to Friction

and Wear

The stringent government regulations for fuel emission and economy have motivated
the need for engine friction mechanism research aiming for higher efﬁciency, relia-
bility and performance. An engine’s mechanical efﬁciency is directly compromised
by frictional losses, since power is wasted to overcome friction within the engine.
Thus, it is important to reduce the engine friction which will lead to increase the
fuel economy. The IC engine manufacturers encounter complex design considera-
tions due to change in engine components temperature. During operation, the engine
components become relatively hot due to friction and combustion of gases within the
cylinders. The lubrication conditions also change due to change in oil viscosity. In an
IC engine, out of all the energy losses, frictional loss alone is in the range of 4–15%
(Kumar et al. 2019). A large amount of fuel energy is wasted in the form of heat
losses. The mechanisms that cause mechanical loss in engines include piston-crank
mechanism, piston ring-cylinder-liner fuel pump and other auxiliary assemblies. The
numerous parts of the IC engine rely mainly on the interaction of their surfaces to
function. These includes many tribological components such as bearings, pistons,
clutches, gears, transmissions, wiper blades, tires and electrical contacts. The losses
contributed by different engine components are shown in Fig. 16.1.

310

S. Das and S. Das

Fig. 16.1 Approximate quantities of losses in different engine components

16.3.1 Piston Rings

One of the important elements in the IC engine are the piston rings. The sliding
surfaces between the piston rings and the cylinder liners may be among the most
complex tribological phenomena in the IC engines. It is even more severe with
an increase of the engine power. The piston assembly comprises sliding between
the cylinder walls and the reciprocating piston and also sliding between the piston
pin and the piston bore. The friction between the piston rings and the cylinder liners
signiﬁcantly contribute to the mechanical power losses of the engine. Sliding between
piston ring and cylinder wall is often said to be the largest contributor to frictional
energy losses (Rosenberg 1981; Wong and Tung 2016). It is also the contact where
the wear problem called scufﬁng sometimes occur in the marine low speed, two-
stroke engines. A piston ring acts as a dynamic seal as it slides against the wall of the
cylinder bore. The main function of the piston rings is to facilitate smooth running of
the reciprocating parts. It aids to prevent the escape of the combustion gases into the
crankcase from the combustion chamber. It also prevents leakage of the lubricating oil
into the combustion chamber from the crankcase. To keep friction and wear low, the
seal is normally lubricated. The lubrication should be controlled such that excessive
oil does not remain on the walls as it leads to high oil consumption due to evaporation
and combustion. Also, there is transfer of heat by the rings from the piston to the
liners which stabilizes the piston in the cylinder bore. Loss of energy to friction
between piston ring and cylinder liner constitutes 20–40% of total mechanical losses
and is regarded as the greatest mechanical loss (Cakir and Akcay 2011).

Friction is important in terms of engine efﬁciency and fuel economy. The kinetic
energy that is lost due to friction is mainly converted into heat that is conducted
away. It also results in vibration and emission of sound, both leading to dissipation
of energy. Some of the energy is converted within the material surfaces and wear
debris by plastic deformation, material intermixing and tribo-chemical reactions. In

16 Applications of Tribology on Engine Performance

311

an IC engine, the sliding velocity, load and viscosity are dynamic and change rapidly.
Other parameters like piston ring shape, surface topography, oil availability, ignition
timing, secondary motions of the piston and piston rings and properties of the surface
layers affect the mode of friction level. The strongest wear of the cylinder liners takes
place on top of the piston ring, where the chemical, thermal, erosive, abrasive and
adhesive conditions are the severest. At low cylinder surface temperatures, the tribo-
chemical wear of the cylinder liner increases drastically due to increase in Sulphur
content of the fuel. There are ﬁve forms of wear that occur in IC engine components
namely abrasion, adhesion, fatigue, corrosion and lubrication breakdown. Abrasion,
adhesion and fatigue involve mechanical damaging of surfaces. The wear rate in the
piston ring/cylinder wall is generally in the range of nm/hour, which is comparatively
very low (Shakhvorostov et al. 2006; Scherge et al. 2006; Dienwiebel et al. 2007).
If hard particles get into the lubricating oil, abrasion can lead to high wear rates.

Adhesion is that part of the wear leading to material being moved around rather
than removed. Adhesion is also part of scufﬁng failure, although the scufﬁng proce-
dure is more complex than only adhesion. Tribo-chemical wear or corrosion is also
important especially in the marine engine running on heavy fuel oil, which has a high
sulphur content leading to high levels of sulphuric acid in the combustion chamber.
Decreasing the friction in the piston assembly is an important way of improving
the mechanical efﬁciency. A 10% reduction in mechanical losses can reduce fuel
consumption by 1.5–2.5% (Andersson 1991; Mishra et al. 2009). With increase in
the engine power, the tribology of the sliding surfaces of piston rings and cylinder
shows extremely complicate phenomena. Due to dynamic operating conditions in
IC engines, changes occur in the lubrication regime depending on the position of
the piston in the cylinder. When the piston changes direction, at dead center, the
friction coefﬁcient increases due to zero piston speed. The hydraulic lubrication
regime changes to mixed lubrication or limit lubrication regime. Cold starting, speed
changes, sudden loads are some of the factors which cause changes to the lubrication
regime in IC engines (Taylor 1993; Priest and Taylor 2000). It is always preferred to
have a hydrodynamic oil ﬁlm at the interface between the rings and the liners as the
performance, durability and exhaust emissions are greatly affected by it.

Wear of the cylinder liner is caused to a great extent by the action of the piston
rings. A higher friction coefﬁcient in IC engines also increases loss of material due to
wear of component surfaces. The wear of piston rings and cylinder liner increases due
to three body abrasive wear caused by the presence of small amount of solid particles
in the lubricating oil, which are added by component wear, ambient air dust particles
and contaminants from the oil sump or combustion chamber. A good lubricating
property of fuel plays an important role in reducing wear and friction losses. Strong
adhesive forces between the piston rings and liner occur due to inadequate lubrication,
leading to high frictional losses and metal scufﬁng, resulting in high wear. Apart from
sliding wear, piston ring surfaces degrade due to blow by of hot gases from the high
temperature combustion chamber, which carry soot along with them. Improving the
lubricating properties of the fuel will reduce the mechanical friction losses within
the fuel pump.

312

S. Das and S. Das

16.3.2 Journal Bearings

Engine bearing performance is affected mainly by mechanical conﬁguration and
hydrodynamics of the oil ﬁlm. In plain journal bearing, the hard shaft rotating in a
soft bearing shell are separated by a lubricant. The journal bearings mainly operate
in pure hydrodynamic lubrication regime for increased life span. But then, in present
automobile industry, there is a necessity of fuel consumption and emissions due
to restrictions by legislation and customer satisfaction. Studies suggest the journal
bearings must be operated in the transition between pure hydrodynamic lubrication
and mixed lubrication regime to reduce friction coefﬁcient. However, this may lead
to wear and durability problems due to metal-metal contact. Thus, efﬁcient jour-
nal bearings can be designed using simulation approach that can describe complex
behavior of mixed elasto-hydrodynamic lubrication for a wide range of operating
conditions (Sander et al. 2016). Journal bearings including those of the connecting
rods, camshaft and crankshaft are affected by dust particles. The hard contaminant
particles, which get into the clearance between the journal and the bearings, are
pressed by the harder surface into softer surface leading to abrasive wear. The par-
ticle size has a major effect on the wear of the engine bearings. The most severe
wear in the bearing is caused by particles with sizes in the range from 10 to 35 µm.
The bearing location affects the wear rate in connecting rod bearings. A reduction
in the sliding surface area of the crankshaft or connecting rod bearings or increasing
bearing clearance will reduce engine friction. However, these methods increase the
possibility of wear, seizure or knocking in the bearings.

In recent trends, the engine downsizing leads to smaller engines and its compo-
nents that results in higher stresses on the components and the lubricated contacts.
For example, the big-end bearing of the connection rod has to withstand speciﬁc
loads above 100 MPa that may expect to increase in future. As a result, the lubri-
cation gap in journal bearing decreases below 1 µm that may cause metal to metal
contact. With the increasing use of start-stop cycle, the bearing wear accelerates
as the bearing has to overcome the boundary and mixed lubrication regime at the
starting of the engine before a hydrodynamic ﬁlm has formed (Sander et al. 2016).
The prediction techniques used in engine bearing has been improved in recent years
due to augmented computing power and precise methods that directly beneﬁts the
designer. Due to this, more realistic bearing conditions can be considered and better
bearing performance prediction is possible. The use of computer aids in present-
ing data in an improved way for good interpretation of the results (Martin 1983).
The journal bearing design approaches to reduce power loss and increase load car-
rying capacity include artiﬁcial texturing, axial and circumferential grooves and
bushing speciﬁc shapes (e.g. three-lobe bearings) (Bompos and Nikolakopoulos
2016). Ghorbanian et al. (2011) studied a problem of complex hydrodynamic mod-
eling of journal bearings in IC engines along with an optimization process described
by numerous variables and constraints that are to be parallelly modiﬁed and satisﬁed.

16 Applications of Tribology on Engine Performance

313

A ratio of bearing length L and bearing internal diameter D in the range of 0.4–0.6
is normally preferred for dynamically loaded bearings. This is because any value
below this range will cause excessive loss of lubricants from the ends of the bearings.
On the other hand, any value above this range may result in alignment problem that
may lead to edge loading. With high value of diametral clearance, there occurs a
reduction in load carrying capacity, oil whirl, excessive damage to due to cavitation
erosion, etc. In contrast to this, a low diametral clearance value restricts the quantity
of oil ﬂow in the bearing that increases the lubricant temperature and reduces its
viscosity that in turn reduces the ﬁlm thickness. In actual practice, it is impossible to
achieve an ideal single clearance value due to inevitable limitations in manufacturing
processes. Hence, the engine bearing must be designed for maximum and minimum
values of clearance (Hirani et al. 1999). In practice, impairment of a bearing may
often be the outcome of several mechanisms operating concurrently. The related
literature and real-world experience show that the plain bearing damages are mainly
triggered by wear, either as a direct cause or as a result of various anomalies in design,
manufacture, assembly, operation and maintenance of the engine and bearings. The
wear is a very complex process originated by the act of different mechanisms, and
can be established by different wear types which are often related: adhesive wear,
abrasive wear, surface fatigue wear, erosive wear, cavitation wear, fretting wear,
oxidative wear and corrosive wear (Vencl and Rac 2014).

16.3.3 Valve Train

The operating conditions of modern engine valve trains are becoming severe due
to design alterations driven by different parameters like increased fuel economy,
environmental policies and higher output. The valves damage during operation due
to abrasive wear of the seat face and the stem, stem corrosion, damage of the seat
face caused by products of combustion, damage of the seat face caused by blobby
exhaust gases and burning, bursting of the seat face, and breakage of the valve head
or the stem. These types of damage arise due to physicochemical interactions of
the working medium at high temperature. They are also the result of mechanical
stresses caused by the occurrence of excessive temperature gradients (Siczek 2016).
In conventional engine design, the cam and follower slide over each other under
the boundary lubrication condition. At low camshaft speed, valve train friction can
contribute signiﬁcantly to overall engine friction. To reduce the cam and follower
wear, roller followers were used instead of slipper type of followers in some of the
production engines. Valve train design with the roller follower type is now becoming
popular in order to reduce friction in valve trains where the friction is reduced by half.
The performance of roller follower valve train is subjected to rotational efﬁciency
of rollers that is mainly governed by oil ﬁlm thickness. The best way to reduce the
friction at cam/tappet interface is to replace the conventional ﬂat faced tappet with
roller followers (Khurram et al. 2019). In a valve train, the valve spring load can
be decreased by reducing the mass of the reciprocating part. Reducing the spring

314

S. Das and S. Das

load reduces friction because of the lower surface pressure between the cam and the
follower. In direct acting valve train, poor lubrication results in asperity contact which
leads to higher frictional heating of material surfaces resulting in polish wear and
scufﬁng of the tribological components (Dyson and Naylor 1960). The performance
of the valve train is also affected due to temperature rise in cam contact area. The
rolling motion of roller in the roller follower valve train ensures better lubrication
which results in reduced friction force and wear (Chiu 1992; Ji and Taylor 1998).

A valve train system consisting of various contacting parts with interactions
governed by different phenomena. Thus, requirement for a relevant prediction is
an integrated model of the inertial dynamics (usually expressed in Lagrangian or
Newton–Euler formulation), tribology (governed by Reynolds equation), contact
mechanics, surface characteristics and physical chemistry of the lubricant. This
method is commonly referred to as multi-physics. From tribological point of view,
one type of solution includes the solution of Reynold’s equation that includes accu-
rate prediction of dynamic behavior of the mechanism. The correct application of
this approach has proven to be very accurate although any simulation is time con-
suming and requires advance computer programming skills. In the second approach,
the behavior of the tribological concurrences is predicted using extrapolated oil ﬁlm
thickness formulae. This include equations obtained through regression of numerical
studies that correlates the applied load, entrainment velocity, lubricant viscosity and
mechanical properties of contact surfaces for different contact geometries and oil
ﬁlm thickness. In spite of various limitations due to simplifying assumptions, such
formulae are relatively easy to use that gives relatively accurate and quick results
(Teodorescu 2010).

The total valve train energy loss is the sum of the friction energy consumed by
all its individual components. A typical valve train system consists of cam, tappet,
pushrod, rocker-arm, valve and spring. The major losses occurring in the valve train
shown in Fig. 16.2 includes losses between cam and tappet (1), between the tappet
and its bore (3), in the rocker arm bearing (5), between the valve stem and the valve
guide (7) and in the camshaft bearings. The friction forces at the two ends of the
push rod (2, 4) and the friction between the valve stem top and the rocker arm end
(6) are much lower than in the other components. They appear as a residual term in
the overall balance of frictional losses (Teodorescu 2010).

16 Applications of Tribology on Engine Performance

315

Fig. 16.2 Schematic of the push rod valve train and the major components of the friction losses
(Teodorescu 2010)

16.4 Tribological Improvements of IC Engine

The improvement in automobile industry is mainly focused to satisfy customer’s
needs like better fuel economy and strict regulations of government for environment
security. This can be achieved through the knowledge of tribology that can be applied
to control frictional losses, wear and fuel consumption. Tribological study can be
adopted to develop new engine oils with low or no sulphur, phosphorus and ash
content for reduction of harmful emissions or to develop new surface materials with
less or no dependence on sulphur and phosphorus containing oils (Komvopoulos
et al. 2003). A small improvement in engine efﬁciency, emission level and durability
make a vehicle more reliable having major effect on world economy and environ-
ment in the long run in future (Taylor 1998). Improved tribological performance
can be achieved in three ways: enhancing the tribological properties of the materials
used for the mechanical parts; coating surfaces to improve tribological behavior;
or developing lubricants that improve tribological behavior. In order to achieve low
fuel consumption and high engine reliability in automobile industry, the tribology
study can be successfully implemented in reducing engine friction and engine size,
hybridization and developing new engine combustion methods.

316

S. Das and S. Das

16.4.1 Engine Friction Reduction

The friction in the engine components can be reduced by various methods that may
cause serious tribology related problems. These problems need to be addressed before
applying the methods to engine design to reduce engine friction (Nakada 1994). The
methods of friction reduction along with their problems are shown in Table 16.1.
The three most important methods to reduce friction and wear in an engine are (i)
mechanical design of micro geometries and major components like power cylinder,
bearings and valve trains, (ii) surface and material engineering and coatings and (iii)
lubricant and additive technologies (Wong and Tung 2016).

Component materials and system design

The automotive design is directly or indirectly related to value engineering. The main
motive of a designer in designing any moving part of an IC engine is to meet the
required functions (components life, noise and vibration, oil consumption, weight,
etc.) simultaneously minimizing its cost. A component with improved performance
might be adopted instead of its higher manufacturing cost. Besides these, the addi-
tional requirement of an engine design engineer is engine’s reliability. In earlier days,
tribological failure was a common problem. However, in modern automotive indus-
try, there is no scope for poor reliability as consumer’s expectations are considerably
increasing (Adam’s 2010). The various technological developments in automobile
industries requires innovative system designs for the tribo-components to function
well under more severe conditions. There is a necessity of development of new mate-
rials for different tribo-components that can be operated at high temperature, pressure
and velocity (Enomoto and Yamamoto 1998). The knowledge of applied tribology
is essential for design engineers to continuously improve a product as well as to
critically assess supplier designs in automobile industry. Tribology can be applied to
the design process at the very beginning by using improved design tools and meth-
ods. Design guides and computer programs are the main tribological design tools
to calculate the parameters affecting performance of various components. Design

Table 16.1 Friction reduction methods and their related problems (Nakada 1994)

Methods of friction reduction

Problems

Components

Piston

Piston ring

Reduction of weight and
sliding surface, surface
treatment on piston skirt

Surface treatment and
reduction in tension

Valve train bearing (crank
and connecting rod)

Reduction of weight and
sliding surface

Engine oil

Low viscous oil with
additives

Increased oil consumption,
wear, seizure, slap noise; low
reliability

Increase in oil consumption
and decrease in reliability

Increased oil consumption,
wear, seizure, slap noise;
poor reliability

Increased wear and seizure

16 Applications of Tribology on Engine Performance

317

guides aid in setting limits on physical dimensions, materials, stress levels etc. that
are required in designing a component. Computer methods like ﬁnite element anal-
ysis can be successfully applied to the distortion and stresses of various components
such as cylinder block and connecting rod (Willermet 1989).

From the viewpoint of materials, most of the primary structures in IC engine
are made of easily available metallic elements like iron and aluminum (Becker
2004). Conventionally, an engine cylinder block subjected to maximum friction loss
is made up of heavy cast iron. In order to reduce weight in automobiles, most of
the metal structures are replaced by cheaper and corrosion resistant polymer com-
ponents (Friedrich 2018). In recent days, an aluminum alloy engine block with or
without cast iron cylinder liner insert is popularly used for passenger cars (Enomoto
and Yamamoto 1998). Aluminum alloy 390 having high silicon content are used
to manufacture cylinder blocks due to their good wear resistant property in spite
of poor machinability. One of the major tribo-components that contribute to engine
friction is piston skirt to cylinder block interface. The clearance between the piston
and the engine block should be small enough to reduce vibration and noise. On the
other hand, there should be adequate clearance between the two to prevent seizure.
The advantage of using cast aluminum as a piston material is light weight to reduce
engine vibration and high thermal conductivity to prevent piston overheating. In con-
trast, the high thermal expansion coefﬁcient of aluminum makes the piston cylinder
arrangement too loose at low temperature that had appropriate clearance at operating
temperature. Hence, aluminum alloy containing copper and nickel is used that pos-
sesses low thermal expansion coefﬁcient than pure aluminum but higher than cast
iron. At present, the upper compression rings are made up of either nitrided stain-
less steel or molybdenum coated cast iron as they are subjected to severe wear in
comparison to lower rings (Becker 2004). The advantage of using Cr–N ion plating
having low friction coefﬁcient (~0.01 − 0.015) is that the wear of the top piston ring
is reduced by 90% and that of cylinder bore is reduced by 15% in comparison to
conventional Cr plated ring (Enomoto and Yamamoto 1998).

The cylinder heads that are generally made of cast aluminum cannot withstand
the high temperature and loads at the valve seating area. This can be resolved by
inserting a valve seat, made up of steel containing one or more element like cobalt,
chromium, vanadium etc. and medium to high carbon (0.5–3 wt%), into the cylinder
head. Generally, the cam shafts are made of gray cast iron with induction or ﬂame
hardened cam lobes and the lifter surface is made of hardened cast iron or hardened
steel. Also, powder metal for cam lobes and ceramics for lifter surface can be a
viable alternative. The journal bearing and the shaft should simultaneously be hard
and soft for better embeddability of small particles to remove them from coming into
contact (Becker 2004). The problem of seizure in bearing due to wear and reduced
oil thickness can be overcome by improving the topography of the plated surface and
dispersion of ﬁne hard particles in a plated layer. The wear resistance of bearing can
be considerably improved by dispersing Si3N4 ﬁne powder in Pb–Sn–In composite
electro-plating and Co hard powder in Cu–Sn–Pb alloy (Enomoto and Yamamoto
1998).

318

Surface engineering

S. Das and S. Das

The recent trends in IC engine include the improvement in surface structures with
suitable coatings instead of earlier trend of using monolithic materials to minimize
frictional losses. The friction between the sliding pairs can be signiﬁcantly reduced
by surface texturing such as dimple, grove and mesh pattern textures. The different
surface texturing techniques are mechanical milling or shot blasting, photolithog-
raphy, etching, laser beam processing, pellet pressing etc. (Yan-qing et al. 2009).
Initially, the concept of lubrication mechanism is nothing but providing reserved
oil in different surface textures. Hence, the inside of the cylinders of combustion
engines was designed with cross-hatch pattern by honing process for not less than
60 years. The micro-irregularities help in achieving improved hydrodynamic pres-
sure that increases the load carrying capacity of the surfaces (Yan et al. 2010). Yu
et al. (2011) studied the effect of dimples of different shapes, viz. circle, square and
ellipse, on the tribological performance of surface texture and found that the elliptical
dimples showed the best friction reduction effect.

Studies revealed that a large amount of heat generated in the combustion chamber
of IC engine is absorbed by piston and the walls of the combustion chamber that
reduces its performance. This situation can be overcome by using thermal barrier
coating that reduces the heat loss which in turn helps in burning the un-burnt gases
to reduce pollution in exhaust gases (Dhomne and Mahalle 2018). Titanium alloys
can be a competent light weight material for automotive applications due to its high
strength, low density and excellent corrosion resistance. But at high temperatures, the
engine components are subjected to oxidation, creep and thermal fatigue. Especially,
the engine valves frequently strike the seat inserts, at hot environment of combustion
gases ~500 °C, that are subjected to short distance sliding contact leading to localized
wear. The development of tribolayer is expected to reduce the intensity of wear. The
weight of Ti alloy valves is 45% less than the stainless steel valves that increases
the engine speed and reduces vibration and noise. Instead of great importance of Ti
alloy such as Ti–6Al–4V in automobile industry, it is subjected to oxidational wear
at low sliding speed and metallic wear at high sliding speed. Hence, various surface
engineering methods like physical vapour deposition of Ti alloy coating, chemical
vapour deposition of carbon based polycrystalline diamond coating, ion implantation
with nitrogen and oxygen and thermal oxidation. Amongst these techniques, the
thermal oxidation method can be implemented at a lower cost for mass production
(Lou and Alpas 2019). Some of the hard antiwear coatings are diamond-like carbon
(DLC), boron nitride (BN), silicon carbide (SiC), titanium nitride (TiN), tungsten
carbide (WC), etc. (Zhmud 2011). Mutafov et al. (2014) observed that tungsten
doped DLC coating on laboratory samples and valve lifter possess good adhesion
and hardness nearly 15 GPa. The coating showed excellent wear resistance in pin-
on-disc and engine testing due to the formation of thin solid tribolayer of 2–4 nm on
the coating surface.

16 Applications of Tribology on Engine Performance

319

Lubrication and additive technology

The engine lubricants are basically used to make the engine more durable, to improve
fuel economy and to reduce emission level. In order to increase engine’s durability,
the lubricant must prevent wear through hydrodynamic lubrication or by using anti-
wear additives and inhibit corrosion formed by oil degradation or its contamination
by combustion gases and unburnt fuel (Howard 2014). The introduction of nanopar-
ticles to engine oils improves the tribological behavior of IC engine due to rolling,
mending and polishing effect and formation of protective ﬁlm as shown in Fig. 16.3.
The spherical nano particles act as rollers for the two sliding surfaces as well interacts
with the friction surfaces to form a protective ﬁlm between them. Also, the nanopar-
ticles form physical tribo-ﬁlm by depositing on the friction surfaces to reduce mass
loss and reduce the roughness of the rubbing surfaces by their abrasiveness prop-
erty (Ali and Xianjun 2015). Darminesh et al. (2017) reviewed the present status of
biodegradable nanolubricant possessing improved properties. Several surface-active
anti-wear additives like zinc dialkyldithiophosphate (ZDDP), antiscuff phosphorus
and sulphur improves the friction and wear behavior due to chemical reactions with
the surfaces forming cohesive anti wear tribochemical ﬁlms. The regeneracy and sta-
bility of a triboﬁlm at high loads and temperatures are the key factors in determining
its efﬁciency and persistence (Komvopoulos 2003).

In addition, the lubricant must possess low viscosity to minimize power loss due to
viscous drag and hence increase efﬁciency. Tormos et al. (2017) made a comparative
fuel consumption test of low viscosity engine oil (LVEO) on an urban compressed
natural gas buses ﬂeet and tribometers. They found reduced fuel consumption in
ﬂeet test and reduced friction in tribometers due to the application of LVEO. The
fuel economy can be improved by using friction modiﬁer additives that are long
molecules with polar head groups that attach to the metal surface to make the sur-
face more slippery in boundary lubrication. The engine efﬁciency can be increased
by better handling of oxidation and contaminants with lubricants to maintain a vis-
cosity proﬁle which provides the required ﬁlm strength for protection. The use of

Fig. 16.3 Mechanism of lubrication of nanolubricants (Ali and Xianjun 2015)

320

S. Das and S. Das

anti-oxidant additives in lubricants can reduce oxidation and dispersants within the
additives reduce contamination. Engine’s good emission performance is possible
due to lubricant’s ability to prevent wear and deposits along with several after treat-
ment methods, viz. particulate ﬁlters, NOx adsorbers and selective catalytic reduction
(SCR) systems (Howard 2014).

16.4.2 Hybridization and Engine Downsizing

Engine downsizing means employing smaller engines in a vehicle that provides the
same power as that of larger engines using recent technologies. It involves the reduc-
tion of engine size by reducing the number of cylinders and the displacement. It is
one of the viable methods to improve fuel economy and combustion by reducing
friction and automobile weight. In spite of having advantageous properties, engine
downsizing can have certain drawbacks like poor acceleration, lowered maximum
speed and smaller internal space. Nozawa et al. (1994) performed a numerical sim-
ulation to assess the consequences of engine downsizing on the frictional losses and
fuel ingestion of automobiles by making use of simpliﬁed models for friction and
combustion. They observed an improvement in fuel economy and an existence of
optimal engine displacement due to engine downsizing.

Engines are said to be downsized when they possess high load levels. Hence,
downsized engine possesses high power density and/or high full load mean pressures
and speciﬁc full load torque. The engine power density Pe/VH is given by (Golloch
and Merker 2005):

Pe
VH

= i.n.Pme = 2π.n. M
VH

(16.1)

where V H is the piston displacement, n is the engine speed, Pme is the engine’s
effective pressure, i is the number of cycles per crankshaft rotation and M is the
torque. The power density can be increased by increasing n or Pme. Engines use
high load concepts through effective charging systems and other measures to show
high mean effective pressures and speciﬁc powers (Golloch and Merker 2005). The
engine downsizing process involves increased performance by using turbochargers,
superchargers and twin charging. These methods alone cannot have high efﬁciencies
and can be coupled with new techniques, viz. direct fuel injection (DI), advanced
exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) and variable valve timing (VVT). Turbocharging
is used to provide the required amount of air in the combustion chamber to burn
additional fuel for efﬁcient and clean combustion. A hybrid turbocharger is used to
obtain high electrical efﬁciency due to absence of mechanical linkage between the
turbine and the compressor. The hybrid turbocharger consists of a series of hybrid
setup where compressor speed and power are independent from turbine speed and
power that improves turbine and compressor efﬁciency. The supercharger compresses
air to increase its pressure and density with the help of mechanical power of the

16 Applications of Tribology on Engine Performance

321

engine. Twin charger is an amalgamation of an exhaust-driven turbocharger and
an engine-driven supercharger that work together to give maximum work output.
Downsizing will be a great boon for petrol and diesel engines in future containing
just two cylinders and lower displacement that provides the required torque and
power and reduces the amount of pollutants (Patil et al. 2017).

The emergence of various innovative vehicle technologies like electric vehicles
(EVs), hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) and fuel cell vehicles (FCVs) leads to the
improvement of fuel economy and reduced emissions. So far, the HEVs are the most
cost-effective feasible choice as they use smaller battery pack and are similar to
conventional vehicles. The different automobile industries are developing solutions
to the standardization of electric systems to the extent that the hybridization fac-
tors, viz. bus voltage, motor size and the relative size of the motor to IC engine,
are concerned. Lukic and Emadi (2004) showed that hybridization improves fuel
economy and vehicle performance up to a critical optimum point. Beyond that, the
performance did not improve satisfactorily on increasing the capacity of electric
propulsion system. Besides, there was a considerable beneﬁt of fuel economy when
ﬁtted with small electric motors. Katrašnik (2007) proposed combined simulation
and analytical approach to accurately determine the energy distribution and losses
in the individual components of the hybrid powertrain. They showed that the utmost
necessity to enhance fuel economy by hybridization and downsizing involves the
determination of optimum hybridization factor.

16.4.3 New Combustion Concepts

The present scenario of engine combustion and its related emissions is very complex
that leads to rigorous research in the ﬁeld of new combustion concepts. There is
no signiﬁcant distinction associated with gasoline and diesel fuel use in SI and CI
engine respectively, homogeneous or non-homogeneous and stoichiometric or lean
mixtures. The new combustion concept in traditional stoichiometric homogeneous SI
engine for better fuel economy includes lean burn combustion and stratiﬁed gasoline
combustion. In lean burn combustion, a homogeneous mixture of low air-fuel ratio
is used to improve fuel efﬁciency. However, the after-treatment process becomes
complicated as the conventional three-way catalyst cannot reduce NOx with excess
oxygen. In stratiﬁed gasoline combustion, the stratiﬁcation of cylinder charge is done
with high pressure in-cylinder injection of the fuel that prepares a near stoichiometric
mix in the vicinity of the spark plug (Payri et al. 2014).

The efﬁcient diesel engines having the problems of harmful emission can be
improved using high pressure injection, lower compression ratio through advanced
valve timing, lean burning and advanced after treatment techniques and renewable
energy sources. Direct use of biofuels or biogas as a fuel, along with use of hydrogen
fuel, synthetic fuel and electricity for electric vehicles produced from wind, hydro
or wave energy can reduce the emissions to a large extent (Olander 2018). The
NOx and particulates are in a trade-off position in diesel engines. The NOx can be

322

S. Das and S. Das

reduced by lowering the combustion temperature using techniques like EGR, timing
retard, low swirl, pilot injection etc. Whereas, particulate matter can be reduced by
air-fuel mixture using high pressure fuel injection, low sulphur fuel, HC reduction
and a decrease in lubrication oil consumption (Odajima 1994). Igartua et al. (2011)
developed a new generation lubricating oil for two-stroke engines that is compatible
with Bioethanol E85 having the properties like low friction, good wear and scufﬁng
protection, no residual ash, low carbon soot or existence of deposits. Penchaliah et al.
(2011) examined the effect of four contaminants viz. soot, oxidation, moisture and
sulphuric acid, and observed that they reduce the conductivity of oil. The sulphuric
acid and soot inﬂuenced the wear rate in the form of abrasion and polishing wear
whereas sulphuric acid and moisture produced corrosive wear. On the other hand,
all contaminants and their levels increased the coefﬁcient of friction.

16.5 Summary

The review shows the contribution of different components of IC engine to the total
frictional losses and the minimization of these losses through various techniques. In
order to increase the efﬁciency and durability and to reduce emissions of IC engine,
it is important to design the major frictional components based on the knowledge of
tribology. The importance of improved lubrication, surface proﬁles and surface ﬁnish
has been focused. The automobile engineers, material engineers and tribologists must
work together to eliminate the difﬁculties of engine tribology.

Despite the threats of strict pollution legislation, globalization and variable fuel
quality, the IC engine will continue as a title role in the next decades with signif-
icant improvement in technologies. Technologies that are already available in the
market includes stop-start, EGR and VVT systems, advanced after-treatment sys-
tems to deal with lean combustion. Some emerging technologies may include low
temperature combustion concept and modiﬁed operating cycles. The widely used
efﬁciency enhancing technologies in current automotive engines is engine downsiz-
ing due to which engines are able to increase their rated power. Different boosting
technologies are being investigated so as to decrease turbo-lag and to broaden tur-
bocharger operation range, limited by surge and overspeed. Some of the active ﬁelds
of research may involve accurate engine control in system integration level, manage-
ment of subsystem requirements, operational limits and their interaction, providing
a systematic calibration procedure and adapting the control system to variations in
the environment and to engine ageing.

16 Applications of Tribology on Engine Performance

Abstract This book chapter focuses on the development in replacement of ﬁrst gen-
eration brake materials (asbestos) by organic ﬁber based polymer composites. This
replacement is necessary as the asbestos brake pads causes hazardous effects to the
human being and environment. Many researchers report the several organic alterna-
tives for asbestos in different journals. In this chapter, some of the best performed
and eco-friendly compositions for brake materials are discussed. The uses of organic
ﬁbers and ﬁllers such as ﬂax, basalt, coconut, palm kernel shell, periwinkle shell,
and pineapple leaf etc. are studied as an alternative to the asbestos based materials
for braking pads. Different combinations of organic ﬁbers with different binders like
phenolic resin, polyester, and epoxy etc. are also studied and its inﬂuence on the
behavior of brake pads is reviewed. Moreover, wear and friction coefﬁcient are the
two signiﬁcant factors to be considered for suitability of any friction materials for
braking pad application. Moreover, the inﬂuential rules and mechanism of braking
conditions like pressure, velocity, and temperature on the friction and wear behaviors
of organic reinforcing friction materials are summarized.
Keywords Brake pad · Organic ﬁber · Binders · Polymer composite · Material
properties
In automotive vehicle system, brake is highly essential part so as to slow down or to
completely stop the vehicle. This stoppable process has been done by the creation
of friction between rotating disc and brake pads (conversion of kinetic energy of
the vehicle into heat energy). Therefore, the brake pads should have some properties
such as resistant to wear, withstand the high temperature, and quickly absorb the heat
energy. Also, the brake pad materials must have capability to maintain a high friction
coefﬁcient (FC) with the brake disc and it should not be broken down like that of the
FC with the brake disc, which is compromised at higher temperature. Generally, brake
pads are manufactured by following constituents; reinforcing ﬁbers, ﬁllers, binders,
and friction additives. These constituents are mixed properly with various weight
proportion and brake pads are obtained by using several manufacturing techniques.
The constituents play the following roles: reinforcing ﬁbers enable the mechanical
strength to the friction material; binders maintain the structural integrity under ther-
mal and mechanical stresses; ﬁllers improve its manufacturability; friction additives
like abrasives provide enhancement in friction coefﬁcient and lubricants develop the
friction coefﬁcient at higher temperature. Earlier generation of composites used in
modern brake pad materials are based on health hazardous asbestos reinforcement
because of its good chemical and physical properties. It is used in friction lining,
brake coupling, and brake pads; however, asbestos causes health risk and carcino-
genic effects on human health (Fu et al. 2012). Hence, in recent year asbestos free
reinforcement such as glass, Kevlar, carbon, and organic ﬁbers have been extensively
used as replacement of asbestos (Liew and Nirmal 2013). Among all the non-asbestos
reinforcement, organic ﬁbres reinforced friction materials are now emerging as new
and low cost friction material in the brake pads development. Even though these ﬁbres
have good friction and mechanical properties, there are some major disadvantages
like susceptibility to friction-induced noise and poor afﬁnity with polymer matrix.
However, because of their eco-friendly nature, excellent mechanical properties, and
economical beneﬁt, these ﬁbers are recently gaining interest in the ﬁeld of automo-
tive industry (Keskin 2011). The researchers established that the natural ﬁbers had
positive inﬂuence on the mechanical and wear properties of ﬁber reinforced poly-
mer composites (Kumar et al. 2016, 2017a, b, 2019a; Venketeshwaran and Perumal
2010; Patel et al. 2018). Kumar et al. (2018) prepared the composite samples with
the combination of bast-leaf natural ﬁbers in epoxy composites and revealed that
the wear behaviour of epoxy composites improved by the addition of natural ﬁber.
In other observation, effect of various inorganic microﬁllers such as CaCO3, Al2O3,
and TiO2 on physico-mechanical properties of Luffa cylindrica/polyester composites
was studied by Patel and Dhanola (2016). The specimen prepared with 5 wt% TiO2
microﬁllers in luffa ﬁber reinforced polymer composite exhibited smallest speciﬁc
wear rate among all ﬁlled/unﬁlled polymer composites. The different natural ﬁbers
such as sisal, Grewia optiva, Bauhinia-vahlii, and hemp etc. in polymer compos-
ite exhibited similar improvement in wear property of ﬁber reinforced composites
(Kumar et al. 2017a, b, 2019b, c; Patel and Rawat 2017).

17 Asbestos Free Braking Pads by Using Organic Fiber Based …

329

Pujari and Srikiran (2019) observed that the palm kernel (50% volume frac-
tion) reinforced phenolic composites had efﬁciently improved the wear resistance
behaviour of the composites. In other investigation, Unaldi and Kus (2017) observed
that the porosity, hardness and wear rate characteristics of the brake pad materials
were greatly affected by the weight proportion of phenolic matrix and Miscanthus
in the mixture. There are four possible mechanisms of failure modes of braking in
automobiles: (i) thermal instability, (ii) wear mechanism, (iii) chemical changes, and
(iv) micro-cracks.

The aim of the present chapter is to review the properties and preparation of
different alternative materials (organic) as suitable alternative of asbestos brake pads.
Braking pads made up with organic ﬁbers and ﬁllers like banana peel, kernel shell,
and palm waste etc. are summarized. Also, the different binders such as phenolic
rein and epoxy resin are also discussed and its inﬂuence on the performance of brake
pads is presented.

17.2 Literature Review

17.2.1 Organic Fiber as Reinforcing Material for Braking

Pads

Recently, eco-friendliness, economic point of view, and governmental regulation
in the use of organic reinforcing ﬁbers the asbestos, which produces carcinogenic
effects, has received growing interest in the brake pads system in automotive indus-
tries. Xin et al. (2007) prepared brake pad material using organic ﬁber such as sisal
for its eco-friendly nature with phenolic as resin and revealed that the 3:4 propor-
tions of phenolic/sisal delivered the superior value of friction and wear properties.
Moreover, in comparisons of asbestos and mineral/steel ﬁber, sisal ﬁber reinforced
friction material attained good FC at different friction temperature. The waste of
banana (peels) are found as a suitable replacement of asbestos and phenolic resin
wherein it was found out that the 30 wt% of carbonized banana peel exhibited better
wear properties (Idris et al. 2015). Ikpambese et al. (2016) produced environmental
friendly non-asbestos brake pads by using kernel ﬁber with epoxy resin binder and
it was revealed that the composition of 10 wt% palm kernel waste, 40 wt% epoxy,
15 wt% calcium carbonate, and 29 wt% graphite gave the optimum properties. The
results indicates that the palm kernel ﬁbers can be a possible replacement of asbestos
embedded brake pads production. The enhancement of wear resistance properties
can be done by using 3 wt% of cotton ﬁbers, so the brake pads embedded with cot-
ton ﬁber reinforcement is another option to asbestos free braking system. Ma et al.
(2013) focused on the impact of bamboo ﬁber on friction performance of brake pad
material. They examined the specimen reinforced with bamboo ﬁbers of 3, 6, 9 and
12 wt% and revealed that the FC of 12 wt% bamboo reinforced friction material

330

S. Kumar et al.

(BRFC) decreased with increasing temperature. The optimum value of friction coef-
ﬁcient and wear properties were attained at 3 wt% of BRFC. In other investigation,
Ma et al. (2014) investigated the inﬂuence of wool ﬁbers on tribological behavior of
friction material. They prepared sample with 0, 3, and 4 wt% of wool ﬁber in fric-
tion material and found out that the superior results were attained at 3 wt% of wool
content. Moreover, impact strength increased and hardness decreased with increase
in the wool content in friction material. A natural cotton ﬂower ﬁber known as Areva
javanica is a possible alternate of asbestos in braking system and the authors revealed
that the developed brake pad obtained a hardness of HRS 91, density of 2.01 g/cm3,
and Loss on ignition 21.68%, respectively. These values were approximately similar
to acrylic ﬁber reinforced brake pad (Ahmed et al. 2018).

17.2.2 Organic Filler as Reinforcing Material for Braking

Pads

The industrial wastes particles such as ﬂy ash and bagasse ash; Fly ash is the by-
product of coal and it is obtained from combustion of coal in power generation
industries, whereas bagasse ash is obtained from combustion of bagasse in sugar-
cane factories. These materials attained higher value of hardness and are positively
used as abrasives in order to reduce and control the wear rate in brake pads (Boz and
Kurt 2007). Choosri et al. (2018) suggested that the 4 wt% of subordinate abrasive (ﬂy
ash and bagasse ash) delivered optimized overall properties of friction material and
showed a possible use as secondary abrasives in the phenolic composites for environ-
mental friendly brake pads. Hazelnut, walnut, and apricot shells are extensively used
as ﬁller reinforcement in various polymeric materials (Ibhadode and Dagwa 2008;
Gürü et al. 2006, 2008; Çöpür et al. 2007). These natural ﬁllers hold higher lignin as
compared to organic ﬁbers, therefore the thermal decomposition of nut shells leads
to formation of higher amount of char due to its high lignin composition. This leads
to a positive impact on increasing wear resistance properties (Sutikno et al. 2010).
Abutu et al. (2018) studied the asbestos free braking pads and the material included
seashell (52%) as reinforcement, epoxy matrix (35%) as binder, aluminum (8%) as
abrasive, and graphite (5%) as friction modiﬁer in manufacturing a braking pad. They
observed that the 24.26 and 55.23% of curing time had the noteworthy impact on
friction coefﬁcient and wear rate respectively in the development of braking pads.
Yawas et al. (2016) focused on the periwinkle shell as alternative for asbestos in brak-
ing pads. They revealed that the 1251 m size of periwinkle particle with 35 wt% resin
was obtained favorable with that of commercial brake pads in automotive industry.
In other investigation on periwinkle shell, the authors developed the factorial design
and revealed that the enhancement in wear resistance depended on the sliding speed,
normal load, and temperature (Amaren et al. 2013).

17 Asbestos Free Braking Pads by Using Organic Fiber Based …

331

17.3 Experimental Procedure

Organic ﬁber/ﬁller in raw form cannot be directly used as reinforcement for brake pad
application. So some mechanical and chemical modiﬁcations are necessary before
using them in brake pad fabrication. Here are certain modiﬁcations are presented for
organic ﬁber/ﬁller based upon the literature survey.

17.3.1 Seashell

Seashells were collected and suspended in a solution of caustic soda for few hours
and cleaned by using dried cloths. After that, seashells were washed with water and
dried in hot air oven at a temperature of 150 °C. The dried seashell was grinded into
powder form using a pestle and mortar and was thereafter sieved using sieve size
<125 µm aperture (Abutu et al. 2018).

17.3.2 Periwinkle Shell

The periwinkle shell was sun dried followed by oven dried (150 °C for ﬁve hours).
After the moisture was completely removed, it was transferred into Denver cone
crusher and reduced into the size of 3–4 mm. Further, this shell was charged into roll
crusher to reduce the size in the range of 1–2 mm. Then the periwinkle shell was ball
milled for two hours and then the Periwinkle shell sieve sizes of ≤125 µm apertures
were mixed with 35 wt% of phenolic resin (Amaren et al. 2013).

17.3.3 Palm Kernel Fiber

Palm kernel ﬁbers, ﬁrst suspended in a solution of caustic soda for a day to remove
the residue of red oil left after extraction and then washed with water to eliminate the
caustic soda and sun dried for one week. The dried ﬁber was converted into powder
form by applying a hammer mill and then sieved using sieve size of greater than or
equal to 100 µm aperture (Ikpambese et al. 2016).

17.3.4 Banana Peels

The sun dried banana peels was converted into powder form by using a ball mill
with the rotation of 250 rpm and further, it was converted into banana peel ash by

332

S. Kumar et al.

Fig. 17.1 The images of raw seashell (a), Periwinkle shell (b), Palm kernel ﬁber (c), banana peel
un-carbonized (d), and Banana peel carbonized (e)

applying the powder in a graphite crucible and ﬁred in electric resistance furnace at
temperature of 1200 °C (Idris et al. 2015).

17.3.5 Sisal Fibers

Sisal ﬁbers was ﬁrst dipped into sodium hydroxide solution-ammonia base liquor
with consistence of 10 wt% and then applied for brake composites (Ma et al. 2014).
The formulation of brake pad by Lapinous ﬁbers (Singh and Patnaik 2015) and basalt
ﬁber (Singha 2012) can be done without any chemical treatment. The images of raw
organic ﬁber/ﬁller used in brake pads is depicted in Fig. 17.1.

17.4 Preparation and Characterization of the Brake Pad

Composites

After the mechanical and chemical treatment, the ﬁnal product is prepared with the
ingredients of binder, ﬁller, and frictional additives etc. in different formulations.
Some of the formulations and the characterizations of brake pad based on organic
ﬁbers and organic ﬁller are discussed below.

17 Asbestos Free Braking Pads by Using Organic Fiber Based …

333

17.4.1 Organic Fibers

17.4.1.1 Palm Kernel Fiber

Ikpambese et al. (2016) reinforced the Palm kernel ﬁber into brake material sample
as depicted in Fig. 17.2. Each raw material was mixed by using a blender to obtain
a homogeneous mixture. Then, the mixtures were compacted by pressing at 100 kN
load for two minutes at room temperature. Further the brake pads were cured at 250 °C
for 90 min. The mechanical, physical, and morphological properties were investi-
gated. In the prepared brake pad containing 10 wt% palm waste, 40% epoxy resin,
6 wt% Al2O3, 15 wt% calcium, and 29 wt% graphite gave better brake properties
among all the fabricated specimens. Pujari and Srikiran (2019) developed an asbestos
free brake pad by using palm kernel as a ﬁber with phenolic resin as a binder. They
varied the palm kernel ﬁber content from 10 to 50 wt% with an interval of 10 wt%
with inclusion of Nile rose (0–15 wt%), and wheat (0–10 wt%). They revealed that
at 350 rpm (50 wt%), 450 rpm (10 wt%), and 550 rpm (10 wt%) exhibited better
wear resistance property and therefore it can be concluded that palm kernel ﬁber can
replace asbestos in reinforcing friction material.

17.4.1.2 Banana Peel Fiber

Idris et al. (2015) fabricated the brake pad by varying the phenolic resin (5–30 wt%)
at an interval of 5 wt% in the banana peels particles. The authors prepared two types
of samples by using the un-carbonized and carbonized banana peels particles. To
achieve a homogeneous mixture, the formulation was properly mixed in mixer and

Fig. 17.2 Constituents of the brake pad composites using palm kernel ﬁber

334

Table 17.1 Comparisons of
properties of asbestos
based/pineapple leaf based
brake pad (Swamidoss and
Prashanth 2015)

Properties

Brake pad
(asbestos)

Compressive
Strength (N/mm2)
Average wear
(mg/m)

Brinell hardness
(HB)

Thickness swell in
Water (%)

111

3.85

101

0.30

S. Kumar et al.

Pineapple leaf
ﬁber based brake
pad

107.25

4.09

100.88

2.75

applied the hot press at temperature of 150 °C under 9.81 × 107 pressure for 2 min.
Further, the brake pad sample was cured in oven for 8 h. This work focused on
physical, mechanical, wear, and morphological behavior of the new brake pad and
observed that the properties such as compressive strength, hardness, and speciﬁc
gravity increased with increase in the ﬁller content. Bashir et al. (2015) fabricated
brake pad sample with 13 ingredients with incorporation of banana peel and phenolic
resin as binder. During the experiment, the phenolic resin and banana peel were
varied and remaining eleven constituents were ﬁxed. The friction and wear property
of newly fabricated brake pad was evaluated by using reciprocating friction monitor.
They revealed that the coefﬁcient of friction was increased at elevated temperature
and the wear characteristic indicated that binding ability of phenolic based brake pad
can be effectively increased by the addition of banana peel powder.

17.4.1.3 Pineapple Leaf

Swamidoss and Prashanth (2015) fabricated four different combinations (such as
S1, S2, and S3) and prepared by varying pineapple ﬁbre weight percent from 10, 20,
and 30 wt% along with binder. The combination of pineapple leaf ﬁbre with epoxy
resin is applied into mould and kept dried in a hot platen temperature of 140 °C for
2 min. After removing the brake pad from hot platen, the brake pad was cured in
oven at 120 °C of temperature for 8 h. The comparison of properties of commercial
and pineapple leaf based brake pads is shown in Table 17.1 and the results show that
the natural ﬁber like pineapple leaf ﬁber can effectively replace the asbestos brake
pad which is harmful to human health.

17.4.1.4 Bamboo and Coconut Fiber

Sutikno et al. (2018) fabricated three composition of Bamboo ﬁber/coconut ﬁber
reinforced brake pad material which consisted of (i) 29% bamboo/coconut, 40%
epoxy, 20% Al2O3, and 11% MgO (ii) 29% bamboo/coconut, 40% epoxy, 25%

17 Asbestos Free Braking Pads by Using Organic Fiber Based …

335

Al2O3, and 6% MgO; (iii) 29% bamboo/coconut, 40% epoxy, 30% Al2O3, and 1%
MgO. They revealed that bamboo/coconut ﬁber reinforced brake pad had the hardness
of 37.14 HRB/44.10 HRB, temperature resistance 251.53 °C/250.56 °C, wear rate
0.0323 mm3/N mm/0.242 mm3/N mm, and FC 0.454/0.46. The hardness of both
fabricated composites had lower value than commercial brake pad whereas FC and
wear rate were similar to commercial one. The mixture of bamboo, aluminum powder,
and glass ﬁber in polyester matrix gave higher hardness (14.47 BHN) as compared
to existing brake pad (13.7 BHN) (Purboputro et al. 2018). Thus, the coconut ﬁber
can be used as reinforcing material for brake pads application especially for small
and medium vehicle (Pinca-Bretotean et al. 2018).

Cr˘aciun et al. (2016) investigated the hardness and density properties of brake pad
product manufactured with coconut ﬁber as an alternative ﬁller material. The ﬁber
content was used with different weight percentages 0–15 wt% and phenolic resin was
used as binder. The specimens were prepared by using powder metallurgy technique.
Results showed that the highest hardness attained at 5 wt% ﬁber content and coconut
ﬁbers had emerged as a potential reinforcing agent for automotive braking system
components. Abutu et al. (2019) developed a non-asbestos brake pad by using coconut
shell as ﬁller material and epoxy resin as binder. They prepared a brake pad with
different percentage of constituents; 35% binder, 58% coconut shell, 8% abrasive,
and friction modiﬁer with 5%. The comparison of mechanical and wear properties
of commercial brake pad and coconut shell reinforced brake pad revealed that the
coconut reinforced exhibited better tensile, hardness and wear properties whereas
commercial brake pad revealed better bending, compressive, and impact strength.

17.4.1.5 Flax and Basalt Fiber

Ilanko and Vijayaraghavan (2016) prepared three combinations of brake pad mate-
rials by using basalt, ﬂax, and their hybrid as reinforcing agent in phenolic. The
ingredients used in this investigation are shown in Fig. 17.3. All these constituents
were blended by mechanical stirrer for 2 min. After that, the mixture was poured
into a cast iron die and a vertical load (10 MPa) was applied at 180 °C in diffu-
sion bonding machine for 10 min. Further, post treatment was applied in an oven
for 4 h at 180 °C. They revealed that wear rate of basalt ﬁber reinforced material
was decreased with increase in the sliding velocity which was attributed to the wear
debris of basalt ﬁber acting as protective barrier. Atmika et al (2016) focused on the
wear behavior of an automotive brake pad with basalt powder. The three combina-
tions of constituents with and without sodium hydroxide treatment were: 30%/70%,
60%/40%, and 80%/20%. The result showed that the wear rate of the composites
was increased by 18.75% with 5% sodium hydroxide and proposed the basalt ﬁber
as substitute of asbestos because of its environmental friendly nature. The FC of
composites was found to be stabilized by reinforcing 5.6 vol% of ﬂax ﬁber and also
the wear resistance at higher temperature (Fu et al. 2012).

336

S. Kumar et al.

Fig. 17.3 Ingredients of the brake pads using basalt ﬁber

17.4.2 Organic Fillers

17.4.2.1 Cocoa Beans Shell Filler

Olabisi et al. (2016) formulated a brake pad by cocoa beans shell as shown in
Fig. 17.4a, b. The test specimens were fabricated by powder metallurgy method.
All ingredients were mixed properly into a container for 15 min to obtain a homo-
geneous mixture. The epoxy and homogeneous mixture paste was poured into the
mould cavity and allowed to cure. Then, they were left in adverse environment for

Fig. 17.4 The ingredients (a) and brake pads sample (b) using Cocoa beans shells (Olabisi et al.
2016)

17 Asbestos Free Braking Pads by Using Organic Fiber Based …

337

21 days in order to allow them to obtain full strength before carrying out mechan-
ical test. They prepared three samples of brake pads in their investigation by three
different weight percentages (21, 26, and 21%). The results showed that newly devel-
oped specimens had a density of 1.01 and 1.37 g/cm3 while the commercial brake
pad (CBP) density was 3.36 g/cm3; the oil absorption was between 0.28 and 0.74%
while the CBP were 0.033%; the wear rate under dry sand abrasion test was 0.72 and
3.93 (g/m) and the CBP wear rate was 0.19 g/min; and the hardness was between
10.67 and 12.27 while the CBP was 2.53. The evaluated properties were lower than
CBP due to its higher wear rate, but it was preferable to be used as substitute for CBP
because of its eco-friendly nature and less health hazard as compared to the asbestos
brake pad.

17.4.2.2 Periwinkle Shell Filler

Amaren et al. (2013) fabricated the phenolic based specimens with different particle
sizes of 125, 250, 355, 500, and 710 µm. They investigated the wear characteristic
of automotive brake pad material with periwinkle shell. The result showed that wear
rate increased with increase in the speed and load with the optimum result obtained
at 125 µm periwinkle size, thus, the smaller size periwinkle shell performed better
as ﬁller material in phenolic resin and can be effectively used as a replacement of
asbestos in braking system especially for brake pads.

17.4.2.3 Hazelnut and Walnut Shell Filler

Öktem et al. (2015) fabricated a new composites brake pad by using hazelnut/walnut
shell as a ﬁller material and phenolic as a binder. They analyzed the mechani-
cal and physical properties of the developed brake pad. It was observed that the
3.5 wt%/7 wt% of hazelnut and walnut imparted optimum value of hardness and
studies showed that the hazelnut and walnut shell based composite brake pad was
eco-friendly and therefore proposed this composition as an alternative of asbestos
in braking system component. Akıncıo˘glu et al. (2018) carried out the physico-
mechanical and wear properties of hazelnut and boron oxide reinforced eco-friendly
brake pad material. The composition of friction material consisted of the hazelnut
was (7 wt%) and boron oxides (6 wt%). Physio-mechanical and wear tests were
conducted to evaluate the properties (density, hardness, water absorption, shear test-
ing, and friction-wear test) of the material. The results showed that the hardness,
water absorption, compressibility ratio, and coefﬁcient of friction of boron oxide
and hazelnut incorporation material were higher than the commercial brake pad. The
properties of eco-brake pads using different organic ﬁbers/ﬁller and asbestos brake
pads is illustrated in Table 17.2.

338

S. Kumar et al.

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
u
d
n
o
c

)

K
m
W

/

(

8
3
3
.
0
–
9
3
2
.
0

9
3
5
.
0

)
a
P
M

(

8
8
6
1

.

0
7

.

a
P
M
3
0
2
1

.

1
0
1

)
2

m
m
N

/

(

h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s

0
1
1

.

2
3
2

%
0
3
0

.

%
8
2
0

.

0
9
8
.
1

0
1
0
.
1

l
a
m
r
e
h
T

h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s

e
l
i
s
n
e
T

s
e
u
l
a
v

s
s
e
n
d
r
a
H

e
v
i
s
s
e
r
p
m
o
C

s
l
l
e
w
s

s
s
e
n
k
c
i
h
T

y
t
i
v
a
r
g

c
ﬁ
i
c
e
p
S

l
i
o
A
E
S
n
i

)
3

m
c
/
g
(

e
t
a
r

r
a
e

W

)

m
/
g
m

(

e
k
a
r
b

f
o

s
e
p
y
T

d
a
p

d
a
p

e
k
a
r
b

d
e
s
u
l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
c

h
t
i

w
d
a
p

e
k
a
r
b

d
e
s
a
b
r
e
b
ﬁ
/
r
e
l
l

ﬁ
c
i
n
a
g
r
o

t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d

f
o

s
e
i
t
r
e
p
o
r
p

f
o

s
n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
C

.

2
7
1
e
l
b
a
T

2
0
2
.
1

)

D
e
r
o
h
s
(

2
9

%
0
6
0

.

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

0
2
1
6

.

B
R
H
6
1
7

.

%
2
1
1

.

B
R
H
7
6
1
1

.

7
4
1

%
7
3
0

.

1
0
.
1

B
R
H
0
1

7
−

0
1
×
6
2
0

.

s
/
3

m

2
.
1

1
.
2

–

–

–

0
0
8
.
3

4
3
9
.
3

–

–

7
6
.
4

8
9
.
3

d
e
s
a
b

s
o
t
s
e
b
s
A

s
n
a
e
b

a
o
c
o
C

.
l
a

t
e

i
s
i
b
a
l
O

(

)
6
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e
m
e
t
k
Ö

(

t
u
n
l
e
z
a
H

)
5
1
0
2

l
l
e
h
s

e
l
k
n
i
w

i
r
e
P

.
l
a

t
e

n
e
r
a
m
A

(

)
3
1
0
2

l
e
e
p

a
n
a
n
a
B

d
e
z
i
n
o
b
r
a
C

.
l
a

t
e

s
i
r
d
I
(

)
5
1
0
2

e
s
e
b
m
a
p
k
I
(

r
e
b
ﬁ

l
e
n
r
e
k
m
l
a
P

)
6
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

17 Asbestos Free Braking Pads by Using Organic Fiber Based …

339

17.5 Friction, Wear Behavior, and Mechanisms of Organic

Fiber Reinforced Brake Friction Materials

It is well known the friction and wear properties of friction materials are strongly
inﬂuenced by braking and surrounding conditions (Eriksson et al. 2001). Further-
more, it was observed that friction and wear behavior of brake friction material
depend on the factors of (i) material characteristics such as chemical, physical, and
mechanical properties of brake pad materials etc. (ii) braking conditions like initial
braking speed, temperature rise in braking, and breaking pressure. (iii) Surrounding
conditions such as humidity, temperature, and airﬂow etc. (iv) Structural parameters
like size, contact modality, and shape etc. Among all these conditions, the braking
condition is considered as the most valuable external factor and various researchers
focused their studies on these inﬂuential factors of braking pressure, initial temper-
ature, and braking speed (Krenkel and Berndt 2005). Therefore, the impact of these
factors on the friction and wear behavior of organic friction material are discussed
in this context.

In general, the friction coefﬁcient increases with the increase in the temperature
and after attaining a certain temperature, the FC suddenly falls off whereas wear rate
increases with increase in the temperature. Yun et al. (2011) focused the research
on the inﬂuence of temperature on the friction and wear behavior of organic brake
friction composites with silica particle as abrasive and revealed that the friction and
wear behaviors of fabricated material had similar impact laws with temperature.
The enhancement in FC was reported with the increase in the temperature initially
but decrement started when the temperature reached to 300 °C. However, the wear
rate kept increasing with increase in temperature, which proved that the wear of
friction material was more at a higher temperature. In other investigation, Ma et al.
(2013) focused on the impact of temperature on the friction and wear behavior of
bamboo ﬁber reinforced friction material and observed that friction coefﬁcient of
bamboo friction material decreased with increase in the temperature and detected
that the friction coefﬁcient had some variation at the temperature of 250 °C. The
braking pressure affects the friction and wear through the deformation and size
of actual contact area (according to modern tribology). Kumar and Bijwe (2014)
studied the friction and wear behavior of non-asbestos-organic brake under different
braking pressures. The results showed that the FC increased ﬁrst and then fell off with
the increasing braking pressure. Öztürk et al. (2013) examined the effect of speed,
temperature, and load on friction and wear behavior of brake friction material. The
effects of speed and temperature on friction coefﬁcient and wear rate is depicted in
Figs. 17.5a, b and 17.6a, b. They revealed that the FC of material decreased with
increase in the sliding speed whereas the wear rate increased with increase in the
speed. Further, the optimum value of FC was attained at 300 °C and then decreased
above this temperature. They observed that at higher temperature the friction property
was intensely affected by softening and thermal degradation of the resin.

340

S. Kumar et al.

Fig. 17.5 a and b Inﬂuence of sliding speed on FC and wear rate of friction brake pad material.
Copyright (2013) Taylor & Francis

Fig. 17.6 a and b Inﬂuence of temperature on FC and wear rate of friction brake pad material.
Copyright (2013) Taylor & Francis

17.6 Current Challenges and Future Research Direction

in Brake Pad Composites

The replacement of asbestos with non-hazardous materials in the production of brake
pad is receiving serious attention in the laboratory and lots of work have been done,
but these works have not been translated into commercial purpose. Thus, the design
of the organic ﬁber based friction material with other ingredients needs to be consid-
ered carefully as it is found that the asbestos free brake pads have many challenges.

17 Asbestos Free Braking Pads by Using Organic Fiber Based …

341

From this review it is observed that the organic ﬁber based brake pads have low
thermal stability as compared to commercial one, but due to much less toxicity and
environmental point of view non-asbestos brake pads have much better performance.
Again, it becomes essential to utilize these combination of organic ﬁber/ﬁller mate-
rial in different ratios to further study their inﬂuence on physico-mechanical and
tribological behaviour of brake pads.

17.7 Conclusion

In this review, the application of non-hazardous (organic ﬁber/ﬁller) reinforcement
material as possible substitute for asbestos has been focused. The physico-mechanical
and tribological properties of these brake pads compared favorably with the presently
used brake pad. The organic ﬁber might be efﬁciently used as a substitute for asbestos
in brake pad fabrication when suitable with some other constituents to ﬁt a better
performance of brake pad. Further, regarding their low thermal stability, they should
be wisely considered.