Piston function, requirements,  

and types

1

1.1  Function of the piston

1.1.1  The piston as an element of power transmission

In the cylinder of an engine, the energy bound up in the fuel is converted into heat and pres-

sure  during  the  expansion  stroke.  The  heat  and  pressure  values  increase  greatly  within  a 

short period of time. The piston, as the moving part of the combustion chamber, has the task 

of converting part of this released energy into mechanical work.

The basic structure of the piston is a hollow cylinder, closed on one side, with the segments 
piston crown with ring belt, piston pin boss, and skirt; Figure 1.1. The piston crown transfers 
the compression forces resulting from the combustion of the fuel-air mixture via the piston 

pin boss, the piston pin, and the connecting rod, to the crankshaft.

Figure  1.1:  Gasoline  engine  pistons  for  passenger 
cars

Figure 1.2: Forces on the piston

The gas pressure against the piston crown and the oscillating inertial forces, referred to in the 

following as the inertia force, of the piston and the connecting rod constitute the piston force 
FK; Figure 1.2. As a result of the redirection of the piston force in the direction of the connect-
ing rod (rod force FST), an additional component arises—following the force parallelogram—, 

namely the lateral force FS, also known as the normal force. This force presses the piston 
Piston function, requirements, and types

Figure 1.3: 
Force curves

skirt against the cylinder bore. During an operating cycle, the lateral force changes direc-

tion several times, which presses the piston from one side of the cylinder bore to the other. 
Figure 1.3 shows the piston force and lateral force curves as a function of the crank angle.

1.1.2  Sealing and heat dissipation

As a moving and power-transmitting component, the piston, together with the piston rings, 

must  reliably  seal  the  combustion  chamber  against  gas  passage  and  the  penetration  of 

lubricating  oil  in  all  load  cases.  A  prerequisite  is  that  the  materials,  geometries,  and  sur-

faces are carefully matched. Long piston service life requires good wear behavior, which in 

turn requires that the running partners are sufﬁciently supplied with lubricating oil. The oil-

retaining capacity of the components due to their surface structure, particularly that of the 

cylinder, plays a decisive role. This is particularly challenging near the dead center points of 

the piston, because the hydrodynamic lubricating ﬁlm is less signiﬁcant here and mixed fric-

tion predominates. Average sliding speeds are typically 10 to 12 m/s.

In four-stroke engines, the piston crown also supports the mixture formation. For this pur-

pose,  it  has  a  partially  jagged  shape,  with  exposed  surfaces  (such  as  the  bowl  rim)  that 

1.2  Requirements on the piston

3

absorb heat and reduce the load carrying capacity of the component. In two-stroke engines 

with outlet ports, the piston also acts as a sliding valve and is thermally highly loaded as a 

result of the combustion gases ﬂowing out at high speed. 

In order for the piston to be able to withstand the brieﬂy occurring, extreme combustion tem-

peratures, it must dissipate the heat sufﬁciently; Chapter 5.6. The heat in the cylinders is pri-

marily dissipated by the piston rings, but also by the piston skirt. The inner contour transfers 

heat to the air in the housing and to the oil. Additional oil can be applied from underneath to 
the piston for improved cooling; Chapter 5.

1.1.3  Variety of tasks

The most important tasks that the piston must fulﬁll are

■  transmission of power from and to the working gas;

■  variable bounding of the working chamber ( cylinder);
■  sealing off the working chamber;

■  linear guiding of the conrod (trunk piston engines);

■  heat dissipation;

■  support of gas exchange by air intake and exhaust (four-stroke engines);

■  support  of  mixture  formation  (by  means  of  suitable  shape  of  the  piston  surface  on  the 

combustion chamber side);

■  controlling gas exchange (in two-stroke engines);

■  guiding the sealing elements (piston rings);

■  guiding the conrod in longitudinal direction of the crankshaft (for top-guided conrods).

As the speciﬁc engine output increases, so do the requirements on the piston.

1.2  Requirements on the piston

Fulﬁlling different tasks such as

■  adaptability to operating conditions;

■  seizure resistance and simultaneous running smoothness;

■  low weight with sufﬁcient shape stability;

■  low oil consumption;

■  low pollutant emissions values; and 

■  lowest possible friction losses

result in partly contradictory requirements, in terms of both design and material. These cri-

teria must be carefully coordinated for each engine type. The optimal solution can therefore 

be quite different for each individual case.

4

1  Piston function, requirements, and types

Table 1.1: Operating conditions and solution approaches for piston design and materials

Operating conditions

Requirements on the 
piston

Solution  
Design

Solution  
Material

High static and 
dynamic strength, even 
at high temperatures

Sufficient wall 
thickness, shape-
stable design, con-
sistent “force flow” 
and “heat flow”

Various AlSi cast-
ing alloys, warm-
aged (T5) or age-
hardened (T6), cast 
(partly with fiber 
reinforcement), or 
forged; forged steel

Mechanical load

a) Piston crown/combustion 

bowl  
Max. gas pressure, two-
stroke gasoline engine:  
3.5–8.0 MPa

  Max. gas pressure, four-
stroke gasoline engine: 
Naturally aspirated engine: 
6.0–9.0 MPa 
Turbo: 9.0–13.0 MPa

 
 
 
 
 

  Max. gas pressure, diesel 

engine:  
Naturally aspirated engine: 
8.0–10.0 MPa 
Turbo: 14.0–24.0 MPa

b) Piston skirt 

Lateral force: approx. 10% of 
the max. gas force

c) Piston pin boss 

Permissible contact pres-
sure temperature-dependent

Temperatures:

gas temperatures in the com-
bustion chamber over 2,300°C, 
exhaust gas up to 1,050°C 

Piston crown/bowl rim,  
200–400°C,  
for ferrous materials  
350–500°C

Piston pin boss: 150–260°C

Piston skirt: 120–180°C

Acceleration of piston and 
connecting rod at high rpm: 
at times much higher than 
25,000 m/s2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High contact pressure 
in the pin bores; low 
plastic deformation

Strength must also 
be retained at high 
temperature. Charac-
teristics: strength at 
elevated temperatures, 
fatigue resistance, high 
thermal conductivity, 
scale resistance (steel)

Low mass, resulting in 
small inertia forces and 
inertia torques

Sliding friction in the ring 
grooves, on the skirt, in the pin 
bearings; at times poor lubrica-
tion conditions

Low frictional resis-
tance, high wear resis-
tance (affects service 
life), low seizing ten-
dency

Contact alteration from one 
side of the cylinder to the other 
(primarily in the area of the top 
dead center)

Low noise level, moder-
ate “piston tipping” in 
cold or warm engine, 
low impulse loading

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pin bore bushing

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specialty brass or 
bronze bushings

Sufficient heat-flow 
cross sections, 
cooling galleries

As above

Lightweight con-
struction with 
ultrahigh material 
utilization

Sufficiently large 
sliding surfaces, 
even pressure 
distribution; hydro-
dynamic piston 
profiles in the skirt 
area; groove rein-
forcement

Low running 
clearance, elastic 
skirt design with 
optimized piston 
profile, piston pin 
offset

AlSi alloy, forged

AlSi alloys, tin-
plated, graphited, 
coated skirt, groove 
protection with 
cast-in ring carrier 
or hard anodizing

Low thermal 
expansion Eutectic 
or hypereutectic 
AlSi alloys

1.2  Requirements on the piston

5

The operating conditions of the piston and the resulting design and material requirements 
are summarized in Table 1.1.

1.2.1  Gas force

The piston is subjected to an equilibrium of gas, inertia, and supporting forces. The support-

ing forces are the resultant of the conrod and lateral forces. The maximum gas force in the 
expansion stroke has critical signiﬁcance for the mechanical loads. The maximum gas forces 

that occur depending on the combustion process (gasoline, diesel, two-stroke, four-stroke) 
and charge intake (naturally aspirated/turbocharger) are shown in Table 1.1. At an engine 
speed of 6,000 rpm and a gas force resulting from a peak cylinder pressure of 90 bar in the 

expansion stroke, each piston (D = 90 mm) of a gasoline engine is subjected to a load of 

about 6 t, 50 times a second!

In addition to the maximum gas force, the rate of pressure increase also affects the stress on 

the piston. The values for diesel engines are about 6 to 12 bar/1 CAD (crank angle degree), 

but can be signiﬁcantly higher in case of combustion faults. The rates of pressure increase in 

gasoline engines are in the range of 3 to 6 bar/1 CAD. Especially if unsuitable fuels are used 

(octane number too low), combustion faults can occur under high load, known as “knock-

ing.” Pressure increase rates of up to 30 bar/1 CAD are possible. Depending on the knocking 

intensity and period of operation, it can lead to signiﬁcant damage to the piston and thus 

failure of the engine. As a prevention method, modern gasoline engines are equipped with 

knock control systems.

1.2.2  Temperatures

The temperature of the piston and cylinder is an important parameter for operational safety 

and service life. The peak temperatures of the working gas, even if present only for a short 

time,  can  reach  levels  of  over  2,300°C.  The  exhaust  gas  temperatures  range  from  600  to 

850°C for diesel engines, and 800 to 1,050°C for gasoline engines.

The  temperature  of  the  fresh  intake  charge  (air  or  mixture)  can  exceed  200°C  for  turbo-

charged engines. Charge air cooling reduces this temperature level to 40–60°C, which in 

turn lowers the component temperatures and improves ﬁlling of the combustion chamber.

As a result of their thermal inertia, the piston and the other parts in the combustion chamber 

do not exactly follow the cyclic temperature ﬂuctuations of the working gas. The amplitude 

of these temperature ﬂuctuations at the bowl rim of an aluminum diesel engine piston, for 

example, is only about 50 K, and this drops off quickly toward the interior. The piston crown, 

which is exposed to the hot combustion gases, absorbs different amounts of heat, depend-

ing  on  the  operating  point  (rpm,  torque).  For  non-oil-cooled  pistons,  the  heat  is  primarily 
conducted to the cylinder wall by the compression rings, and to a much lesser degree, by 

6

1  Piston function, requirements, and types

the piston skirt. For cooled pistons, in contrast, the engine oil carries off a large portion of the 

accumulating heat; Chapter 7.2.

Heat ﬂows that lead to characteristic temperature ﬁelds result from the material cross sec-

tions that are determined by the design. Typical temperature distributions for gasoline and 
diesel engine pistons are shown in Figures 1.4 and 1.5.

Figure 1.4:  
Temperature distribution in 
a gasoline engine piston

Figure 1.5:  
Temperature distribution in 
a diesel engine piston with 
cooling gallery

1.2  Requirements on the piston

7

The temperature levels and distributions in the piston essentially depend on the following 

■  Temperature of the incoming fresh charge (depending on turbocharging and charge air 

parameters:

■  Operating process (gasoline/diesel)

■  Operating principle (four-stroke/two-stroke)

■  Combustion process (direct/indirect injection)

cooling)

■  Operating point of the engine (speed, torque)

■  Engine cooling (water/air)

type of piston, piston material)

■  Piston cooling (yes/no)

■  Design of the piston and cylinder head (location and number of gas channels and valves, 

■  Intensity of cooling (spray jet cooling, cooling gallery, cooling gallery location, etc.)

The strength properties of the piston materials, particularly of light alloys, are very dependent 

on the temperature. The level and distribution of temperatures in the piston essentially deter-

mine the mechanical stress that it can withstand. High thermal loads cause a drastic reduc-

tion in the fatigue resistance of the piston material. The critical locations for diesel engines 

with direct injection are the boss zenith and the bowl rim; for gasoline engines, the transition 

area from the boss connection to the piston crown and to the skirt.

The  temperatures  in  the  top  ring  groove  are  also  signiﬁcant  in  terms  of  oil  carbonization. 

If certain limit values are exceeded, the piston rings tend to “lock up” (carbonization) as a 

result  of  residue  buildup  in  the  piston  ring  groove,  which  leads  to  an  impairment  of  their 

functionality. In addition to the maximum temperatures, the piston temperatures are signiﬁ-

cantly dependent on the engine operating conditions (such as speed, brake mean effective 
pressure, ignition angle, injection quantity). Table 7.2 shows typical values for passenger car 
gasoline and diesel engines in the area of the top ring groove.

1.2.3  Piston mass

The piston, equipped with piston rings, piston pin, and circlips, together with the oscillating 

connecting rod portion, constitute the oscillating mass. Depending on the engine type, free 

inertia forces and/or inertia torques are thus generated that can no longer be compensated 

at times, or that require extreme efforts to do so. This characteristic gives rise to the desire to 

keep the oscillating masses as low as possible, particularly in high-speed engines. The piston 

and the piston pin account for the greatest proportion of the oscillating masses. Any weight 

reduction undertaking must therefore start with these components.

About 80% of the piston mass is located in the area from the center of the piston pin to the 

upper edge of the crown. The remaining 20% is in the area from the center of the piston pin 

to the end of the skirt. The determination of the compression height KH is therefore of great 
signiﬁcance, because it predetermines about 80% of the piston mass.

8

1  Piston function, requirements, and types

For pistons of gasoline engines with direct injection, the piston crown can be used to support 

mixture formation and can thus be shaped accordingly. These pistons are taller and heavier, 

which means the center of gravity is shifted upward.

Piston mass mK can best be compared (without piston rings and piston pin) when related 
to  the  comparative  volume  D3,  as  shown  in  Figure  1.6.  The  compression  height,  how-
ever, must always be taken into consideration. Mass ﬁgures (“X factors”) for proven piston 
designs mK/D3 are shown in Table 1.2.

Figure 1.6: 
Piston mass mK (without 
piston rings and piston pin) 
for passenger car engines, 
as a function of the piston 
diameter

Table 1.2: Mass figures for passenger car pistons <100 mm in diameter, made of aluminum base alloys

Operating principle

Mass figure mK/D3 [g/cm3]

Two-stroke gasoline engine with port fuel injection

Four-stroke gasoline engine with port fuel injection

Four-stroke gasoline engine with direct injection

Four-stroke diesel engine

0.50–0.70

0.40–0.60

0.45–0.65

0.90–1.10

1.2.4  Friction power loss and wear

In times of increasing environmental awareness, in connection with climate change and the 
CO2 emissions legislation put in place to tackle it, the subject of reducing friction power loss 
in the engine is increasingly in focus. As a moving element, the piston can make a signiﬁcant 

contribution here, as described below. 

Installation clearance:
One major parameter that inﬂuences piston friction is the Installation clearance. An appropri-

ate installation clearance can signiﬁcantly reduce the typical thermal warping between piston 

1.2  Requirements on the piston

9

and cylinder in warm operating conditions. Excess clearance is counterproductive, however, 

because it can lead to greater secondary motion and wedging of the piston in the cylinder 

(the “drawer effect”). Under these circumstances, the hydrodynamic lubricating ﬁlm can be 

penetrated and mixed friction can arise. Too large an installation clearance can also have a 

negative acoustic effect. The lower thermal expansion coefﬁcients of steel pistons in com-

parison with aluminum pistons can result in frictional advantages.

Piston proﬁle (cf. Chapter 2.2):
For low friction power loss values, the local tapering of the piston proﬁle toward the piston 

axis  (mantle  curve  decrease  values)  and  the  ovality  are  designed  in  such  a  way  that  the 

contact pressures in the desired support area are uniform. As a rule, this can limit the distur-

bance of the hydrodynamic lubrication behavior by the change in the direction of movement 

of the piston to the points where the piston reverses direction (top and bottom dead center). 
This is where mixed friction conditions arise in the support area. Figure 1.7 shows, as an 
example, the lubricant gap between the piston and cylinder for this case. 

Figure 1.7:  
Lubricant gap between 
piston and cylinder

Surface roughness: 
Besides the skirt proﬁle, the surface of the skirt running surface also has a great inﬂuence 

on  the  sliding  behavior  of  the  piston.  Excessive  skirt  roughness  increases  friction  power 

losses. In addition to friction forces on the piston skirt, the lubrication of the skirt also plays a 

10

1  Piston function, requirements, and types

decisive role in the proper functioning of the piston in the cylinder. Certain minimum surface 

roughness values of the piston skirt and the honed cylinder surface

■  enhance running-in characteristics;

■  prevent abrasive wear;

the cylinder wall; and

■  contribute to the formation of a hydrodynamic lubricating ﬁlm between the piston skirt and 

■  prevent the piston from seizing, i.e., local fusing between the piston and the cylinder due 

to a lack of clearance or lubricating oil.

If the skirt roughness is too great, friction power losses are increased, while if the skirt rough-

ness is too low, then the piston may not run in as well. A good compromise between these 
requirements yields piston skirt surface roughness levels in the range Ra = 1.5–5 μm. 

Protective coatings for the running surface:
Protective coatings for the running surface, such as MAHLE GRAFAL® or EvoGlide, have a 
positive effect on friction losses in the boundary lubrication conditions, increase wear resis-

tance, and improve resistance to seizing.

1.2.5  Blow-by

One of the primary functions of the piston and the piston rings is to seal off the pressurized 

combustion chamber from the crankcase. During the motion sequence, combustion gases 

can escape between piston, cylinder, and piston rings and enter the crankcase (blow-by). In 

addition to the resulting energy loss, escaping leakage gas also poses a risk to the piston and 

piston ring lubrication due to contamination and displacement of the lubricating ﬁlm, and 

due to oil carbonization as a result of excessive temperatures at the locations in contact with 

the combustion gases. Increased blow-by values also require greater crankcase ventilation.

Sealing against gas penetration is mainly accomplished by the ﬁrst piston ring, which is a 

compression ring. For naturally aspirated engines, the quantity of blow-by is a maximum of 

1%; for turbocharged engines, it is a maximum of 1.5% of the theoretical air intake volume.

1.3  Piston types

The various operating principles of combustion engines give rise to a wide variety of engine 
types. Each engine type requires its  own  piston  variant,  characterized  by  its  construction, 

shape, dimensions, and material.

The most signiﬁcant piston types in engine design are described in the following. There are 

also new development paths, such as pistons for very low-proﬁle engines, or pistons made 

of composite materials with local reinforcement elements.

1.3  Piston types

11

1.3.1  Pistons for four-stroke gasoline engines

Modern gasoline engines employ lightweight designs with symmetrical or asymmetrical skirt 

proﬁles and potentially different wall thicknesses for the thrust and antithrust sides. These 

piston types are characterized by low weight and particular ﬂexibility in the central and lower 

skirt areas.

1.3.1.1  Controlled-expansion pistons

Controlled-expansion pistons are pistons with struts that control thermal expansion. They 
are installed in gray cast iron crankcases. The main target of controlled-expansion piston 
designs, and many inventions in this ﬁeld, was and still is to reduce the relatively large dif-

ferences  in  thermal  expansion  between  the  gray  cast  iron  crankcase  and  the  aluminum 

piston. The known solutions range from Invar strip pistons to autothermic or Autothermatik 

Because of various adverse properties—notch effects resulting from cast-in struts, increased 

piston  mass,  and  higher  cost—controlled-expansion  pistons  have  faded  more  and  more 

into the background. For completeness’ sake, however, older piston types are addressed 

pistons.

brieﬂy.

Autothermic pistons
Autothermic pistons, Figure 1.8, are slotted at the transition from the piston crown to the 
skirt, at the height of the oil ring groove. They are characterized by their particularly quiet 

running behavior. The unalloyed steel struts cast in between the skirt and the piston pin boss, 

together  with  the  light  alloy  that  surrounds  them,  form  control  elements.  They  reduce  the 

thermal expansion of the skirt in the direction that is critical for the guiding of the piston in the 

cylinder. On account of their relatively low load carrying capacity (slits), however, autothermic 

pistons are no longer up to date.

Figure 1.8:  
Autothermic piston

12

1  Piston function, requirements, and types

Figure 1.9:  
Autothermatik pistons

Autothermatik pistons
Autothermatik pistons, Figure 1.9, operate according to the same control principle as auto-
thermic pistons. In the case of Autothermatik pistons, however, the transition from the crown 

to  the  skirt  is  not  slotted.  The  transition  cross  sections  are  dimensioned  such  that  they 

barely constrain the heat ﬂow from the piston crown to the skirt and, on the other hand, the 

effectiveness of the steel struts remains unaffected by the connection of the skirt to the rigid 

crown. This piston design thus combines the high strength of the nonslotted piston with the 

advantages of the strut design.

1.3.1.2  Box-type pistons

Compared with controlled-expansion pistons, this piston type, Figure 1.10, is characterized 
by its reduced mass, optimized support, and box-like, often slightly oval skirt design. The 

box-type  piston  is  compatible  with  both  aluminum  and  gray  cast  iron  crankcases.  With  a 

ﬂexible skirt design, the difference in thermal expansion between the gray cast iron crank-

Figure 1.10: Asymmetrical duct pistons

1.3  Piston types

13

Figure 1.11: Ring carrier piston for gasoline 
engines

Figure 1.12: Piston with cooling gallery for 
gasoline engines

case and the aluminum piston can be compensated very well in the elastic range. If the box 

width is different on the thrust and antithrust sides, the piston is referred to as an asymmetri-

cal duct piston. Box-type pistons are cast or forged.

In addition to the classical box-type piston with vertical box walls, new shapes have recently 

been  established,  with  box  walls  that  are  tapered  toward  the  top.  One  example  is  the 
EVOTEC® piston; Chapter 1.3.1.3.

A ring carrier can protect the compression ring groove in turbocharged engines with high 
peak cylinder pressures against wear and deformation; Figure 1.11.

Pistons for engines with very high speciﬁc power output ( >100 kW/L) may have a cooling 
gallery; Figure 1.12.

1.3.1.3  EVOTEC® pistons
The greatest current potential for reducing the piston mass in four-stroke gasoline engines 
is the EVOTEC® design, which is primarily used in conjunction with trapezoidal supports; 
Figure 1.13.

Figure 1.13: EVOTEC® piston

14

1  Piston function, requirements, and types

Box walls set at a steep angle allow particularly deep cast undercuts behind the ring grooves 

in the boss area, with good elasticity in the lower skirt area. The connection of the box walls 

far inside the piston crown—combined with supporting ribs in the piston window between 

the ring area and the box wall—provides excellent structural stiffness with very small cross 

sections.

Another signiﬁcant feature of this piston concept is the asymmetric design of the box walls. 

In order to accommodate the higher lateral force load on the thrust side, the spacing of the 
box walls is smaller on the thrust side. The shorter lever arm between the box wall and the 

contact area between the piston and the cylinder reduces the bending moment load. This 

allows smaller cross sections, even with extremely high lateral forces, which are preferred 

for turbocharged gasoline engines with direct injection. In order to provide the required elas-

ticity and good guiding properties, the antithrust side, which experiences signiﬁcantly lower 

loads, features greater spacing between the box walls. Careful design of the piston proﬁle 

(see Chapter 2.2) ensures uniformly low contact pressures on the thrust side, even under 

ultrahigh loads.

1.3.1.4  EVOTEC® 2 pistons
The next stage of development of the EVOTEC® piston is the EVOTEC® 2 piston; Figure 
1.14. The EVOTEC® 2 piston is characterized by the 
■  new, load-optimized shape of the skirt-to-wall joint to increase strength; and 

■  reduced ﬂoor thickness to decrease weight without compromising strength as a result of 

temperature reduction. 

The  sum  total  of  all  measures  taken  in  developing  the  MAHLE  EVOTEC®  piston  into  the 
EVOTEC® 2 is a weight reduction of about 5% at a neutral cost, as well as local increases 
in structural strength to meet the increasing requirements of future generations of engines.

Figure 1.14: EVOTEC® 2 piston

1.3  Piston types

15

Figure 1.15: Forged aluminum piston

Figure 1.16: Forged piston for Formula 1

1.3.1.5  Forged aluminum pistons

In  engines  with  very  high  power  densities—such  as  highly  loaded  turbocharged  gasoline 

engines—cast pistons reach their limits. MAHLE forged pistons are a particularly good ﬁt for 
this area of application; Figure 1.15. Their strength advantage in the temperature range of up 
to about 250°C improves the load carrying capacity for lateral forces, and increases the load 

carrying capacity of the pin bore and the fracture toughness. Forged pistons are therefore 

especially well suited for high-speed concepts and turbocharged engines. Because of the 

high ductility of the forged material, they also react more tolerantly to peak pressures that can 

arise if an engine is operated very close to the knock limit. This allows lower ring land widths, 

among  other  things,  and  therefore  lower  compression  heights.  Since  the  manufacturing 

process is very stable, the forged pistons can be designed to the limit in order to minimize 
component weight.

One disadvantage, compared with cast counterparts, is the higher product cost of the forged 

piston. Limited design ﬂexibility is another. Undercuts or inserts such as ring carriers or salt 

cores, in particular, cannot be formed.

Motorsport pistons are all special designs; Figure 1.16. The compression height KH is very 
low, and the overall piston is extremely weight-optimized. Only forged pistons are employed 

in this ﬁeld. Weight optimization and piston cooling are critical design criteria. In Formula 1, 

speciﬁc power outputs of greater than 200 kW/L and speeds of more than 19,000 rpm are 

common. The service life of the pistons matches the extreme conditions.

1.3.2  Pistons for two-stroke engines

For  pistons  of  two-stroke  engines,  Figure  1.17,  the  thermal  load  is  particularly  high  as  a 
result of the more frequent heat incidence—one expansion stroke for every revolution of the 

16

1  Piston function, requirements, and types

Figure 1.17:  
Piston and cylinder for a  
two-stroke engine

crankshaft. It also needs to close off and expose the intake, exhaust, and scavenging ports 

in the cylinder during its up-and-down motion, thus controlling the gas exchange. This leads 

to high thermal and mechanical loads.

Two-stroke  pistons  are  equipped  with  one  or  two  piston  rings,  and  their  external  design 

varies from open window-type pistons to full-skirt piston models. This depends on the shape 

of the scavenging ports (long channels or short loop-shaped scavenging passage). The pis-

tons are typically made of the hypereutectic AlSi alloy MAHLE138.

1.3.3  Pistons for diesel engines

1.3.3.1  Ring carrier pistons

Ring carrier pistons, Figure 1.18, have been in use since 1931. The ﬁrst, and at times even the 
second piston ring are guided in a ring carrier that is securely joined to the piston material 

by metallic bonding.

The ring carrier is made of an austenitic cast iron with a similar coefﬁcient of thermal expan-

sion to that of the piston material. The material is particularly resistant to frictional and impact 

wear. The top ring groove, which is the most vulnerable, and the piston ring inserted in it are 

thereby effectively protected against excessive wear. This is particularly advantageous at high 

operating temperatures and pressures, which are particularly prevalent in diesel engines. 

1.3.3.2  Cooling gallery pistons

In  order  to  cool  the  area  around  the  combustion  chamber  most  effectively,  and  thereby 

address the increased temperatures that result from higher outputs, there are various types 

of cooling galleries and cooling cavities. The cooling oil is generally fed through ﬁxed ports in 
the crankcase. Chapter 5 gives an overview of possible cooling variants.

1.3  Piston types

17

Figure 1.18: Ring carrier piston for a diesel 
engine

Figure 1.19: Salt-core cooling gallery piston 
with ring carrier for a passenger car diesel 
engine

Figure 1.19 shows a cooling gallery piston with ring carrier for a passenger car diesel engine. 
The annular cavities are formed by casting around salt cores, which are then dissolved and 

washed away with water.

1.3.3.3  Pistons with cooled ring carrier

The piston with cooled ring carrier, Figure 1.20, is another cooled piston variant. The cooled 
ring carrier signiﬁcantly improves the cooling of the top ring groove and the thermally highly 

loaded combustion bowl rim. The intensive cooling of this ring groove makes it possible to 

replace the usual full keystone ring with a rectangular ring.

Figure 1.20:  
Piston for passenger cars  
with cooled ring carrier

18

1  Piston function, requirements, and types

1.3.3.4  Pistons with bushings in the pin bore

One of the most highly stressed areas of the piston is the piston pin bearing. Temperatures 

of up to 240°C can occur in this area, a range at which the strength of the aluminum alloy 

starts to drop off considerably.

For extremely stressed diesel engine pistons, measures such as shaped pin bores, pin bore 

relief, or oval pin bores are no longer sufﬁcient to increase the load carrying capacity of the 

pin bore.

For  this  reason,  MAHLE  has  developed  a  reinforcement  of  the  pin  bore,  using  shrink-ﬁt 

bushings made of a material with higher strength (e.g., CuZn31Si1).

1.3.3.5  FERROTHERM® pistons
In FERROTHERM® pistons, Figure 1.21, the guiding and sealing functions are implemented 
separately.  The  two  parts,  piston  crown  and  piston  skirt,  are  movably  connected  to  each 

other through the piston pin. The piston crown, made of forged steel, transfers the gas pres-

sure to the crankshaft via the piston pin and connecting rod.

The light aluminum skirt only bears the lateral forces that arise because of the angle of the 

connecting rod, and can therefore support the piston crown with an appropriate design. In 

addition to this “shaker cooling” via the skirt, closed cooling cavities can also be incorporated 

in the piston crown. The outer cooling cavity of the steel piston crown is closed by split cover 

plates.

Thanks  to  its  design,  the  FERROTHERM®  piston  exhibits  good  wear  rates  in  addition  to 
high strength and temperature resistance. Its consistently low oil consumption, small dead 

space, and relatively high surface temperature provide good conditions for maintaining low 
exhaust  emissions  limits.  FERROTHERM®  pistons  are  used  in  highly  loaded  commercial 
vehicle engines.

Figure 1.21:  
FERROTHERM® piston

1.3  Piston types

19

Figure 1.22:  MONOTHERM®  piston  for  a  com-
mercial vehicle engine

Figure 1.23:  Optimized  MONOTHERM®  piston 
for a commercial vehicle engine

1.3.3.6  MONOTHERM® pistons
The MONOTHERM® piston, Figure 1.22, emerged  from the  development  of  the  FERRO-
THERM® piston. This piston type is a single-piece forged steel piston that is greatly weight-
optimized. With a small compression height (to less than 50% of the cylinder diameter) and 

machining above the pin boss spacing (internal), the piston mass, including the piston pin, 

almost corresponds to the mass of a comparable aluminum piston with piston pin. In order 

to improve the piston cooling, the outer cooling cavity is closed off by two cover plate halves. 
The MONOTHERM® piston is used in passenger car and commercial vehicle engines with 
peak cylinder pressures of up to 20 MPa.

1.3.3.7  Optimized MONOTHERM® pistons
In optimized MONOTHERM® pistons, Figure 1.23, the piston skirt is connected to the pin 
boss on the side, just as a conventional MONOTHERM® piston is. The upper edge of the 
piston skirt is additionally connected to the inner contour of the piston.

The advantages of the optimized MONOTHERM® piston are
■  stiffening  of  the  structure,  resulting  in  reduced  deformation  and  greater  load  carrying 

capacity;

■  reducing the secondary piston motion, resulting in both a 

■  reduced cavitation propensity and 

■  improved guide properties, particularly for the piston rings;

■  smoothing of contact pressure on the skirt;

■  additional surface and additional cross section for heat dissipation;

■  advantages in forging and machining.

The optimized MONOTHERM® piston is used for peak cylinder pressures of up to 25 MPa.

20

1  Piston function, requirements, and types

1.3.3.8  MonoWeld® pistons
The portfolio of steel pistons was complemented with the new friction-welded MonoWeld® 
piston; Figure 1.24. The structure is stiffer than the optimized MONOTHERM® piston, making 
for an increased thermal and mechanical load carrying capacity. In contrast to the MonoX-
comp® piston, the MonoWeld® piston has no cooling cavity in its interior.

The MonoWeld® piston is suitable for peak cylinder pressures of up to 25 MPa.

Figure 1.24:  
MonoWeld® piston for a 
commercial vehicle engine

1.3.3.9  Electron beam-welded pistons

The basis is a forged aluminum-base alloy piston for highly loaded engines. Forging pro-

vides signiﬁcantly higher and more consistent strength values than casting. On the other 

Figure 1.25:  
Electron beam-welded piston with cooling  
gallery for a high-performance diesel engine

1.3  Piston types

21

hand, the casting process allows the use of ring carriers and the incorporation of salt cores 

to form cooling galleries.

Electron  beam  welding  makes  it  possible  to  combine  forged  piston  bases  with  cast  ring 
bands, in order to unite the advantages of both production processes. Figure 1.25 shows an 
example of an electron beam-welded piston with ring carrier and cooling gallery.

1.3.4  Composite pistons for large-bore engines

1.3.4.1  Areas of application and design types

The  composite  piston  enables  the  incorporation  of  cooling  cavities  and  the  combination 
of the properties of various materials in one piston. The performance range of four-stroke 
engines with composite pistons  extends  from  500 to  30,000  kW,  with  up  to  20  cylinders. 

Areas of application include gensets, main ship drives and auxiliary ship drives, and heavy 

construction and railroad vehicles.

There are many variants of composite pistons. Common to them all is a design consisting 

of two main constituents: the piston crown with the ring belt (upper part of piston) and the 

piston skirt with the piston pin boss (piston skirt). The two parts are screwed together with 

appropriate threaded fasteners.

The connection between the upper part and skirt of the piston can be designed as a central 
screw joint—with only one screw, Figure 1.30 and Figure 1.26 left—or as a multiple screw joint. 
The multiple screw joint is essentially divided into models with four single screws, of which 
each has its own thrust piece, Figure 1.26 center, and twin screw joints, i.e., two screws for 
each thrust piece, Figure 1.26 right.

The  selection  of  the  screw  joint  type  is  based  on  the  geometric  ratios  of  the  piston.  For 

example, the component size, combustion bowl geometry, cooling principle, and design of 

the upper part (bore cooling or shaker cooling) have a great inﬂuence.

 

Central screw joint 

Quadruple screw joint 

Twin screw joint

Figure 1.26: Types of screw joints—bottom views

22

1  Piston function, requirements, and types

1.3.4.2  Piston upper part

The piston upper part is made of forged steel and can be designed with shaker cooling or 
bore cooling; Figure 1.27. The bore-cooled variant is characterized by increased stiffness, 
with the efﬁcient heat transfer remaining unchanged. The increased stiffness makes a design 

with only one contact surface possible.

If heavy fuel oil is used, the piston ring grooves are inductively hardened or chrome-plated 

to reduce wear.

Figure 1.27: Piston upper part with shaker cooling (left) and bore cooling (right)

1.3.4.3  Piston skirt made of forged aluminum-base alloy

Forged aluminum skirts, Figure 1.28, are suitable for low and medium peak cylinder pres-
sures, exhibit a low mass, and are easy to machine.

Figure 1.28:  
Composite piston with steel crown, aluminum 
skirt, pin bore bushings, thrust piece, and anti-
fatigue bolt

1.3  Piston types

23

1.3.4.4  Piston skirt made of nodular cast iron

Key features of a composite piston with nodular cast iron piston skirt, Figure 1.29, are low 
cold piston clearance and the resulting low secondary piston motion as well as high seizure 

resistance. The casting process, in contrast to forged steel, allows for undercuts and there-

fore a lighter design. With an appropriate design, it is suitable for peak cylinder pressures 

greater than 20 MPa.  Compared with  pistons  with  aluminum  skirts,  however,  the  mass  is 

increased as a result of the higher material density.

1.3.4.5  Piston skirt made of forged steel

Piston skirts made of forged steel, Figure 1.30, provide ultrahigh component strength and, 
related  to  the  process,  a  material  with  extremely  few  defects.  They  are  suitable  for  ultra-

high stresses greater than 24 MPa. Similar to pistons with nodular cast iron piston skirts, 

they provide the advantage of low cold piston clearance, resulting in low secondary piston 

motion.

Figure 1.29: Composite piston with steel crown 
and  nodular  cast  iron  piston  skirt,  thrust  piece, 
and antifatigue bolts

Figure 1.30: Composite piston with steel crown 
and  forged  steel  piston  skirt,  thrust  piece,  and 
antifatigue bolt

2  Piston design guidelines

25

In view of the operational requirements of typical internal combustion engines (two-stroke, 

four-stroke,  gasoline,  and  diesel  engines)  aluminum-silicon  alloys  are  generally  the  most 

appropriate  piston  materials.  Large-bore  pistons  and  commercial  vehicle  pistons,  or  their 
crowns or upper parts, however, are often made of steel.

2.1  Terminology and major dimensions

Functional divisions of the piston are the piston crown, the ring belt with top land, the piston 
pin boss, and the piston skirt; Figure 2.1. Additional functional elements, cooling galleries, 
and ring carriers indicate the piston type. The piston rings, piston pin, and—depending on the 

design—the pin retaining system are all part of the piston assembly.

In order to keep the masses as low as possible, a careful design of the piston and good piston 
cooling are necessary. Important dimensions and typical values are shown in Figure 2.2 and 
Table 2.1.

Figure 2.1: Important piston terminology
Piston design guidelines

Figure 2.2:  
Important piston dimensions

BO:  Pin bore Ø (piston pin Ø)
KH:  Compression height
NA:  Pin boss spacing
D:  Piston Ø
s:  Crown thickness
DL:  Elongation length
SL:  Skirt length
GL:  Total height
UL:  Lower height

Table 2.1: Major dimensions of light-alloy pistons

Diameter D [mm]

Total height GL/D

Compression height KH/D

Pin diameter BO/D

Top land height [mm] 

Skirt length SL/D

Pin boss spacing NA/D

Gasoline engines

Diesel engines*

Two-stroke

Four-stroke  
(passenger cars)

Four-stroke 
(passenger cars)

30–70

0.8–1.0

0.4–0.55

0.20–0.25

2.5–3.5

0.55–0.7

0.25–0.35

65–105

0.6–0.7

0.30–0.45

0.20–0.26

2–8

1.0–1.75

0.4–0.5

0.20–0.35

0.06–0.10

65–95

0.8–0.95

0.5–0.6

0.3–0.4

6–12

1.75–3.5

0.5–0.65

0.25–0.35

0.14–0.23

1st ring land height St/D *

0.045–0.06

0.040–0.055

0.055–0.1

Groove height for 1st piston ring [mm]

1.2 and 1.5

Crown thickness s/D or s/DMu, max **

0.055–0.07

* Values for diesel engines apply to ring carrier pistons, ** Diesel

2.1.1  Crown shapes and crown thickness

The piston crown forms part of the combustion chamber. Pistons for gasoline engines can 

be ﬂat, raised, or sunken. For diesel engine pistons, the combustion chamber bowl is usually 

located in the piston crown. The geometry of the piston crown is also affected by the number 
and location of the valves; Figure 2.3. The maximum gas pressure and the quantity of heat 
to be dissipated determine the thickness of the piston crown (crown thickness). The piston 

crown, or the bowl rim for diesel engine pistons, is the part of the piston that is exposed to 

the greatest thermal stress.

The values listed in Table 2.1 for the crown thickness s apply in general to pistons with ﬂat, 
convex, or concave crowns.

2.1  Terminology and major dimensions

27

Figure 2.3:  
Examples of piston crown 
shapes of various pistons for 
gasoline and diesel engines 
(1 to 3 for four-stroke gasoline 
engines with port fuel injec-
tion, 4 for four-stroke gasoline 
engines with direct injection, 
5 to 6 for four-stroke diesel 
engines with direct injection)

2.1.2  Compression height

The compression height is the distance between the center of the piston pin and the upper 

edge of the top land. The goal is to have as low a compression height as possible, in order 

to keep the piston mass and the height of the engine as low as possible. The number and 

height of piston rings, the required ring lands, the piston pin diameter, and the top land width, 

however, result in a minimum compression height; a lower height is not possible. For diesel 

engine pistons, in addition to the combustion chamber depth, the conrod bore radius and 

the required minimum crown thickness below the bowl generally determine the compression 

height.

Reducing the compression height also has disadvantages. For high power output and gas 

pressures, higher temperatures in the pin bore and higher stresses on the piston crown are 

the result of the low compression height. Cracks in the pin bore or the piston crown may 

then occur. Accordingly, for diesel engine pistons, a large expansion length is advantageous 

for the load carrying capacity of the bowl rim.

2.1.3  Top land

In the piston ring zone, the distance between the edge of the piston crown and the upper 

ﬂank of the top ring groove is called the top land. Its dimensions are a compromise between 

the  following  requirements:  low  piston  mass  and  minimal  dead  volume  for  reducing  fuel 

consumption  and  exhaust  gas  emissions,  on  one  side;  on  the  other  side,  the  ﬁrst  piston 

ring, which is a compression ring, requires a temperature range that is still compatible with 
its function. This, in turn, depends greatly on the combustion process, the material, and the 

28

2  Piston design guidelines

geometry of the ﬁrst piston ring and its piston ring groove, as well as the location of the water 

jacket on the cylinder.

For  gasoline  engines,  the  top  land  width  is  4  to  10%  of  the  piston  diameter,  tending  to 

decrease in order to further reduce the hydrocarbon emissions caused by gaps.

For  passenger  car  diesel  engines  with  direct  injection,  this  value  is  8–15%  of  the  piston 

diameter.

For commercial vehicle diesel engines with direct injection, it is 8 to 13% of the piston diam-

eter for aluminum pistons, and 6 to 10% for steel pistons.

2.1.4  Ring grooves and ring lands

The piston ring zone, in general, consists of three ring grooves that hold the piston rings. The 

piston rings seal off the combustion chamber and control lubricating oil consumption. Their 

surface must therefore be of the highest quality. Poor sealing leads to blow-by of combustion 

gases into the crankcase, to heating due to the contact of the hot gas ﬂow on the surfaces, 

and to destruction of the critical oil ﬁlm on the running surfaces of the sliding and sealing 

partners. The piston ring must not impact the groove root diameter of the piston when it 

is pressed into the groove so that it is ﬂush with the outer diameter of the piston, that is, it 

requires radial clearance.

Current lubricating oils permit groove temperatures of over 200°C in gasoline engine pistons, 

and up to 280°C in diesel engine pistons, without the piston rings binding as a result of resi-

due buildup in the top ring groove.

For  diesel  engine  pistons,  which  develop  signiﬁcantly  greater  combustion  pressures  than 

gasoline engines, the top ring groove is made much more wear-resistant by casting in a ring 

carrier.  Ring  carriers  are  typically  made  of  Ni-resist,  an  austenitic  cast  iron  with  a  thermal 

expansion coefﬁcient that is approximately the same as aluminum. The ring carrier forms a 

permanent metallic bond with the piston through the established process of Al-ﬁn composite 

casting. This process also enables better heat transfer.

The ring land is the part of the ring belt of a piston that is located between two piston ring 

grooves. In particular, the ﬁrst ring land, which is severely loaded by the gas pressure, must 

be sized sufﬁciently to prevent fracture of the ring land. Its height depends on the maximum 

gas pressure of the engine and the land temperature. For gasoline engine pistons, the ring 

land width is 4 to 6% of the piston diameter, for turbocharged passenger car diesel engines 

it is 5.5 to 10%, and for commercial vehicle pistons about 10%. The second or remaining ring 

lands can be smaller, on account of the lower pressures they are subjected to.

2.1  Terminology and major dimensions

29

2.1.5  Total height

The total height GL of the piston, relative to the piston diameter, depends on the compres-

sion height and the guide length on the skirt. For small, high-speed engines in particular, the 

total height is kept as low as possible in order to obtain low piston mass.

2.1.6  Pin bore

2.1.6.1  Surface roughness

The pin bore/piston pin sliding system must be in perfect condition in order to ensure reli-

able  engine  operation.  If  the  surface  roughness  is  too  low,  particularly  when  starting,  this 

can cause galling of the pin bore. Therefore, depending on the pin bore diameter, a surface 
roughness  of  Ra  =  0.63–1.0 μm  is  desired  for  the  pin  bore.  Pistons  with  piston  pins  that 
move only in the piston (shrink-ﬁt connecting rods) generally have slightly greater surface 

roughness values, in order to increase oil retention, particularly under less than ideal running 

conditions.

Other detailed measures are often necessary in order to ensure lubrication under all operat-

ing conditions. These include oil pockets (slots) or circumferential oil grooves for improved 

lubrication in the pin bore.

2.1.6.2  Installation clearance

The clearance of the piston pin in the piston pin boss is important for smooth running and 

low wear of the bearing surfaces. As the materials of the piston and piston pin have different 
thermal expansion, the running clearances in a warm engine are greater than the installation 

clearances in a cold engine. This difference can be approximated as:

increase in clearance = 0.001 x pin diameter [mm]

The increase in clearance for a 30 mm diameter piston pin is therefore approximately 30 μm.

Previously, very tight clearances were typical, so that the piston pin could be inserted only 

in  a  preheated  piston.  Today,  the  clearance  is  considerably  greater,  and  the  piston  pin  is 

inserted into the pin bore at room temperature. This prevents deformation of the skirt due to 

shrinkage stresses and potential galling of the piston pin in the piston when starting at low 

temperatures.

When designing the minimum clearance, Table 2.2, in gasoline engines, differentiation must 
be made between a ﬂoating piston pin or a piston pin with a shrink ﬁt in the small end bore. 

30

2  Piston design guidelines

Table 2.2: Minimum pin clearance for gasoline engines [mm]—not suitable for motorsport engines

Piston pin 
with floating design

0.002–0.005

Shrink fit 
piston pin

0.006–0.012

The ﬂoating piston pin is the standard design and is the variant that can be speciﬁcally most 

highly loaded in the piston pin boss.

With  shrink-ﬁt  connecting  rods,  the  piston  pin  is  seated  in  the  small  end  bore  with  some 

interference. This makes the automatic assembly of the piston, piston pin, and connecting 

rod  easier,  because  no  special  piston  pin  circlip  is  needed.  The  shrink-ﬁt  connecting  rod 

design is not suitable for modern diesel engines and gasoline engines with turbocharging.

2.1.6.3  Tolerances

Similar  considerations  apply  to  matching  the  piston  pin  and  piston  as  for  the  piston  and 

cylinder.  In  order  to  facilitate  assembly—aided  by  lower  production  tolerances  for  the  pin 

bore and piston pin—only one deﬁning group is typically used. The tolerance for piston pins 
is 4 to 8 μm, depending on the pin diameter. The pin bore tolerance is about 1 μm greater 
in each case.

2.1.6.4  Piston pin offset

The kinematics of the crank mechanism of a reciprocating piston engine leads to multiple 

contact alteration of the piston on the cylinder wall during a working cycle. After the top dead 

center point, the gas pressure presses one side of the piston skirt against the cylinder wall. 

This zone is known as the thrust side, and the opposite side of the skirt is the antithrust side.

An offset of the piston pin axis relative to the piston axis (piston pin offset) causes a change 

in the contact behavior of the piston as the side changes, and decisively affects the lateral 

forces and impacts. By calculating the piston motion, the location and amount of offset from 

the piston axis can be optimized, thus drastically reducing piston running noise and the risk 

of cavitation on the cylinder liner.

2.1.7  Piston skirt

The piston skirt, as the lower part of the piston, guides the piston in the cylinder. It can fulﬁll 

this task only if it has suitable clearance to the cylinder. Sufﬁcient skirt length and tight guid-

ance keep the tipping of the piston low during contact alteration from one cylinder wall to 

the other.

For diesel engine pistons, the full-skirt piston was previously dominant, with its closed skirt, 

interrupted only in the area of the pin bore. This construction is still sometimes used for pis-
tons in two-stroke gasoline engines. Aluminum diesel engine pistons for commercial vehicle 

2.1  Terminology and major dimensions

31

engines still feature a full-skirt design at times, with only a slight setback in the area of the 

piston pin boss, but window-type pistons are used across the board in passenger cars.

Gasoline engine pistons have a wide range of designs for the piston skirt; Figure 2.4. In order 
to keep inertia forces low, they now have only relatively narrow skirt surfaces, which led to 

the  box-type  piston,  sometimes  with  different  running  surface  widths  (asymmetrical  duct 
pistons) and/or inclined box walls (including EVOTEC® pistons).

 
Full-skirt piston for 
  two-stroke gasoline engine 

Window-type piston for 
passenger car diesel engine 

Box-type piston for
passenger car gasoline engine

Figure 2.4: Skirt profiles

The  piston  skirt  must  meet  a  few  requirements  related  to  its  strength.  First,  it  must  bear 

the lateral forces without major deformations, and second, it should elastically adapt to the 

deformations  of  the  cylinder.  The  piston  crown  deﬂects  under  the  temperature  and  peak 

cylinder pressure, and deforms the piston skirt to an oval in the thrust and antithrust direc-

tion. This increases the diameter in the direction of the piston pin, and reduces it along the 
thrust-antithrust axis. Residual skirt collapse due to plastic deformation, however, should be 

avoided. Remedial measures for at-risk pistons include greater wall thickness, oval interior 

piston proﬁle, or small circumferential length of the piston skirt.

The lower end of the piston skirt should protrude out of the cylinder only a little or not at all 

(lower edge of pin bore). The protrusion must be considered appropriately when designing 

the piston proﬁle.

32

2  Piston design guidelines

2.2  Piston profile

2.2.1  Piston clearance

The piston is deformed under the effect of gas temperatures and forces, particularly the gas 

force. This change in shape must be taken into consideration when designing the shape of 

the piston in order to ensure that it runs without binding at the operating temperature. To this 
end, the piston is installed with some clearance in the cold state, which takes the expected 

deformation  and  the  secondary  piston  motion  into  consideration.  Its  shape,  known  as  the 

piston proﬁle (or ﬁne piston contour), also deviates from an ideal circular cylinder.

Local clearance in the cold state is made up of the difference of the cylinder diameter and 

the piston, imagined as a circular cylinder (the installation clearance), as well as the devia-

tion of the piston from this circular cylinder shape. The piston proﬁle deviates from the ideal 

circular cylinder in the axial direction (conicity, barrel shape) and in the circumferential direc-

tion (ovality).

2.2.2  Ovality

Pistons  typically  have  a  slightly  smaller  diameter  in  the  piston  pin  axis  than  in  the  thrust-
antithrust axis. The difference is the (diametric) ovality; Figure 2.5.

The oval shape of the crown and skirt provides many design opportunities. The skirt ovality 

creates space for thermal expansion in the piston pin axis direction. The ovality can be varied 

to generate an even wear pattern with sufﬁcient width. It is typically (diametric) 0.3 to 0.8% 

of the piston diameter.

Figure 2.5: Ovality and superposition, double oval (left), tri-oval (right)

2.2  Piston profile

33

In addition to the normal ovality, ovalities with superposition are also possible, such as double 

or tri-ovality. For double ovality, in the form of a positive (double oval plus) or negative (double 

oval minus) superposition, the local piston diameter is greater or less than for normal ovality; 
Figure 2.5, left. The positive superposition widens the wear pattern relative to normal ovality, 
and the negative makes it narrower. Tri-ovality in the form of positive superposition widens 

the wear pattern, which is limited because of a signiﬁcantly reduced local piston diameter 
starting at about 35° from the thrust-antithrust axis; Figure 2.5, right.

The resulting running surfaces in the thrust and antithrust direction should not be too narrow, 

so that the speciﬁc pressures between piston and cylinder remain low. In order to prevent 

hard contact and the risk of galling, the support area should not, however, extend out to the 
box walls. Figure 1.7 in Chapter 1.2.4 shows the support area of an advantageous piston 
proﬁle.

Further opportunities for optimizing the piston proﬁle are provided by different ovalities in the 

thrust and antithrust direction, as well as ring belt offsets and so-called corrections.

2.2.3  Skirt and ring belt tapering

The piston is tapered slightly at the upper and lower skirt ends, in order to promote the for-

mation of the wedge of lubricating oil that acts as a support element.

The greater taper in the area of the ring belt compensates for the great thermal expansion 

due to high temperatures in this area and for the deformation due to gas force. It also pre-

vents the piston ring belt from impacting the cylinder owing to secondary piston motion. 

Figure 2.6: Piston profile

34

2  Piston design guidelines

For noise-sensitive gasoline engines, in particular, there should be no contact between the 

ring belt and the cylinder.

All of these aspects require optimized machining forms of the outer surface for the various 

piston types. The ﬁnal piston proﬁle can only be veriﬁed through extensive simulation and 
engine testing. Figure 2.6 shows a detail from a piston proﬁle drawing.

2.2.4  Dimensional and form tolerances

The  piston  diameter  is  typically  determined  absolutely  at  one  of  at  least  three  measuring 

planes. This reference measuring plane is designated as DN. It is preferably located at the 

point with the tightest clearance between the piston and cylinder (DN = D1) or in an area with 
a stable shape (DN = D2). The dimensional tolerance (diametric) is 8 to 18 μm, depending 
on the piston diameter.

The outer contour of the piston is manufactured by NC-controlled precision turning. A fun-

nel-shaped tolerance band results from the elasticity of the piston, as shown schematically in 
Figure 2.7. Deviations from the nominal form are called form tolerances. The form tolerances 
of the diameters D1, D2, D3, and D4 for passenger car and commercial vehicle pistons are 

Figure 2.7: Piston profile, dimensional and form tolerances

2.2  Piston profile

35

about 7 μm in the skirt area (diametric) relative to DN, and 10 to 15 μm in the ring belt area 
(diametric). The principle of the sliding scale applies. The tolerance band for the form toler-

ances shifts according to the actual diameter in the classiﬁcation plane.

2.2.5  Installation clearance

The  installation  clearance  is  the  difference  between  the  cylinder  diameter  and  the  largest 
piston diameter D1. For low friction power loss, the installation clearance must not be too 

small. However, it also must not be too large, so that consistently smooth running is achieved 

under all operating conditions. Because of the difference in thermal expansion, these goals 

are most difﬁcult to achieve for the combination of an aluminum piston and gray cast iron cyl-

inder. Previously, cast-in steel struts were often used to reduce thermal expansion. Table 2.3 

gives an overview of the (diametric) clearances at the skirt for various piston types.

The installation clearance decreases with increasing operating temperature, which is caused 

by the greater heating of the piston relative to the cylinder, and possibly the different thermal 

expansion of the piston and cylinder materials. At operating temperature, the piston runs in 

the cylinder with interference. Because of the ovality, the interference is limited to the elasti-

cally adaptable area of the skirt.

Table 2.3: Typical installation clearances for light-alloy pistons [‰ of nominal diameter]

Gasoline engines

Diesel engines

Two-stroke

Four-stroke (passenger cars)

Four-stroke  
(passenger cars)

Engine block material

Aluminum-base 
alloy

Aluminum-
base alloy

Gray cast iron

Gray cast iron

installation clearance

0.6–1.3

Clearance at upper skirt end

1.4–4.0*

0.2–0.6

1.2–1.8

0.4–0.8

1.7–2.4

0.6–0.9

1.9–2.4

* Only for single-ring designs and high-performance engines (skirt end close to top land)

2.2.6  Defining group

One deﬁning group for the piston and cylinder makes logistics easier in large-scale produc-

tion. If the highest priority is the economic efﬁciency of production, then slightly wider bands 

must be used for the dimensional tolerances than for division into several groups, e.g., (dia-
metric) 18 μm compared to (diametric) 14 μm for a two-group division; Figure 2.7.

When  pistons  up  to  140  mm  in  diameter  are  divided  into  several  classes,  overlap  zones 
of  2  μm  are  required  at  the  group  boundaries.  The  pistons  in  the  overlap  zones  can  be 
assigned to the larger or smaller deﬁning group, as desired. This ensures that the desired 

quantity can be supplied for each deﬁning group.

36

2  Piston design guidelines

2.2.7  Skirt surface

Besides the skirt proﬁle, the surface of the skirt running surface also has a great inﬂuence 

on the sliding behavior of the piston. Too little surface roughness means the piston will not 

run in properly, while too much increases the friction power losses. Skirt roughness proﬁles 
with roughness values of Ra = 1.5–5 μm (Rz = 6–20 μm), generated precisely by diamond 
turning, provide good results (cf.: Chapter 1.2.4).

Thin metal layers of tin (0.8 to 1.3 μm) or synthetic resin graphite coatings (10 to 40 μm) fur-
ther improve the boundary lubrication properties, particularly in the critical run-in process or 

when starting the engine under less than ideal conditions, such as during cold start. 

3  Simulation of piston operational 

strength using FEA

37

Today’s  requirements  for  modern  combustion  engines  can  be  met  only  with  highly  efﬁ-

cient combustion and charging processes. Modern engines can now achieve speciﬁc power 

output  and  peak  pressures  in  the  combustion  chamber  that  were  previously  unheard  of 

outside of motorsport. This exposes the pistons to extreme loads, but the high requirements 

for service life and cost efﬁciency remain unchanged for these components. They are the 

decisive variables in the current global competitive environment.

One prerequisite in the context of extensive engine testing is simulation, particularly of oper-

ating  loads,  and  veriﬁcation  of  the  operational  strength  of  the  piston.  Precise,  physically 

based approaches and the use of efﬁcient calculation methods are therefore critical. In the 

industrial environment, ﬁnite element analysis (FEA) has become established as a standard 

process. The special application of this method to the piston engine component is described 

in the following.

3.1  Modeling

The basis for FE analysis is modeling, using discretization or meshing, that is, the partitioning 

of the affected structure into so-called volume elements. All the individual parts of the entire 
model are meshed,  typically  in three  dimensions,  including  all  signiﬁcant  details,  and  with 

only minor simpliﬁcations.

Thanks  to  the  processing  capacity  of  current  computers,  symmetries  (the  use  of  half  or 

quarter models) is no longer absolutely necessary. The initial geometry created by design 

can  nearly  always  be  implemented  to  its  full  extent.  Powerful  mesh  generators  and  user 

interfaces  with  reﬁned  graphics  (known  as  preprocessors)  effectively  support  modeling. 

Modern software running on multiprocessor computers allows models with a large quantity 

of volume elements to be processed, or solved.

In the case of piston calculations, the entire model includes not only the piston, but also the 
piston pin, the small end bore, and the cylinder; Figure 3.1. The cylinder and small end bore 
are ﬁxed to the appropriate interfaces for the calculation. For the piston and piston pin com-

ponents, which move during engine operation, support is provided solely by contact condi-

tions. Interactions and load transmission can thus be shaped under conditions that are close 
Simulation of piston operational strength using FEA

Figure 3.1: 
FE model of a piston, with 
piston pin and small end bore

to reality. Within the contact deﬁnitions, any existing reﬁned proﬁles of the contact surfaces, 

such as the piston skirt proﬁle or the pin bore proﬁle, can also be taken into consideration.

The application of the load in the model is depicted in the following Chapters 3.2 and 3.3. 

The assignment of material fatigue data concludes the modeling process. Depending on the 

component, the application, and the load, both purely linearly elastic material properties and 

elastic-plastic properties are used.

3.2  Boundary conditions from engine loading

39

3.2  Boundary conditions from engine loading 

First, loads are differentiated as either thermal or mechanical; see Chapters 3.2.1 and 3.2.2. 

This determines whether the load on the piston should be treated as dynamic, or simpliﬁed 

as a static load.

The operating load on the piston is determined by the operating principle of the engine (e.g., 
four-stroke  gasoline  or  four-stroke  diesel  process).  On  account  of  the  cyclic  sequence  of 

the strokes for this operating principle, the load is considered to be cyclic. The cyclic loads 

include

■  the temperature from the combustion process;

■  the gas force from the cylinder pressure;

■  the inertia force; and

■  the lateral force.

Loads that do not originate directly in the engine operating principle are either static, such 

as residual stresses (Chapter 3.3), or they result from changes in engine operation. These 

could be randomly caused (e.g., road proﬁle for passenger cars), or deﬁnitively prescribed 

(e.g., acceptance run, exhaust gas test cycle).

3.2.1  Thermal load 

The thermal load from the gas temperatures in the combustion process is also a cyclic load 

on the piston. It acts primarily during the expansion stroke on the combustion chamber side 

of the piston.

In the other strokes, depending on the operating principle, the thermal load on the piston 

is reduced, interrupted, or even has a cooling effect during gas exchange. In general, heat 

transfer from the hot combustion gases to the piston occurs primarily by convection, and 

only a slight portion results from radiation.

In relation to the expansion stroke, the duration over which the thermal load from combus-

tion acts is very short. Therefore, only a very small portion of the component mass of the 

piston, near the surface on the combustion side, follows the cyclic temperature ﬂuctuations. 

Nearly  the  entire  mass  of  the  piston,  therefore,  reaches  a  quasi-static  temperature,  which 

can, however, have signiﬁcant local variations. A temperature ﬁeld is established; see Chap-

ter 3.4. In the simulation, the cyclic temperature ﬂuctuations at the surface can be taken into 

consideration, but this is very difﬁcult. It is generally omitted.

40

3  Simulation of piston operational strength using FEA

The  thermal  boundary  conditions  required  to  simulate  the  quasi-static  temperature  ﬁeld 

in  the  piston  are  determined  using  an  iterative  thermodynamic  calculation.  They  may  be 

supplemented by any temperature measurements from engine tests; see Chapter 7.2. Addi-

tional  knowledge  about  heat  transfer  that  are  dependent  on  the  contact  pressure  allows 

suitable heat transfer coefﬁcients to be deﬁned for all relevant surfaces and contact areas of 

the piston. In combination with the corresponding ambient temperatures, they can be used 

to describe the local heat ﬂow.

An  alternative  to  determining  the  thermal  boundary  conditions  required  to  simulate  the 

quasi-static  temperature  ﬁeld  in  the  piston  is  the  use  of  the  CFD  method  (Computational 

Fluid Dynamics). It allows numerical simulation of the combustion process.

Using the CFD method, for example, the consequences of nonhomogeneous mixture for-

mation and the corresponding nonuniform heat release in the combustion chamber can be 

described. It also allows near-realistic modeling of the complex conditions on the piston-side 

walls of the combustion chamber, particularly in a direct injection diesel engine. A practical 

example of the high spatial resolution of the boundary conditions for simulating the tempera-

ture ﬁeld is the detailed consideration of the interaction between the wedge-shaped ﬂame 
jets and the contour of the piston recess; Figure 3.2.

Thanks  to  the  multiport  nozzles  used  in  this  combustion  process,  nearly  any  pattern  can 

occur at the circumference of the piston recess. Without the support of the CFD method, 

such relationships can be modeled only at a simpliﬁed level with reasonable effort.

Figure 3.2: Distribution of heat transfer coefficients (HTC, left) and gas temperature (T, right) on the 
piston crown of a commercial vehicle engine, from a CFD analysis

3.2  Boundary conditions from engine loading

41

3.2.2  Mechanical load 

The cyclic loading of the piston due to
■  the gas force from the combustion pressure;

■  the inertia force from the oscillating motion of the piston; and

■  the lateral force from the support of the gas force by the inclined connecting rod, and the 

inertia force of the oscillating connecting rod

determines the mechanical load.

According to the fundamental principles of machine dynamics, the correct superposition of 

these dynamic forces, as a function of the kinematic relationships in the crank mechanism, 

can be determined at any given point in time, and can be deﬁned as an external force in the 

simulation of the operating loads. In the simulation of the operating load on the piston, the 

external forces acting on the piston are considered to be static at the point in time that is 

under analysis.

In order to avoid neglecting any combination of these forces—so-called load cases—that may 

be  critical,  a  practical  number  of  appropriately  selected  points  in  time  are  analyzed.  This 

include  primarily  the  times  at  which  individual  components  of  the  mechanical  load  reach 

a  maximum.  For  example,  the  effect  of  the  piston’s  inertia  force  is  at  a  maximum  at  the 

dead center points of the crank mechanism. Other examples include the maximum of the 

combustion pressure, or the lateral force, which in turn can act in two different directions. 

Because the same arrangement of the crank mechanism elements occurs for all of these 

cases, the time points are deﬁned on the basis of the angular position of the crankshaft. For 

example, in the four-stroke cycle, two revolutions of the crankshaft are needed for the entire 

process, which corresponds to 720° of crank (shaft) angle.

3.2.2.1  Gas force

Simulation of the gas force is intended to represent the effect of gas pressure on a piston at 
operating temperature. The gas pressure is applied to the simulation model over the entire 
piston crown, down to the lower ﬂank of the top ring groove. The force ﬂow of the longitudi-

nal force generated thus runs through the piston pin to the small end bore.

3.2.2.2  Inertia force

mum at the top dead center (TDC).

The oscillating motion of the piston in the cylinder generates accelerations that reach a maxi-

In this context, the length of the connecting rod relative to the crank radius of the crankshaft 

pin,  known  as  the  stroke-connecting  rod  ratio,  plays  a  decisive  role.  As  the  length  of  the 

connecting  rod  increases,  the  acceleration  of  the  piston  and  the  lateral  forces  decrease. 

Maximizing the length of the connecting rod is therefore a recognized design principle. In 

order  to  achieve  this  while  minimizing  overall  dimensions,  the  compression  height  of  the 

piston must also be reduced as much as possible. This has corresponding consequences 
for the piston design; see Chapter 2, Figure 2.2. The accelerations are linearly dependent 

42

3  Simulation of piston operational strength using FEA

on  the  stroke-connecting  rod  ratio  of  the  crank  mechanism,  and  quadratically  dependent 

on the engine speed. This means that the effects of the inertia forces in an engine increase 

signiﬁcantly at high speeds.

The resulting acceleration force is applied to the connecting rod by the piston, by means of 

the piston pin. In the FE model, the acceleration is applied globally to the piston and piston 

pin. The model is ﬁxed in the axial direction at the small end bore. 

3.2.2.3  Lateral force

The conversion of the piston’s linear motion into the crankshaft’s rotational motion leads 

to force components in the crank mechanism, which press the piston against the cylinder 
bore, due to the lateral displacement of the big end bore and the resulting inclined position 
of the connecting rod. These are known as lateral forces. In a crank mechanism that is not 

offset (cylinder axis and conrod axis are collinear), the greatest lateral forces occur in the 

expansion stroke. In high-speed engines, however, they can also occur in other crank angle 

ranges as a result of inertia forces. In the simulation, the lateral forces of interest are trans-

mitted into the piston via the small end bore and the piston pin. The piston then presses 

against the cylinder.

As already indicated in the simulation of the gas force, the simulation of lateral forces is a 

purely static consideration at ﬁrst. This approach is correct if the piston runs in the cylinder 

without clearance, but this is not always the case in practice. Disregarding the operating con-

ditions for a cold start, in which the installation clearance is fully present for a short period, 

additional conditions can occur, depending on the application, in which there is a running 

clearance between the piston and the cylinder. This includes, in addition to most applications 

of steel or nodular cast iron as a piston material, all thin-walled lightweight pistons, such as 

are preferred for use in gasoline engines and especially in motorsport applications. These 

piston types become deformed under the operating conditions during engine load. Despite 
the  typical  interference  under  full-load  conditions,  this  often  leads  to  dynamic  clearance 

conditions between the piston and cylinder.

These effects can be depicted using appropriate simulation tools (in this case, the structural 

dynamic  simulation  of  the  secondary  piston  motion)  and  the  resulting  additional  dynamic 

loads in the static approaches of the lateral force can be correctly taken into account for the 

physical FE analysis.

3.3  Boundary conditions due to manufacturing and assembly

43

3.3  Boundary conditions due to manufacturing and 

assembly 

Pistons  with  design  features  such  as  pin  bore  bushings  or  ring  carrier  inserts,  as  well  as 

composite pistons, are made up of several parts that are connected to one another using 

various  methods:  casting,  joining  or  pressing  a  shrink  ﬁt,  and  bolting.  These  joining  and 

composite methods cause residual stresses, which must be considered in a precise strength 

analysis. Such loads act statically on the piston and must be included in relaxation processes 

and for problems dealing with creep under load.

3.3.1  Casting process/solidification 

Residual stresses in the component are an unavoidable characteristic of casting. They arise 

as a result of differences in wall thicknesses and different local cooling conditions; they are 

therefore present in the piston as well. Heat treatment after the casting process, however, 

reduces these stresses. Both processes—the casting process and the heat treatment—can 

be modeled using a numerical casting simulation, and the resulting residual stresses can be 

considered as well.

3.3.2  Inserts 

Aluminum pistons for diesel engines usually have a cast-in ring carrier made of austenitic 

cast iron with lamellar graphite (Ni-resist), which is intended to reduce ring-side wear in the 

top ring groove; see Chapter 1.3.3. Cast-in and composite stresses arise during the casting 

of this ring carrier. The aluminum alloy shrinks onto the ring carrier during solidiﬁcation and 
ﬁnal cooling, thus generating primarily compressive stresses in the ring carrier.

3.3.3  Pressed-in components

The combustion pressures in a passenger car diesel engine currently reach about 200 bar, 

while they reach about 250 bar in commercial vehicle diesel engines and are even greater 

than 250 bar in large-bore engines. This leads to high stresses in the piston pin boss. Par-

ticularly for pistons made of aluminum or composite pistons with aluminum skirts, therefore, 

it may be necessary to increase the load carrying capacity of the piston pin boss by shrink-

ing  in  a  pin  bore  bushing  made  of  a  suitable  material,  such  as  bronze  or  special  brass. 

The shrink-in process generates compressive stresses in the pin bore bushing, and tensile 

stresses in the surrounding aluminum alloy, primarily at the bottom of the pin boss (nadir).

44

3  Simulation of piston operational strength using FEA

3.3.4  Screw joints

Screw  joints  in  composite  pistons  must  be  analyzed  under  the  described  thermal  and 

mechanical loads. Analysis of the assembled state at room temperature, as well as friction at 

the various contact surfaces, is also required.

Depending on the process used for tightening the bolts (hydraulic, torque, or rotation angle 

tightening) the pretensioning force of the bolts is calculated and adjusted at room tempera-

ture for the simulation of the screw joint in the FE model. The pretensioning force is then 

superimposed on the thermal and mechanical loads (gas force, inertia force, lateral force).

With this approach, it is possible to establish
■  whether  the  bolt  pretensioning  force  increases  or  decreases  in  the  piston  at  operating 

■  how clearances and inclinations on the contact surfaces affect the distribution of the pre-

temperature;

tensioning force;

■  whether the upper part lifts off from the piston skirt in the area of the bolt; and

■  how the clearances affect the stress amplitudes from the mechanical loads.

3.4  Temperature field and heat flow due to 

temperature loading 

The extent of the temperature ﬁeld and the resulting temperature gradients are determined 

by the cooling of the piston. Pistons are generally categorized as having no cooling, oil-spray 

cooling,  or  cooling-gallery/cooling-cavity  cooling.  The  partially  ﬁlled  cooling  galleries  and 
cooling cavities, together with the oscillating piston motion, lead to extensive turbulence in 

the engine oil cooling medium. This turbulence generates high relative velocities of the cool-

ing medium at the gallery wall, which in turn improves heat transfer at the wall. This condition 

is referred to, in a simpliﬁed manner, as the “shaker effect.” The piston is then said to have 

“shaker cooling.”

With regard to component strength, the temperatures at the piston crown (gasoline engine 

pistons), at the bowl rim (diesel engine pistons), in the support area (transition from the boss 

to the piston crown), and in the pin bore are of interest. The temperatures in the top ring 

groove and the cooling gallery are also signiﬁcant in terms of oil carbonization. Typical tem-

perature values for passenger car engines are

■  center of piston crown (gasoline engine, port fuel injection)  

■  piston crown bowl (gasoline engine, direct injection) 

■  bowl rim (diesel engine, direct injection)  
■  support area 

270–310°C;

270–350°C;

350–400°C;
200–250°C;

3.4  Temperature field and heat flow due to temperature loading

45

■  pin bore (zenith) 

■  top ring groove (spray jet cooling, salt-core cooling gallery) 

■  top ring groove (cooled ring carrier) 

■  cooling gallery (zenith) 

200–250°C;

200–280°C;

180–230°C;

250–300°C.

Numerical simulation of the temperature ﬁeld allows detailed analysis of the heat ﬂows in the 

piston. Depending on the piston cooling method used in each case, typical values for the 
percentual distribution of the heat ﬂow through the piston crown are shown in Table 3.1 for 
various areas of the piston. In the uncooled piston, the heat ﬂow to the cooled cylinder bore 

(through  the  ring  grooves,  the  piston  rings,  and  the  piston  skirt)  dominates  the  heat  ﬂow 

pattern, while the heat ﬂow into the engine oil by convection is predominant in the cooled 

piston types.

Table 3.1: Distribution of heat flow for various piston types

Piston 
type  
 
Operating 
principle

Uncooled 
piston  
 
 
Gasoline

Oil-spray 
cooling  
 
 
Gasoline

Oil-spray 
cooling 
 
 
 Diesel

Salt-core 
cooling 
gallery 
 
Diesel

Cooled 
ring carrier  
 
 
Diesel

MONO-
THERM® 
ring  
gallery  
Diesel

2-chamber 
cooling 
cavity  
 
Diesel

0

0

0

40–50

50–60

75–90

90–100

Ring belt

50–60

15–25

50–55

25–45

0–10

0–5

10–15

5–10

10–15

5–10

10–30

5–10

10–20

50–60

20–30

5–15

5–15

0–10

0–5

5–10

5–10

0–5

0–5

0–5

0–5

0–15

0–10

0–5

0–10

Heat flow 
[%]  
Cooling 
gallery

Skirt

Inner 
shape

Window/
undercut

Boss

0

0

0

0

0

0

The typical temperature distribution in a gasoline engine piston, with a temperature gradient 
from the piston crown to the skirt, generates a thermal deformation as shown in Figure 3.3. 
This  deformation  characteristic  must  be  taken  into  consideration  when  ﬁne  machining  is 

done  on  the  outer  diameter,  and  deﬁnes  the  barrel  shape  used  for  the  piston  skirt.  The 

prominent inclined position at the zenith of the pin bore is typical for these deformation pat-

terns. This wedge-shaped gap between the pin boss zenith and the piston pin is completely 

closed under the gas force load.

Pistons with cooled ring carriers are used in passenger car diesel engines, in order to reduce 
the temperature at the bowl rim and in the top ring groove. Figure 3.4 shows a comparison of 
the cooling effect of a cooled ring carrier (left) and a so-called salt-core cooling gallery (right).  

46

3  Simulation of piston operational strength using FEA

Figure 3.3: Temperature distribution (left) and thermal deformation (right) of a piston in a passenger 
car gasoline engine with spray jet cooling (deformation shown magnified)

The advantageous inﬂuence of the cooled ring carrier on the bowl rim temperature, and espe-

cially on the temperature in the top ring groove, is evident.

For commercial vehicles, MONOTHERM® pistons are also used in engines with the highest 
power ratings. It is a single-piece forged steel piston. It has a skirt that is directly bonded 
to the piston pin boss, and which can be open or closed at the top. Figure 3.5 shows the 

Figure 3.4: Comparison of cooling effect for cooled ring carriers (left) and salt-core cooling galleries 
(right) on a passenger car diesel piston

3.4  Temperature field and heat flow due to temperature loading

47

Figure 3.5: 
Temperature distribution in a MONOTHERM® 
piston with a closed skirt

temperature distribution in a MONOTHERM® piston with a closed skirt. The greatly reduced 
heat ﬂow in the skirt, and the resulting low skirt temperatures, is typical for this type of piston.

For  large-bore  engines,  a  signiﬁcantly  longer  service  life  is  required,  and  the  combustion 

pressures reach levels greater than 250 bar. Under such conditions, piston cooling is deci-

sively  signiﬁcant.  Therefore,  large-bore  pistons  are  nearly  always  designed  as  composite 

pistons, with an upper part made of heat-resistant steel, and a skirt made of either aluminum, 

nodular cast iron, or forged steel. With this design, it is possible to make the cooling cavities 

large, and accordingly effective for cooling. This is accomplished, for example, by using con-

centric 2-chamber systems, which cover nearly the entire crown of the piston. The heat bal-
ances in Table 3.1 show that the cooling in this piston is very effective. The heat ﬂowing into 
the piston as a result of combustion can thus be dissipated nearly 100% by the cooling oil.

The thermal deformations caused by the severe temperature gradients in the piston crown 
are shown in Figure 3.6 for a piston with shaker cooling. The temperature in the screw joint 
affects the relaxation behavior in the high-strength screw material used here. If temperatures 

greater than 180 to 200°C occur over large areas of the bolt, then relaxation must be antici-

pated, leading to a reduction in bolt pretensioning force during operation.

The skirts of composite pistons are hardly affected by the temperature load—with the excep-

tion of the area of the screw joint’s countersunk holes. The temperature here can increase 

the stresses in the radii of the countersunk holes, if the axial tolerance are poorly designed. 

For screw joints in composite pistons, the distribution of the bolt pretensioning force at the 

internal contact surface must not drop below 20 to 25% of the pretensioning force under 

temperature loading. This can be achieved by suitably designing the axial tolerance at the 

external contact surface.

48

3  Simulation of piston operational strength using FEA

Figure 3.6: Temperature distribution (left) and thermal deformation (right) of a composite piston with 
shaker cooling (deformation shown magnified)

3.5  Stress behavior 

3.5.1  Stresses due to temperature loading

The temperature distributions shown in Chapter 3.4 for various pistons show signiﬁcant tem-

perature gradients. This is especially true at the piston crown and the bowl rim. The piston 
expands  greatly  in  the  hot  areas,  whereas  expansion  is  prevented  in  the  cold  areas.  The 

thermal  stresses  thus  induced—primarily  compressive  stresses—are  greatest  at  the  crown 

and bowl area, and can exceed the yield limit of the piston material there.

In  order  to  consider  the  fact  that  the  yield  limit  has  been  exceeded  in  the  FEA,  complex 

analysis using the nonlinear elastic-plastic behavior of the material is necessary. Exceeding 

the yield limit, however, affects only limited, localized areas of the piston. These areas also 

have very low stiffness, on account of the high temperatures that are typically present there. 

The impact on the global stress and deformation behavior of the entire piston is therefore 

correspondingly small.

The numerical complexity can be reduced by determining the thermal stresses under lin-

ear-elastic conditions, considering the temperature-dependent physical material data. The 

stresses  thus  determined  are  then  converted  into  an  elastic-plastic  behavior  at  the  highly 

stressed locations of interest, and are analyzed for strength and service life according to the 

methods described in Chapter 3.6.

3.5  Stress behavior

49

Figure 3.7 shows the distribution of the thermally induced stresses in a piston for a gasoline 
engine with port fuel injection. The temperatures on nearly level piston crowns are approxi-

mately 280 to 300°C and generate compressive stresses in the internal crown area.

Figure 3.7: Thermally induced stresses in a piston for a passenger car gasoline engine with port fuel 
injection

Figure 3.8 shows the thermally induced stresses in an aluminum piston with a cooled ring 
carrier  for  a  passenger  car  diesel  engine  with  direct  injection.  The  undercut  bowl  shape 

reveals a signiﬁcant concentration of compressive stresses at the bowl rim. The level of the 

bowl rim stresses, together with the high temperatures (up to 400°C) lead to the yield limit at 

the bowl rim being exceeded.

Figure 3.8: Thermally induced stresses in a piston with cooled ring carrier

50

3  Simulation of piston operational strength using FEA

In general, bowl rims have better strength and temperature performance when the bowl rim 

radius is greater. The same applies to a small undercut for the bowl as well as to obtuse 

angles and ﬂat bowl shapes, which are preferably used for commercial vehicle pistons.

MONOTHERM®  pistons  (made  of  steel)  also  have  high  thermally  induced  compressive 
stresses at the bowl  rim and in the  cooling  gallery  area.  Compared  with  pistons  made  of 

aluminum, however, this has little inﬂuence on the strength, as long as the temperatures in 

these areas are below the scaling limit. Long-term temperatures greater than 450 to 500°C 
cause scaling, and therefore damage the surface. Such defect locations can be the starting 

point for cracks in the bowl rim of a steel piston.

Composite  pistons  with  shaker  cooling  generally  have  the  greatest  thermally  induced 

stresses in the steel crown. The stress maxima are located in the wall of the outer cooling 

cavity, the top ring groove, and at the bowl rim.

3.5.2  Stresses due to mechanical loading 

For all mechanical loads, the “temperature” load case, assumed to be quasi-static, is super-

imposed in order to calculate the correct resulting stresses in the piston analysis.

As a reaction to the gas force load, the piston presses against the piston pin and the cylinder. 

For aluminum pistons, the rigid piston pin dominates the deformation behavior of the system, 

because  the  piston  has  a  lower  stiffness  on  account  of  its  highly  temperature-dependent 

material fatigue data. The structure bends; the piston is deformed “around the piston pin.” 

This deformation generates stresses induced by the gas force in addition to the temperature 

stresses, and causes a “saddle-shaped” curve in the piston ring grooves.

Figure 3.9 shows the distribution of the stress amplitudes, as calculated from the cyclic gas 
force loads on a piston. This general stress distribution from the gas force can be explained 
by the “bending around the piston pin” and applies, in the broadest sense, to all pistons: 

under gas force load, circumferential tensile stresses arise at the bowl rim along the pin axis, 

while compressive stresses predominate in the thrust-antithrust direction.

Under gas force load, for all piston variants, the boss and support area and the transition of 
the support into the piston crown are clearly loaded by compressive stresses; Figure 3.10. In 
aluminum pistons, in particular, the load limit of the bosses can be exceeded as a result of 

high local pressures and temperatures. This limit can be increased, to a certain degree, by 

the use of special pin bore proﬁles that deviate from the round, cylindrical pin bore by 10 to 

100 μm. The design of the pin bore proﬁle, however, also affects the stress at other areas on 

the piston, such as the bowl rim, bowl base, cooling gallery, or support.

In composite pistons, high compressive stresses due to gas force also arise in the support 

area. The force ﬂow of the gas force, from the combustion chamber, through the crown and 

the contact surfaces, into the skirt and then into the piston pin, can be signiﬁcantly affected 

by the radial location of the contact surfaces. Contact pressures and displacements (relative 

3.5  Stress behavior

51

Figure 3.9: 
Stress amplitudes due to gas force load on 
a commercial vehicle piston with salt-core 
cooling gallery

motions) arise under gas force loads at the contact surfaces in each expansion stroke. These 

are caused by the different deformations of the piston’s crown and skirt. This can lead to 

wear at the contact surfaces.

The screw joint is particularly important for composite pistons in order to minimize the ampli-

tudes from the gas force, particularly in the skirt’s countersunk holes. This is done by appro-

priately designing the bolted parts (tappet, optimized countersunk depth) and by placing the 

bores outside of the force ﬂow of the gas force as much as possible (central screw joint, twin 

screw joint).

Figure 3.10: Stresses under temperature and gas force in a passenger car diesel piston with spray jet 
cooling

52

3  Simulation of piston operational strength using FEA

At the TDC ﬁred, the effect of inertia force contributes to relieving the contact load due to gas 
force in the piston pin boss and the small end bore. Figure 3.11 shows the stress distribution 
due to the temperature and inertia forces at the TDC nonﬁred for a passenger car gasoline 

engine piston, which is primarily concentrated at the side of the pin bore.

Figure  3.11:  Stresses  from  temperature  and  inertia  force  loads  in  a  gasoline  engine  piston  at  TDC 
nonfired

Figure 3.12: Stresses due to temperature, gas, and lateral force loads on a gasoline engine piston

3.6  Numerical verification of operational strength

53

Figure 3.12 shows the distribution of stresses under the inﬂuence of temperature, gas force, 
and the maximum lateral force on a passenger car gasoline engine piston. The location with 

the greatest stress amplitudes can be easily identiﬁed at the transition from the piston skirt 

to the pin boss. The level of the maximum compressive stresses is greatly inﬂuenced by the 

degree of skirt ovality. Reducing the free deformation of the piston prior to contact with the 

cylinder, by using a piston skirt with less ovality, signiﬁcantly reduces the stress amplitudes 

without requiring increased wall thickness in the skirt area.

3.5.3  Stresses due to manufacturing and assembly 

Figure  3.13  shows  the  stress  distribution  from  the  joining  process  of  a  shrink-ﬁt  pin  bore 
bushing, using the example of a piston for a passenger car diesel engine with direct injection. 

The bushing is not shown in the illustration. The joining process generates circumferential 

tensile stresses across broad areas of the pin boss circumference, with maxima at the equa-

tor and the nadir (exterior). These must be taken into consideration when designing the boss 

shape and wall thicknesses.

Figure 3.13: Cold shrink fit of the pin boss, stress distribution

3.6  Numerical verification of operational strength 

While steel and cast iron materials have pronounced fatigue resistance, aluminum materials 

lose fatigue strength with increasing numbers of load cycles. This material behavior needs to 

also be taken into consideration in the strength assessment. For steel pistons, the equivalent 

stresses  are  determined  in  a  linear-elastic  FEA  under  full-load  conditions,  considering  all 

load case combinations, and are analyzed for fatigue resistance as a function of the tem-

perature and surface condition (stress-life method).

54

3  Simulation of piston operational strength using FEA

For  today’s  highly  stressed  light-alloy  pistons,  the  evaluation  based  on  a  deﬁned  number 

of  load  cycles  (limiting  number  of  cycles:  50  million)  is  no  longer  possible  considering  a 

minimum safety factor because of the lack of fatigue resistance, as indicated above, at the 

highly stressed component locations. The alternating plasticization that occurs primarily in 

the highly thermally stressed bowl area must be taken into consideration, and this requires 

a different approach.

Numerical veriﬁcation of the operational strength is an important instrument for reducing the 
time, and therefore the cost, required for development. It is possible to develop the product 

close to its ﬁnal contours at an early stage by considering variants used in series production, 

and thus reducing the number of engine tests. Service life analysis provides, among others, 

the following opportunities for analysis:
■  Assessment  of  geometric  inﬂuences  (e.g.,  bowl  rim  radius,  cooling  gallery  location,  pin 

bore proﬁles)

■  Effects of load-speciﬁc changes (e.g., power output, torque, and engine speed)

■  Comparison of customer release procedures

■  Correlation between release engine tests and ﬁeld applications

■  Establishing inspection intervals

■  Parameter studies for developing reasonable engine test programs

Veriﬁcation of operational strength is performed using the “local strain approach,” analyzing 
local, transient stresses and deformations (strain-life method); see overview in Figure 3.14.

The load-versus-time sequences are typically deﬁned for customer-speciﬁc release engine 

tests, or by the load spectrum of the in-house engine test lab. These are primarily alternating 

load programs and thermal shock tests, which are intended to cover nearly all conditions of 

the series application within less time under more severe conditions.

The stress distribution in a piston under engine operating loads is known for a static temper-

ature ﬁeld from the ﬁnite element analysis. In addition to the full-load state, partial-load states 

can  also  be  calculated  as  needed,  and  analyzed  for  critical  levels  of  equivalent  stresses 

(mean stress and deﬂection stress). Residual stresses are taken into account in the service 

life  analysis,  as  are  the  existing  knowledge  gained  from  engine  testing,  ﬁeld  ﬁndings,  and 

strain gauge measurements on identical or similar components in the laboratory.

With regard to materials, cyclic stress-strain curves and total strain controlled Wöhler lines 

as a function of temperature are necessary. The isothermal material fatigue data for the tem-

perature range from RT (room temperature) to 400°C are based on zero mean strain tests 
(strain ratio R(cid:72) = –1) and are applicable to the saturated material state.

In order to describe the local stress-strain situation, starting with the initial loading curve and 

continuing after load reversal with the hysteresis branches (doubling the stress-strain curve, 

according to Masing), the “true” (elastic-plastic) stresses and strains are iteratively calculated 

from the existing elastic stresses at the highly loaded component locations, using the Neuber 
approximation.  The  mathematical  formulation  of  the  cyclic  stress-strain  curve  follows  the 

3.6  Numerical verification of operational strength

55

Figure 3.14: Service life concept (schematic)
Definitions: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remark: The symbols apply only to the images above.

T1:  temperature 1
T2:  temperature 2
(cid:86)m:  mean stress
(cid:86)a:  stress amplitude
(cid:72)a:  strain amplitude
pz:  maximum gas force in expansion stroke
nM:  engine speed
PB: damage parameter (Bergmann)
NA: number of cycles to crack initiation
t: 

time

Ramberg-Osgood  material  law  and  the  hyperbolic  curve  according  to  Neuber.  The  effect 

of mean stress is described by a damage parameter, according to Bergmann, for example.

Here, nonzero mean stresses are transformed into zero mean stresses. In addition to con-
verting the stress into PB values (damage parameter according to Bergmann), the temper-
ature-dependent (cid:72)/N lines are also described as P-Wöhler lines. The inﬂuence of the load 
spectrum is analyzed using a damage calculation based on the linear damage hypothesis 

according to Palmgren-Miner, which states that damage is accumulated starting at the ﬁrst 

load cycle. Failure occurs at a deﬁned sum of damage. The application of the operational 

strength assessment is performed at MAHLE using the proprietary MAFAT computer pro-

gram. The result is the crack initiation service life. The qualitative effects of gas force and tem-

perature on the service life are shown, using the example of a passenger car diesel piston, 
in Figure 3.15: 10% reduction in gas pressure leads to nearly 3 times the service life, while a 
10°C lower component temperature approximately doubles the service life.

56

3  Simulation of piston operational strength using FEA

Figure 3.15: 
Effect of gas pressure and 
component temperature on 
the service life of a passenger 
car diesel piston

Figure 3.16 shows the close agreement between the analysis and engine test results, based 
on the example of a passenger car gasoline engine piston. The failure locations are situated 

in the center of the crown and at the valve pocket intersection, and coincide with the lowest 

service life estimates on this piston.

Another comparison is shown in Figure 3.17, using the example of a heavy-duty diesel engine 

piston. The piston failure, with cracks occurring in the bowl base, again matches the service 

life prediction.

In the damage calculation, the high-cycle stress due to the maximum gas force load acting 

for a large number of load cycles, and the low-cycle damage due to temperature changes 

under operating conditions with relatively few events are separated (HC or HCF: high-cycle 

fatigue, and LC or LCF: low-cycle fatigue). When the operating conditions change, a transient 

temperature and a change in material properties occurs. At present, the LCF stress is con-

sidered as isothermal by using the higher temperature of the two load cases to deﬁne the LC 

stress range. According to the latest TMF (thermomechanical fatigue) fundamental research, 

under thermal-mechanical loading, this can lead to a nonconservative service life estimate. 

Because of the temperature and stress gradients present in the piston, the out-of-phase pro-

cesses are of primary interest: while compressive stresses buildup during heating because 

of the constraint of the surrounding material, tensile stresses during cooling resulting from 

cyclic plasticization may lead to crack initiation.

3.6  Numerical verification of operational strength

57

Figure  3.16:  Comparison  of  numerical  simulation  and  engine  test  (passenger  car  gasoline  engine 
piston)

Figure 3.17: Comparison of numerical simulation and engine test (heavy-duty diesel engine piston)

58

3  Simulation of piston operational strength using FEA

Current research and development activities focus on the simulation of near-engine condi-

tions.  Baseline  material  tests  are  performed  on  in-house  TMF  test  benches.  Because  the 

transient  LC  stress—with  the  exception  of  the  shutdown  or  stopping  process—is  simulta-

neously  superimposed  on  the  mechanical  loads  (HC  stress),  this  must  also  be  taken  into 

consideration in the numerical simulation. One potential method is to investigate the micro-

structural damage process under various load applications.

One practical approach uses models for cyclic plasticity (Chaboche, Jiang, etc.) that describe 
material-dependent  deformation  behavior  for  monotone  and  cyclic  stresses,  creep,  relax-

ation, and cyclic creep. Changes in the deformation model for LCF stresses can be used to 

include the viscoplastic material law to capture the inﬂuence of HCF. The service life of com-

ponents under cyclic load is often determined by the formation and growth of microcracks. 

A cycle-dependent damage parameter can be developed on the basis of elastic-plastic frac-

ture mechanics of microcracks, and includes the effects of isothermal and thermomechani-

cal stresses, dwell times, creep effects, etc., resulting in a prediction of the service life.

4  Piston materials

59

4.1  Requirements for piston materials

The function of the piston and the loads that act on it present a special requirements proﬁle 

for the piston material.

If the goal is low piston weight, then a low-density material is preferred. Besides the design, 

the strength of the material is crucial for the load carrying capacity of the piston. The change 

in loads over time requires good static as well as dynamic strength. Temperature resistance 

is also important in view of the thermal loads.

The thermal conductivity of the material signiﬁcantly affects the temperature level. As a rule, 

high thermal conductivity is advantageous, because it leads to a uniform temperature distri-

bution within the piston. Low temperatures not only allow greater material loading but, in the 

piston crown, they also have a beneﬁcial effect on process parameters such as ﬁlling ratio 

and knock limit.

Static and dynamic strength values describe the behavior of the material under isothermal 

conditions. Pistons are sometimes exposed to heavily ﬂuctuating temperatures. The transient 

thermal stresses that this causes place a cyclic load on the material, sometimes beyond its 

elastic limit. The materials must also be resistant to this stress. Because of the motions and 

forces at sliding and sealing surfaces, piston materials must also meet high requirements for 

seizure resistance, low friction coefﬁcients, and wear resistance.

Material pairings between the piston and its mating parts, as well as lubrication conditions, 

are of particular signiﬁcance. They must be considered as a tribological system. Special sur-

face treatments or coatings improve the properties of the base material.

The requirements for the thermal expansion behavior of the piston material depend on the 

material pairing between the cylinder and the piston pin. In view of changes to clearance 

between the cold and hot states, the thermal expansion coefﬁcients should differ by as little 

as possible.

A material with good machining properties ensures cost-effective production of large quanti-

ties. The production of the raw forging should allow a shape that is as close as possible to 

the ﬁnal contour, as well as high material quality. Suitable processes include permanent mold 

casting  and  forging.  Sliding  and  sealing  surfaces  demand  high-precision  ﬁnishing,  which 

requires the material to have suitable machining properties.
Piston materials

4.2  Aluminum materials 

As a light alloy with high thermal conductivity, aluminum is ideal for use as a piston material. 

Unalloyed, however, its strength and wear resistance are too low. The discovery of precipita-

tion hardening by Wilm in 1906 made aluminum alloys suitable for technical purposes.

Metals have a mutual solubility that depends on temperature. At low temperatures and in the 
solid state, this value is very low for some metals [1]. Phase diagrams, derived from cooling 

curves from the liquid state, provide a good visual representation of these conditions.

For example, Figure 4.1 shows the phase diagram of the 2-material system (binary system) 
for  aluminum/silicon  [2].  Drawing  a  section  through  the  diagram  at  about  7%  silicon,  the 

liquidus line is intersected at about 620°C when cooling down. Below this line, a mixture of 
primarily precipitated (cid:68) solid solution and melt is present.

Figure 4.1: 
Phase diagram of the 2-material alloy AlSi

The  solid  solution  consists  of  crystals  of  the  main  alloying  element  (aluminum),  with  the 

foreign atoms of the second element (silicon) randomly distributed throughout the matrix. 

As the temperature drops, the melt becomes more and more rich in silicon, until ﬁnally the 

residual melt solidiﬁes at the so-called eutectic point of 577°C and a content of about 12.5% 
silicon, forming a eutectic mixture consisting entirely of aluminum (cid:68) solid solution and silicon 

4.2  Aluminum materials

61

crystals. As the diagram shows, the maximum solubility (1.65%) of the silicon in the aluminum 

solid solution occurs at 577°C, and drops at lower temperatures. At 200°C, the solubility is 

only 0.01%.

The microstructure of the solidiﬁed alloy consists of the primarily precipitated (cid:68) solid solu-
tion and the AlSi eutectic. The diagram also shows that the percentage of eutectic becomes 

greater with increasing silicon content, until ﬁnally the melt transitions from the liquid to solid 

eutectic state with no solidiﬁcation interval at the eutectic point of 12.5% silicon and 577°C.

Alloys with a silicon content of <12.5% are hypoeutectic, and those with a silicon content of 

>12.5% are hypereutectic. It can also be seen in the diagram that the microstructure in the 

hypereutectic range consists of primarily precipitated silicon crystals and the AlSi eutectic.

Crystallization from the melt is enhanced by nuclei. The number of nuclei and the cooling 

rate, among other factors, determine the ﬁneness of the microstructure grains. The crystal-

lites growing from the melt restrict the proportion of liquid metal more and more, and form 

grain  boundaries  where  their  edges  run  into  each  other.  Contaminants  and  intermetallic 

phases arising from the melt are concentrated at these boundaries.

4.2.1  Heat treatment

The temperature function of the solubility of solid solutions is utilized for precipitation hard-

ening. With rapid cooling from the melt or from annealing temperatures of around 500°C 

(solution annealing), supersaturated solid solution is present at low temperatures. Alloys suit-

able  for  pistons  primarily  have  aluminum-copper-magnesium  and  aluminum-magnesium-

silicon solid solutions. These alloys, in a supersaturated solid solution, are relatively soft and 

have minimal volume. Even aging at room temperature causes the supersaturated portions 

to  attempt  to  reach  the  state  of  equilibrium  that  corresponds  to  the  temperature,  which 
causes stresses in the atomic matrix. No microscopically veriﬁable changes to the micro-

structure occur.

This process, known as natural aging, leads to substantially greater hardness and strength 

and a slight increase in volume after hours or days. Natural aging, however, can be reversed 

at relatively low temperatures. This makes it unsuitable for thermally loaded parts.

In the range of temperatures between 100°C and 300°C, artiﬁcial aging occurs and precipita-

tion can be microscopically veriﬁed. The considerable increases in hardness and strength 

can  lead  to  undesired  increases  in  the  volume  of  precision  parts  if  the  heat  treatment  is 

performed incorrectly.

The artiﬁcial aging curve depends on the exposure time and the temperature level; Figure 
4.2.

62

4  Piston materials

Figure 4.2: 
Hardness-time isotherms for 
artificial aging of aluminum-
silicon piston alloys. Initial 
state: solution-annealed and 
rapidly cooled

Depending on the temperature used for artiﬁcial aging, the hardness-time isotherms pass 

through a maximum. In the stabilizing process of artiﬁcial aging, this maximum is exceeded, 

which always causes some loss of strength, but establishes sufﬁcient volume stability. The 

temperature level and the exposure time affect not only the hardness and thus the strength 

at room temperature, but also the hardness and strength at elevated temperatures, which 

are of great signiﬁcance to the operating behavior of the piston material.

Figure 4.3 shows the residual hardness curve for an aluminum-silicon piston alloy, measured 
on  a  cooled  sample  after  corresponding  temperature  exposure.  The  curves  are  used  to 

evaluate the suitability of heat-resistant alloys. If the hardness of used pistons is measured, 

the curves can be used to draw conclusions about the average temperature to which the 

piston has been exposed.

Figure 4.3: 
Residual hardness curve of a 
heat-treated aluminum-silicon 
piston alloy, by temperature 
exposure

4.2  Aluminum materials

4.2.2  Piston alloys 

63

Pistons are almost exclusively made of aluminum-silicon alloys of eutectic, and partly hyper-

eutectic  composition,  which  can  be  cast  easily  and  nearly  always  can  be  forged  as  well. 
Table 4.1 shows an overview of the chemical composition of piston alloys used by MAHLE.

The  eutectic  alloy  M124  is  the  “classic”  piston  alloy,  and  has  been  the  basis  for  the  vast 

majority of pistons in recent decades. Even today it is still a very signiﬁcant, universally appli-

cable alloy. Pistons made of hypereutectic alloys exhibit even greater wear resistance. From 

this group, the alloys M138 and M244 are preferred for two-stroke engine pistons, while the 

M126 alloy is used in the USA for passenger car gasoline engines.

The  alloys  M142,  M145,  and  M174+  have  been  developed  only  recently.  Their  common 

characteristic is the relatively high proportion of the elements copper and nickel. This gives 

the alloys particularly high strength at elevated temperatures and thermal stability. Despite 

increasing  requirements  in  terms  of  casting  technology  and  slight  disadvantages  due  to 

somewhat  greater  density  and  lower  thermal  conductivity,  their  high  strength  at  elevated 

temperatures and thermal stability have led to great market penetration for these alloys in 

high-performance passenger car and commercial vehicle engines. The eutectic alloy M142 

is  primarily  used  in  gasoline  engines,  and  the  alloy  M174+,  which  is  likewise  eutectic,  is 

used increasingly in diesel engines. The hypereutectic alloy M145 is used in several gasoline 

engines.

Aluminum-silicon piston alloys are employed mainly for cast pistons. They can also be forged 

for special purposes, which leads to somewhat different microstructures and properties. The 

designation “P” is added to the alloy symbol in order to highlight this distinction.

The alloy M-SP25 is a silicon-free, high-strength aluminum alloy used exclusively for forged 

pistons and piston components, primarily for racing pistons, but also for skirts of composite 

pistons in large-bore engines.

The  Figures  4.4  show  examples  of  characteristic  material  structures.  The  eutectic  alloys 
M124, M142, and M174+ exhibit a granular, heterogeneous, eutectic aluminum-silicon mix-

ture with embedded intermetallic phases. In the hypereutectic alloys M126, M138, M145, and 

M244, the increasing silicon content results in a clearly visible increase in the proportion of 

primarily precipitated silicon crystals. Low levels of phosphorus in the aluminum melt act as 

nucleating agents for the silicon, producing a silicon crystal formation that is beneﬁcial for 
machinability. Their edge lengths should not be greater than 100 μm.

64

4  Piston materials

Table 4.1: Chemical composition of MAHLE aluminum piston alloys [percent by weight]

M124

M126

M138

M244

AlSi12CuMgNi

AlSi16CuMgNi

AlSi18CuMgNi

AlSi25CuMgNi

11.0–13.0

14.8–18.0

17.0–19.0

23.0–26.0

Si

Cu

Mg

Ni

Fe

Mn

Ti

Zn

Cr

Al

Si

Cu

Mg

Ni

Fe

Mn

Ti

Zn

Zr

V

Cr

Al

0.8–1.5

0.8–1.3

0.8–1.3

Max. 0.7

Max. 0.3 

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.3

Max. 0.05

Remainder

11.0–13.0

2.5–4.0

0.5–1.2

1.75–3.0

Max. 0.7 

Max. 0.3 

Max. 0.2 

Max. 0.3

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.18

Max. 0.05

Remainder

Max. 0.05

Remainder

Max. 0.05

Remainder

M142

M145

M174+

M-SP25

AlSi12Cu3Ni2Mg

AlSi15Cu3Ni2Mg

AlSi12Cu4Ni2Mg

AlCu2,5Mg1,5FeNi

14.0–16.0

11.0–13.0

Max. 0.25 

0.8–1.5

0.8–1.3

0.8–1.3

Max. 0.7

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.3

2.5–4.0

0.5–1.2

1.75–3.0

Max. 0.7

Max. 0.3

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.3

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.18

Max. 0.05

Remainder

0.8–1.5

0.8–1.3

0.8–1.3

Max. 0.7

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.3

3.0–5.0

0.5–1.2

1.0–3.0

Max. 0.7

Max. 0.3

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.3

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.18

Max. 0.05

Remainder

0.8–1.5

0.8–1.3

0.8–1.3

Max. 0.7

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.6

Remainder

1.8–2.7

1.2–1.8

0.8–1.4

0.9–1.4

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.2

Max. 0.1

–

–

–

Remainder

The eutectic piston alloy M124 is also used in a reﬁned state (M124V). The eutectic between 

AlSi solid solutions, which develop as dendrites, is made particularly ﬁne by the addition of 

small amounts of sodium or strontium. Machinability is improved, but resistance to wear is 

worse than for the granular eutectic structure.

The microstructures of the forged alloys M124P, M124VP, and the AlCu alloy M-SP25 are also 

illustrated. The ﬂow structure can be seen in the line-shaped formation of the microstructure.

The temperature-dependent physical and mechanical material fatigue data for cast pistons 
are summarized in Table 4.2. Along with the static parameters of tensile strength and yield 

4.2  Aluminum materials

65

a) Eutectic AlSi alloy M142 (representative for M124 and M174+ as well), casting state with granular  
structure

b)  Hypereutectic  AlSi  alloys,  casting  state  with  granular  structure,  M145  (14–16%  Si),  left,  M244  
(23–26% Si), right

c) Aluminum-base alloys for forged pistons, M124P with granular structure, left, M124VP with modified 
structure, right

d) Silicon-free alloy M-SP25

Figures 4.4: 
Microstructure of MAHLE aluminum piston alloys

Yield strength  
Rp0,2 [MPa]

20°C

190–230

66

4  Piston materials

Table 4.2: Physical and mechanical properties of cast MAHLE aluminum piston alloys

Description

M124

M126, M138

M142, M145, 
M174+

M244

Hardness HB10

Tensile strength  
Rm [MPa]

90–130

90–130

200–250

180–220

180–200

170–200

20°C

90–110

80–100

100–110

20°C

20°C

150°C

250°C

350°C

150°C

250°C

350°C

20°C

150°C

250°C

350°C

150°C

250°C

350°C

20°C

150°C

250°C

350°C

20°C

350°C

90–110

35–55

170–210

70–100

20–30

< 1

1

3

10

75–85

45–50

20–25

80,000

77,000

72,000

65,000

145

155

19.6

20.6

21.4

22.1

2.68

1

100–140

200–280

180–240

100–120

45–65

190–260

170–220

80–110

35–60

< 1

< 1

1.5–2

7–9

80–90

50–55

35–40

84,000–85,000

79,000–80,000

75,000–76,000

70,000–71,000

130–135

140–145

18.5–19.5

19.5–20.5

20.5–21.2

21.0–21.8

2.75–2.79

0.85–0,9

90–130

170–210

160–180

70–100

35–55

170–200

130–180

70–100

30–50

0.1

0.4

0.5

2

70–90

55–70

40–50

15–25

90,000

85,000

81,000

76,000

135

145

18.3

19.3

20.0

20.7

2.65

0.6

80–110

35–55

170–200

150–180

70–100

20–40

1

1

5

1.5

60–75

40–50

15–25

84,000

80,000

75,000

71,000

140

150

18.6

19.5

20.2

20.8

2.67

0.8

Elongation  
at fracture  
A5 [%]

Fatigue strength 
under reversed 
bending stress 
(cid:86)bw [MPa]

Young’s modulus 
[MPa]

Thermal  
conductivity  
(cid:79) [W/mK]

Thermal expansion  
(cid:68) [10–6 m/mK]

Density (cid:85) [g/cm3]

Relative wear rate

20–100°C

20–200°C

20–300°C

20–400°C

20°C

4.2  Aluminum materials

67

Table 4.3: Physical and mechanical properties of forged MAHLE aluminum piston alloys

Description

Hardness HB10

Tensile strength  
Rm [MPa]

Yield strength  
Rp0,2 [MPa]

Elongation  
at fracture  
A5 [%]

Fatigue strength 
under reversed 
bending stress 
(cid:86)bw [MPa]

Young’s modulus  
[MPa]

Thermal  
conductivity  
(cid:79) [W/mK]

20°C

20°C

150°C

250°C

300°C

20°C

150°C

250°C

300°C

20°C

150°C

250°C

300°C

20°C

150°C

250°C

300°C

20°C

150°C

250°C

300°C

20°C

150°C

250°C

300°C

Thermal expansion  
(cid:68) [10–6 m/mK]

Density (cid:85) [g/cm3]

Relative wear rate

20–100°C

20–200°C

20–300°C

20°C

M124P

100–125

300–370

250–300

80–140

50–100

280–340

220–280

60–120

30–70

< 1

4

20

30

110–140

90–120

45–55

30–40

80,000

77,000

72,000

69,000

155

 

165

19.6

20.6

 21.4

2.68

1

M142P

100–140

300–370

270–310

100–140

60–100

280–340

230–280

70–120

45–70

1

2

6

20

110–140

100–125

50–60

40–50

84,000

79,000

75,000

73,000

140

150

19.2

20.5

21.1

2.77

0.9

M-SP25

120–150

350–450

350–400

130–240

75–150

320–400

280–340

90–230

50–90

8

9

12

12

120–150

110–135

55–75

40–60

73,500

68,500

64,000

62,000

140

155

165

170

22.4

24

24.9

2.77

1.3

68

4  Piston materials

strength, the dynamic parameter of alternate strength is also provided for evaluating fatigue 

resistance [3]. In order to determine alternate strength, the load cycle limit has been deﬁned 
as 50 x 106.

The  strength  values  given  here  apply  to  test  bars  taken  from  pistons.  Prior  to  testing  at 

elevated temperatures, they were artiﬁcially aged at the test temperature for a long period of 

time. This procedure allows for the current service life of pistons in engine operation, which 

is signiﬁcantly longer than the load times that can be produced in materials testing.

The material fatigue data for forged pistons are shown in Table 4.3. Compared with the cast 
state, the material in the forged state exhibits greater strength and greater plastic deform-

ability (greater elongation at fracture). The strength advantage of the forged material structure 

is greatest in the lower and middle temperature ranges, up to about 250°C, and drops off at 

high temperatures.

aged at the test temperature.

The strength values are based on heat-treated samples taken from pistons and artiﬁcially 

The wider scatter bands for the strength values compared with cast alloys, because of dif-

ferences  in  heat  treatment,  account  for  the  use  of  forged  pistons  for  different  service  life 

requirements. The lower limits are representative for series vehicles and large-bore engines, 

and the higher limits for racing and sports vehicles.

The  wear  rates  shown—relative  to  the  material  M124—are  relative  values,  obtained  using  a 

variant of the wear machine according to E. Koch [4]. The practical applicability of values 

obtained on wear machines, however, is often questionable. Experience has shown that the 

data determined by MAHLE allow at least a qualitative evaluation of the materials.

4.2.3  Fiber reinforcement 

Ceramic  ﬁbers  signiﬁcantly  increase  the  thermal  and  mechanical  load  limits  of  aluminum 
piston materials. Using pressure-aided casting processes, ﬁber preforms—short Al2O3 ﬁbers 
with  an  average  ﬁber  diameter  of  3–4  μm  and  average  ﬁber  length  of  50–200  μm—are 
inﬁltrated with the molten alloy [5]. The structure images in Figure 4.5 show the distribution 
and orientation of the ceramic ﬁbers in the metallic matrix. As a result of the ﬁber preform 

manufacturing process, most ﬁbers are randomly oriented within a plane.

Slight disadvantages in the form of somewhat greater density and lower thermal conductiv-

ity are offset by the many advantages of ﬁber-reinforced composite materials, such as an 

increase in Young’s modulus and a lower thermal expansion coefﬁcient.

The  thermal  and  mechanical  alternate  strength  increases  particularly  sustainably.  For  this 

reason,  composite  materials  are  especially  well-suited  for  the  local  reinforcement  of  par-

ticularly  highly  stressed  zones,  such  as  the  combustion  bowl  in  diesel  engine  pistons.  In 

4.3  Ferrous materials

69

Figure 4.5: Microstructure of the Al piston alloy M124, reinforced with about 15 percent Al2O3 fibers 
by volume, section in the plane, left, and perpendicular to the preferred fiber orientation, right

commercial vehicles, pistons with locally ﬁber-reinforced combustion chamber bowls have 

proved their functionality and reliability for many years.

4.3  Ferrous materials 

If the strength or wear resistance of aluminum alloys is not sufﬁcient to meet the loads, then 

ferrous materials are employed. This can begin with local reinforcement (e.g., ring carriers), 

and extend to parts of composite pistons (e.g., piston crown, bolts), all the way to pistons 

constructed entirely of cast iron or forged steel.

Carbon is the most important alloying element for iron. The iron-carbon diagram, Figure 4.6, 
enables a thorough assessment of these materials [6]. This diagram differentiates two sys-
tems: the metastable or carbidic system, consisting of iron and metastable iron carbide Fe3C 
(solid lines), and the stable or graphite system (dashed lines). In the latter case, the majority of 

the carbon is embedded in the iron as graphite. In the metastable system, the iron can bind 
the carbon only as cementite (Fe3C), up to 6.7%. Figure 4.6 therefore presents a complete 
overview (0–100% Fe3C). Depending on the temperature, carbon atoms can be embedded 
up to a certain degree in the iron lattice on so-called interstitials. The solubility of carbon in 
the cubic body-centered (cid:68) solid solution—also known as (cid:68) iron or ferrite—is signiﬁcantly lower 
(max. 0.02 percent C by weight) than in the cubic face-centered (cid:74) solid solution—also known 
as (cid:74) iron or austenite (max. 2.0 percent C by weight).

For carbon contents of less than 4.3%, austenite is primarily precipitated from the melt. At 

4.3%  C,  the  melt  solidiﬁes  eutectically  as  ledeburite.  At  greater  than  4.3%  C,  cementite  is 

primarily  precipitated  from  the  melt.  Below  2.0%  C,  austenite  forms  ﬁrst,  and  its  range  of 

70

4  Piston materials

Figure 4.6: Iron-carbon diagram

existence  drops  off  with  falling  temperature  to  lower  concentrations  of  C,  until  ﬁnally  the 

high-carbon austenite degrades into low-carbon ferrite and cementite at 723°C. In the range 

of  0.8%  C,  the  eutectoid  perlite  is  formed,  which  is  a  laminar  arrangement  of  ferrite  and 
cementite.

In the stable system, the processes shown with dashed lines occur at normal cooling rates 

only in the presence of additional silicon (>0.5%), because silicon promotes the formation of 

free carbon (graphite). Fundamentally, the processes are similar to those in the metastable 

system, except that graphite is formed instead of cementite.

4.3.1  Cast iron materials 

Cast iron materials generally have a carbon content of >2%. In these materials, the brittle 

cementite or graphite can no longer be brought into solution by subsequent heat treatment. 

They are therefore not suitable for radical hot forming, but their castability can be optimized.

MAHLE  uses  high-quality  cast  iron  varieties  with  lamellar  and  spherolithic  graphite  for  its 
products.  Table  4.4  contains  the  composition,  physical  properties,  and  strength  values  of 
common alloys. The microstructures of these materials are shown in Figures 4.7a to c.

4.3  Ferrous materials

71

Table  4.4:  MAHLE  cast  iron  materials—chemical  composition,  mechanical  and  physical  properties 
(guidelines for separately cast sample bars)

C

Si

Mn

Ni

Cr

Cu

Mo

Mg

20°C

100°C

200°C

300°C

400°C

20°C

100°C

200°C

300°C

400°C

20°C

Description

Alloying elements  
[Percent by weight]

Tensile strength  
Rm [MPa]

Yield strength  
Rp0,2 [MPa]

Elongation at fracture 
A5 [%]

Brinell hardness  
HBW 30

Fatigue strength under 
reversed bending stress 
(cid:86)bw [MPa]
Young’s modulus  
[MPa]

Thermal conductivity  
(cid:79) [W/mK]

Thermal expansion  
(cid:68) [10–6 m/mK]
Density (cid:85) [g/cm3]

Austenitic cast iron for  
ring carriers

Cast iron with nodular 
graphite for pistons and 
piston skirts

M-H  
(lamellar)

M-K  
(spherolithic)

M-S70  
(EN GJS 700-2)

2.4–2.8

1.8–2.4

1.0–1.4

1.0–1.6

5.0–7.0

2.4–2.8

2.9–3.1

0.6–0.8

0.9–1.1

13.5–17.0

19.5–20.5

0.03–0.05

0.04–0.06

3.5–4.1

2.0–2.4

0.3–0.5

0.6–0.8

–

< 0.1

700

640

600

590

530

420

390

360

350

340

2

250

177,000

171,000

27

12

7.2

190

170

160

160

150

150

150

140

140

130

2

32

18

380

210

8

13

18

7.4

120–150

140–180

240–300

20°C

84

100,000

120,000

20°C

200°C

20°C

20–200°C

20°C

7.45

72

4  Piston materials

a) M-H

b) M-K

c) M-S70

Figures 4.7: 
Microstructures of MAHLE cast iron materials

Thanks to their relatively high thermal expansion in comparison to cast irons with perlitic or fer-

ritic basic structures, austenitic cast iron materials are of great signiﬁcance for the production 

of ring carrier pistons [7]. The alloy M-H, for example, has a coefﬁcient of thermal expansion of 
(cid:68) (cid:124) 17.5 x 10–6 m/mK, which, compared with normal cast iron at (cid:68) (cid:124) 10 x 10–6 m/mK, is close 
to the aluminum piston alloy M124 ((cid:68) (cid:124) 21 x 10–6 m/mK). For the solidiﬁed cast aluminum 
piston, this means that critical stresses between the piston body and a ring carrier made of 

austenitic cast iron are much lower than for a ring carrier made of normal cast iron. Most 

ring carriers are made of austenitic cast iron with lamellar graphite formation M-H. In special 

cases,  the  higher-strength  austenitic  cast  iron  with  spherolithic  graphite  formation  M-K  is 

used. Ring carriers are machined from centrifugal-cast tubes. Centrifugal casting produces 

a dense, consistent casting structure.

For the materials used in piston casting, the basic material of the structure is largely per-

litic, on account of its good strength and wear properties. Pistons in highly stressed diesel 

engines  and  other  components  subjected  to  heavy  loads  in  engines  and  the  mechanical 

engineering industry are predominantly made of M-S70 spherolithic cast iron. This material 

is used, e.g., for single-piece pistons and piston skirts in composite pistons.

4.3  Ferrous materials

4.3.2  Steels 

73

The iron alloys designated as steels generally have a carbon content of less than 2%. When 

heated, they transform completely into malleable (suitable for forging) austenite. The ferrous 

alloys are therefore excellent for hot forming, such as roll-burnishing or forging.

Steels used for components generally have a carbon content of less than 0.8%. If they cool 
slowly after casting or hot forming, then a ferritic-perlitic structure is formed; Figure 4.8b. In 
this state, the steel typically has insufﬁcient strength and hardness. The strength of the mate-

rial is therefore increased by various means.

One  technically  signiﬁcant  process  is  tempering,  where  the  steel  is  cooled  rapidly  from  a 

temperature of more than 850°C (quenching). The conversion of austenite to perlite and fer-
rite, as shown in the iron-carbon diagram in Figure 4.6, no longer takes place, because of 
the suddenly limited freedom of motion of the carbon atoms in the iron matrix. The carbon 

remains forcibly dissolved in the crystal lattice, although it does not have sufﬁcient solubility 

under equilibrium conditions. This leads to great distortions in the lattice, which are expressed 

macroscopically as high hardness and strength, but also brittleness. This hardened structure 

with a typically acicular appearance is called martensite. Subsequent heating of the material, 
or tempering, relieves these stresses somewhat and forms a tempered structure; Figure 4.8a. 
Hardness and strength are reduced somewhat, but toughness is increased [8].

When quenching, the cooling rate decreases from the edge to the core of a component and 

is ultimately less than the critical cooling rate of the steel, so that the austenite is no longer 

completely converted to martensite in this area. The material no longer fully hardens. Ele-

ments such as manganese, chromium, nickel, or molybdenum increase the hardenability of 

the alloy by reducing its critical cooling rate. This is particularly important for components 

with large heat-treatment cross sections, because it can limit the loss of strength toward the 

core.

Tempered structure
a) Steel 42CrMo4

Ferritic-perlitic structure
b) Precipitation-hardened ferritic-perlitic steel 
38MnVS6

Figures 4.8: Microstructures of steels for pistons

74

4  Piston materials

Table 4.5: Steels for pistons—chemical composition, mechanical and physical properties

38MnVS6

Controlled cooling  
from heat of deformation

Description

State of heat treatment

Alloying elements  
[Percent by weight]

Brinell hardness HBW 30

Tensile strength  
Rm [MPa]

Yield strength  
Rp0,2 [MPa]

Elongation at fracture  
A5 [%]

Fatigue strength under 
reversed bending stress  
(cid:86)bw [MPa]

Young’s modulus  
[MPa]

Thermal conductivity  
(cid:79) [W/mK]

C

Si

Mn

Cr

Mo

P

S

V

N

20°C

130°C

300°C

450°C

20°C

130°C

300°C

450°C

20°C

130°C

300°C

450°C

20°C

130°C

300°C

450°C

20°C

130°C

300°C

450°C

20°C

130°C

300°C

450°C

42CrMo4

Heat-treated

0.38–0.45

Max. 0.40

0.60–0.90

0.90–1.20

0.15–0.30

Max. 0.035

Max. 0.035

 

 

265–330

920–980

870–960

850–930

630–690

740–860

700–800

680–750

520–580

12–15

8–13

10–13

15–16

370–440

350–410

340–400

280–340

212,000

203,000

193,000

180,000

44

43

40

37

13.2

13.7

7.80

Average linear thermal 
expansion  
(cid:68) [10–6 m/mK]

Density (cid:85) [g/cm3]

20–300°C

20–450°C

20°C

0.34–0.41

0.15–0.80

1.20–1.60

Max. 0.30

Max. 0.08

Max. 0.025

0.020–0.060

0.08–0.020

0.010–0.020

240–310

910

860

840

610

610

570

540

450

14

9

11

15

370

350

320

290

38

39

39

37

13.1

13.7

7.78

208,000

201,000

189,000

176,000

4.3  Ferrous materials

75

For very highly stressed pistons and piston components, the chromium-molybdenum alloy of 

heat-treated steel 42CrMo4 is used. In addition to improved full hardenability, both alloying 

elements promote carbide formation, and molybdenum also increases strength at elevated 

temperatures. However, even for this steel, a decrease in strength toward the core area must 

be expected for very large heat-treatment cross sections or changes in cross section. The 
scattering ranges for strength values shown in Table 4.5 highlight this fact.

Bolts that connect the piston crown of a composite piston to the piston skirt are also gen-
erally  made  of  42CrMo4  heat-treated  steel.  They  must  comply  with  the  highest  DIN  267 

strength classiﬁcation of 10.9. In special cases, 34CrNiMo6 heat-treated steel is used, which 

has even greater full hardenability thanks to the addition of nickel.

Another signiﬁcant technology for increasing the strength of metallic materials is precipita-

tion hardening. Precipitation-hardened ferritic-perlitic steels exhibit small amounts of vana-

dium  or  niobium  added  (about  0.1  percent  by  weight).  They  are  therefore  referred  to  as 

microalloyed steels [9]. When the material is heated to forging temperatures, these microal-
loyed elements dissolve completely in the (cid:74) solid solution. The forged part is allowed to cool 
in air at a controlled rate immediately after hot forming. As the austenite converts to ferrite 

and perlite, the carbides and carbonitrides of these microalloyed elements precipitate in a 

very ﬁne distribution in  the ferrite and  increase  the  strength,  particularly  the  yield  limit,  by 

preventing dislocation mobility. 

Figure 4.8b shows a typical AFP structure, using 38MnVS6 as an example. This material is 
preferably used in steel pistons for commercial vehicle engines and for forged steel skirts in 

composite pistons. The advantages of this group of materials, compared with heat-treated 

steels, are improved machinability of the ferritic-perlitic structure and the elimination of costly 

subsequent heat treatment.

Both steel grades  used for manufacturing  pistons  today,  42CrMo4  heat-treated  steel  and 

38MnVS6 precipitation-hardened ferritic-perlitic steel, are suitable for use at temperatures of 

up to 450°C with regard to strength at elevated temperatures and oxidation resistance. When 

testing new engines, it is sometimes common to test the service life under overloaded condi-

tions. This can easily involve steel piston temperatures of 500–550°C, particularly at the edge 

of the combustion chamber bowl. In this temperature range, the iron reacts with the excess 

oxygen of the burning fuel-air mixture, and appreciable scaling occurs. If future engine con-

cepts are going to have similar thermal loads even under normal operating conditions, either 

antioxidation  coatings  or  other  heat-resistant  and  oxidation-resistant  steel  grades  may  be 

used.

76

4  Piston materials

4.4  Copper materials for pin bore bushings 

Piston pin bosses of diesel engine pistons are highly speciﬁcally loaded and sometimes have 

pin bore bushings made of copper materials. The bushings are inserted with interference, 

i.e.,  using  a  shrink  ﬁt  connection.  For  aluminum  pistons,  the  pin  bore  bushing  increases 

fatigue strength of the piston pin boss. For steel pistons, seizure resistance of the piston pin 

bearing is the primary emphasis. Besides high strength and good sliding properties, bushing 

materials should feature these additional properties:

■  Similar thermal expansion behavior as the piston material (for constant interference under 

hot and cold conditions)

■  Corrosion resistance against hot, acidiﬁed lubricating oil

MAHLE prefers to use solid piston pin bore bushings. They are machined from drawn tubing, 

which gets its strength from the deformation process or heat treatment. The range of appli-

cations indicated above is covered by two material grades.

Special brass CuZn31Si1 (material 2.1831) per DIN/ISO 4382-2
A nonhardenable material, which obtains its strength from cold forming. It is very resistant 

to corrosion due to oils and has good sliding properties. The microstructure consists of an 
(cid:68) matrix with some proportion of (cid:69) phase. Alloying silicon improves the wear and corrosion 
resistance.

Aluminum bronze CuAl10Ni5Fe4
A  precipitation-hardened  material  that  is  hardened  during  hot  forming.  It  is  characterized 

by  high  strength  and  good  corrosion  resistance  against  oils.  The  microstructure  consists 
of an (cid:68) matrix with precipitated iron, nickel, and manganese ((cid:78) phase). Alloyed aluminum 
improves the mechanical properties. Nickel increases strength at elevated temperatures, and 

iron  improves  ﬁne-graining  and  strength.  The  addition  of  manganese  increases  corrosion 

resistance and ductility.

Figures  4.9  display  the  structures,  and  Table  4.6  shows  the  composition  and  properties 
of the two materials. Because of its very high strength, aluminum bronze CuAl10Ni5Fe4 is 

preferred for bushings in steel pistons, while the special brass CuZn31Si1 is the preferred 

pin bore bushing material for aluminum pistons, on account of its greater thermal expansion 

coefﬁcient.

4.4  Copper materials for pin bore bushings

77

a) CuZn31Si1

b) CuAl10Ni5Fe4

Figures 4.9: Microstructures of pin bore bushing materials

Table 4.6: Chemical composition and properties of pin bore bushing materials

CuZn31Si1

CuAl10Ni5Fe4

Composition

[Percent by weight]

Reference values

Physical properties

Density

Thermal conductivity

Young’s modulus at room  
temperature

Hardness

Tensile strength  Rm 

Yield strength  Rp0,2 

Elongation at fracture  A5

Others, total

Al

Ni

Fe

Mn

Si

Pb

Zn

Cu

[g/cm3]

[W/mK]

[MPa]

[HB 10]

[MPa]

[MPa]

[%]

Max. 0.5

Max. 0.4

–

–

0.7–1.3

0.1–0.3

28.5–33.3

Max. 0.5

Remainder

8.4

19.2

71

150

540

430

10

Thermal expansion, RT–300°C

[10–6 m/mK]

Mechanical properties at room temperature, minimum values

108,000

120,000

8.5–11

4–6

2–5

0.5–1.5

–

Max. 0.05

Max. 0.5

Max. 0.3

Remainder

7.6

16.6

63

170

700

460

10

78

4.5  Coatings

4.5.1  Piston coatings

4  Piston materials

Coating of the piston skirt is primarily intended to prevent local welding between the piston 

and the cylinder, or piston seizing. A protective coating against wear is generally not neces-

sary here.

Under normal, moderate operating conditions, a piston does not require a coating on the 

skirt if it is carefully and correctly dimensioned. Risk of seizing does exist, however, under 

extreme operating conditions:
■  Lack of local clearance, caused by mechanical and/or thermal deformation of the cylinder

■  Insufﬁcient oil supply, such as during a cold start

■  Insufﬁcient  lubricity  of  the  engine  oil,  caused  by  fuel  contamination  in  the  oil,  extremely 

high operating temperature, or excessive aging of the oil

■  In brand-new condition, when the piston and cylinder have not yet been run in

A coating on the piston skirt provides protection in such extreme situations. It is important 

that the skirt coating be tribologically matched to the cylinder bore (cast iron or aluminum).

4.5.1.1  GRAFAL® 255 and EvoGlide
The standard coating for the piston skirt is GRAFAL®, for pistons of all sizes and types that 
are paired with cast iron cylinders.

GRAFAL® is an approximately 20 μm thick sliding lacquer coating with ﬁne graphite particles 
embedded in a polymer matrix. It withstands temperatures of up to 250°C that can occur at 

the piston skirt and is resistant to oils and fuels. The ﬁlm-forming polymer matrix supports 
the action of the solid graphite lubricant during dry running, with advantageous tribological 

properties. This provides great seizure resistance for very low clearances and a lack of oil. 

Under normal stress, the coating does not wear. Under extreme stress, particularly in case 

of high local contact pressure, it can be partially worn off locally. The resulting greater clear-

ance reduces the tendency to seize. As a result of this adaptability and the self-lubricating 
properties of GRAFAL®, pistons can exhibit very low clearances, which produces favorable 
acoustic properties with low friction.

Because the lateral forces on the piston skirt are increased when implementing a downsizing 

concept, the sliding lacquer layer must demonstrate improved wear resistance in the piston/

cylinder  bore  system  over  the  service  life  of  the  engine.  EvoGlide  was  developed  for  this 

purpose. The addition of certain additives makes the resin matrix more wear-resistant. The 

ability to wear off locally under extreme stress, however, is retained.

4.5  Coatings

4.5.1.2  Tin

79

Tin  is  a  soft,  malleable  metal  that  is  also  suitable  as  a  skirt  coating,  helping  with  run-in 

and  improving  boundary  lubrication  properties,  especially  for  a  cold  start.  The  tin  coating 
is 1–2 μm thick. The potential for preventing seizing is thus somewhat less than that of a 
GRAFAL® layer. Tin-plated pistons are paired with gray cast iron or NIKASIL® cylinders, and 
are preferably installed in passenger car gasoline engines.

4.5.1.3   Ferrostan/FerroTec®
The  skirt  coatings  that  have  been  proven  in  gray  cast  iron  cylinders,  such  as  tin  and 
GRAFAL®, are not tribologically suited as partners for aluminum running surfaces, because 
they would lead to rapid seizing and high wear. The Ferrostan coating system and FerroTec® 
have proved to be excellent for uncoated AlSi cylinders. Both are characterized by a high 
level of running reliability and low wear. Ferrostan consists of a 10–13 μm thick iron coating 
that is topped with a thin coating of tin as a run-in aid. FerroTec® consists of a pure iron 
coating that can optionally be tin-plated as well. Ferrostan/FerroTec® pistons are used exclu-
sively in passenger car gasoline engines, because diesel engines typically do not feature AlSi 

running surfaces.

4.5.1.4  FERROPRINT®
An alternative to the Ferrostan coating is the FERROPRINT® coating. It also serves to pro-
tect the running surfaces for pistons that are paired with high-silicon aluminum cylinders. 
Similar to GRAFAL®, this layer consists of a highly temperature-resistant polymer in which 
harder  stainless  steel  particles  are  embedded  as  a  reinforcement.  The  layer  thickness  is 
about 20 μm. The properties are similar to GRAFAL®.

4.5.1.5  Hard oxide in the top ring groove

While  the  top  ring  groove  in  a  diesel  engine  piston,  or  the  compression  ring  groove,  is 
traditionally well protected against wear by a ring carrier, gasoline engine pistons have not 

previously  required  this  protection.  Recently,  however,  damage  has  occurred  in  the  form 

of disruption and material wear at the groove ﬂanks, particularly at the lower groove ﬂank 

(microwelding). It presumably occurs as a result of local microwelds between the piston ring 

and  the  groove  ﬂank,  and  particularly  on  pistons  with  short  top  lands,  which  thus  exhibit 

higher  groove  temperatures.  These  higher  temperatures  presumably  arise  in  conjunction 

with ring packs that are tuned for extremely low oil consumption. On account of the minimal 

oil quantity that is available for lubricating the piston rings, microwelds can occur.

One effective means of protection against microwelding is localized hard-anodizing of the 
groove with a coating thickness of about 15 μm. The quasi-ceramic structure of the hard 
oxide layer eliminates metallic contact between the piston ring groove and the piston ring, 

and thus prevents microwelding. Although the hard oxide layer is signiﬁcantly rougher than 

the ﬁnely machined groove ﬂank, there is no problem sealing the piston rings, because the 

coating surface is quickly smoothed out by the micromotion of the piston rings.

80

4  Piston materials

4.5.1.6  Hard oxide on the crown

After long running times in diesel engines for passenger cars and commercial vehicles, ther-

mal and mechanical overloads can cause cracks in the bowl rim and piston crown. In order 

to prevent such cracks in the bowl rim, hard oxides are used once more, albeit with a layer 
thickness of 50–80 μm in this case.

The advantageous effect of this coating on the cracking behavior of the piston material can 

be attributed to bond stresses that reduce the compressive stresses as a result of thermal 
and  mechanical  loading  of  the  piston  crown.  Because  the  layer  is  not  applied  from  the 

outside, but arises from the conversion of the base material at the surface, the bond forces 

between the layer and the base material are strong enough to withstand the substantial local 

stresses.

4.5.1.7  Phosphate

Metal phosphates form crystalline or amorphous coatings that stand out for their good oil 
bonding, high adhesive strength, and good deformability. Phosphate coatings can provide 
effective protection against seizing and scufﬁng between sliding pairs, especially in run-in 

phases. This effect can also be exploited for pistons, particularly for diesel engine pistons to 

protect the boss.

Relatively thick layers (averaging 5 μm) of manganese-iron mixed phosphates are deposited 
on steel pistons (MONOTHERM®, FERROTHERM®, MonoWeld®). They enable direct pair-
ing with hardened steel pins, without the use of pin bore bushings.

Thin (<0.5 μm) aluminum phosphate layers are deposited on aluminum pistons as conver-
sion layers. They also provide limited antiscufﬁng protection in the piston pin boss.

4.5.1.8  GRAFAL® 210
Run-in of steel pistons in heavy-duty engines of commercial vehicles is a critical phase with 
regard to the pin bore/pin tribological system. This requires greater protection, such as is 
provided  by  GRAFAL®  210.  The  layer  consists  of  a  highly  temperature-resistant  polymer 
matrix, in which graphite particles and molybdenum sulﬁde pigments—added as a pressure-
resistant component—are embedded. The layer thickness is about 8 μm and provides longer 
antiscufﬁng/antiseizing protection in the pin bore during the run-in phase.

4.5.1.9  Chromium contact surfaces

For composite pistons in large diesel engines, relative motion occurs at the surfaces where 

the upper part contacts the piston skirt as a result of cyclic deformation of the components. 
Although these relative motions normally amount to less than 100 μm, they can lead to unde-
sired frictional wear at the contact surfaces. For the pairing of an aluminum skirt and steel 

upper part, the harder steel upper part wears more severely. Dimensional chrome plating of 
the contact surfaces of the steel upper part with a layer thickness of about 20 μm provides 
an effective solution.

4.5  Coatings

81

4.5.1.10  Chromium ring grooves

Heavy fuel oil, used as a fuel for large diesel engines, can contain large quantities of small, 

hard  particles,  which  can  cause  severe  abrasive  wear  to  the  piston  rings  and  piston  ring 

grooves if they enter the combustion chamber. Heavy fuel oil also incidentally contains rela-

tively high concentrations of sulfur compounds, which produce acidic gases during com-

bustion. These condense in the region of the piston ring groove and then cause corrosion 

damage to the piston rings and piston ring grooves.

Hard chrome plating of the side faces of the compression ring groove, paired with a piston 

ring with chrome-plated sides, provides highly effective protection against these effects. In 

order to ensure the very long service life required for these engines, the layer must be appro-
priately thick, with the standard being at least 200 μm.

4.5.2  Application table 

Table 4.7: Application table for coatings

 

Tin

GRAFAL®/EvoGlide

Ferrostan/FerroTec®

FERROPRINT®

Hard oxide com-
pression ring groove

Hard oxide crown

Phosphate on Al

Phosphate on Fe

GRAFAL® 210

Hard chrome

X

X

X 

X

X 

 

X

 

 

 

Pistons for 
passenger 
cars

Pistons for 
passenger 
cars 

Pistons for 
commercial 
vehicles

Pistons for 
commercial 
vehicles

Large-bore 
pistons

Gasoline

Diesel

Steel

Aluminum

X

 

 

 

X 

X

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

X

X

 

X

X1)

 

 

 

 

X 

X

X

 

 

 

 

X2)

X3)

 

X

1) only for old types, 2) aluminum piston skirts, 3) gray cast iron piston skirts

5  Piston cooling

83

As  speciﬁc  power  output  increases  in  modern  combustion  engines,  the  pistons  are  sub-

jected to increasing thermal loads. In order to ensure operating safety, therefore, they must 

be cooled as effectively as possible.

5.1  Thermal loads

The chemical energy stored in the fuel is converted into heat in the cylinder during combus-

tion. The piston, as a moving wall of the combustion chamber, converts part of this heat into 

mechanical work and drives the crankshaft through the connecting rod. The heat that is not 

converted into mechanical work is partially dissipated with the exhaust gas. The remainder 

is transferred, through convection and radiation, to the parts of the engine that are adjacent 

to the combustion chamber. In addition to mechanical stresses, this leads to thermal loading 

of these components, which can reach very high levels locally.

5.2  Combustion and flame jets

In  gasoline  engines,  the  spark  plug  normally  initiates  combustion  of  the  fuel-air  mixture. 

The ﬂame front expands quite evenly in all directions, so that all the surfaces enclosing the 

combustion chamber are subjected to the gas temperature. This results in a temperature 

gradient in the piston from the combustion chamber side to the crankcase.

For  diesel  engines  with  direct  fuel  injection,  combustion  starts  in  the  area  of  the  injector 

holes, because the combustible mixture is ﬁrst present at that point. After the mixture in this 

area  has  autoignited,  several  ﬂame  fronts  in  the  form  of  combustion  lobes  run  along  the 
injected streams of fuel toward the surfaces enclosing the combustion chamber; Figure 5.1. 
This generates a nonhomogeneous temperature ﬁeld in the piston, particularly at the rim of 

the combustion chamber bowl.
Piston cooling 

Figure 5.1:  
Flame fronts in the diesel process

5.3  Temperature profile at the bowl rim

As a result of the nonuniform introduction of heat through the “combustion lobes” described 

above, a quasi-stationary, uneven temperature proﬁle is induced at the bowl rim of the diesel 
engine piston. The temperature proﬁle in Figure 5.2 shows this temperature condition along 
the bowl rim for a six-hole injector. The temperature difference between the locations that are 

located directly in the center of a combustion lobe and the areas in between can exceed 40 K.

The resulting thermal stresses, in conjunction with superimposed loads (mechanical stresses, 

temperature cycles, oxidation, etc.) can cause cracks in the bowl rim.

Figure 5.2:  
Uneven temperature profile 
at the bowl rim

5.4  Piston temperature profile

85

Between the intake and exhaust sides, the temperature proﬁle is shifted toward the exhaust 

side.  Moreover,  additional  inﬂuences  must  be  considered,  such  as  the  coolant  ﬂow  path 

between the individual cylinders.

5.4  Piston temperature profile

Because of the various combustion processes and the required different piston geometries, 
diesel and gasoline engine pistons exhibit different temperature proﬁles; Figure 5.3.

Pistons for gasoline engines typically exhibit their maximum temperature in the center of the 

piston crown, but also at the edge of the bowl in the case of direct fuel injection and associ-

ated pronounced combustion bowls. The temperature drops off quite evenly toward the top 

land. In pistons for diesel engines, however, the maximum temperature occurs at the loca-

tions on the bowl rim that are exposed to the center of combustion lobes. The temperature 

drops off evenly toward the center of the bowl and toward the top land. The temperature 

proﬁle  is  largely  determined  by  the  number  and  angle  of  the  injection  ports,  the  injection 

pressure, the injection timing and duration, and the combustion bowl geometry.

Qualitatively  similar  temperature  proﬁles  develop  for  diesel  and  gasoline  engine  pistons 

along the piston mantle curve, from the top land, past the piston ring pack, to the piston pin 

boss and the end of the piston skirt.

Figure 5.3: Temperature profile for diesel and gasoline engine aluminum pistons

86

5  Piston cooling 

5.5  Effects on the function of the piston

The thermal loads on the piston and the resulting temperature proﬁle within the piston cause 

temperature-induced deformations. In conjunction with the cyclic thermal loads, these inﬂu-

ence the local material stress and strength, as well as the function of the piston. In extreme 

cases, this can cause the component to fail, resulting in engine damage.

5.5.1  Thermally induced deformation

The deformation of the piston due to the temperature proﬁle must be taken into consider-
ation when designing the shape of the piston. Figure 5.4 shows this thermal deformation 
schematically  for  a  piston  for  a  gasoline  engine.  Pistons  in  diesel  engines  show  basically 

comparable deformation behavior.

Figure 5.4:  
Deformation of a piston in a gasoline engine 
under thermal load

The magnitude of the deformation depends on the thermal expansion coefﬁcient and the 

temperature change between the cold state and operating temperature. Radial deformation 

affects noise, susceptibility to seizure, and friction power loss, and must be compensated for 

with appropriate clearances, especially in the ring belt. The axial thermal deformation must 

be considered when designing the clearance at the top dead center point when coordinating 

the piston position and the valve lift.

5.5.2  Temperature-dependent material fatigue data

As Figure 5.5 shows, the component temperature has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the fatigue 
resistance of the piston material. 

5.5  Effects on the function of the piston

87

Figure 5.5:  
Influence of temperature on 
the fatigue resistance of M124

For  the  piston  alloy  M124,  for  example,  this  means  that  the  piston  pin  boss  and  support 

areas,  which  typically  reach  a  temperature  level  of  160  to  260°C,  have  20  to  60%  lower 

fatigue resistance compared with the value at room temperature. For the piston crown and 

bowl rim of aluminum diesel engine pistons, which can reach temperatures of 300 to 400°C, 

the fatigue resistance drops by as much as 80%. Ferrous materials are signiﬁcantly less sen-

sitive in this temperature range.

5.5.3  Influence of temperature on the piston rings

If the maximum tolerable temperature of the ring belt is exceeded, then plastic deformation 

and increased wear can occur, particularly in the top ring groove. The chemical decomposi-

tion of the lubricating oil brought about by heat can also cause carbon buildup in the groove 

root.  These  residues  then  act  as  thermal  insulators  in  the  ring  groove/piston  ring  system 

and  reduce  the  heat  transport  from  the  piston  to  the  cylinder  wall.  They  also  hinder  the 

piston rings from moving freely and can even block them completely. However, the rotational 

motion of the piston rings in the piston ring grooves, in particular, is essential for their func-

tion. This rotation ensures that the ring gap, through which small amounts of combustion gas 

continuously ﬂow into the crankcase, is not always at the same location. If the piston rings do 

not undergo any rotational motion for a prolonged period of time, then the hot combustion 

gases that ﬂow past in the area of the ring gap may damage both the piston ring groove and 

the cylinder surface. The lubricating oil ﬁlm in this area is likewise disturbed and can result in 

ring/piston scoring and engine damage.

88

5  Piston cooling 

5.6  Potential influences on the piston temperature

The inﬂuences of engine operating parameters on piston temperature must be considered 

during  piston  development.  These  include  the  engine  speed,  load,  ignition  and  injection 

timing,  air  ratio,  and  mean  operating  temperatures.  Table  7.2  (Chapter  7.2)  lists  reference 

values  for  temperature  changes  in  the  region  of  the  top  ring  groove  for  a  gasoline  and  a 

diesel engine piston. It is notable that addition of just 50% glycol (antifreeze) to the coolant 

can increase the temperature in the top ring groove by 5°C.

A comparison of various cooling types—spray jet cooling with a spray jet at the connecting 

rod  end,  spray  jet  cooling  with  a  ﬁxed  nozzle  on  the  crankcase,  and  piston  cooling  with 

oil-ﬁlled cooling galleries—indicates that cooling galleries result in the greatest reduction in 

temperature. Depending on the design possibilities, up to 50°C lower temperatures can be 

achieved at the top ring groove.

5.7  Types of cooling

In order to ensure effective heat dissipation from the piston and to reduce the temperature in 

critical piston zones, pistons with different types of cooling are used in place of an uncooled 

piston,  depending  on  the  amount  of  heat  to  be  dissipated  and  the  combustion  process 

(diesel or gasoline). The coolant in all of the piston cooling methods considered here is the 

engine oil.

5.7.1  Pistons without piston cooling

Pistons without piston cooling are primarily used in gasoline engines with low thermal load-

ing. They are additionally employed in diesel engines with low power output. The temperature 

proﬁle of these pistons is more than 20°C higher, depending on the point of measurement, 

than for the same piston with spray jet cooling.

5.7.2  Pistons with spray jet cooling

The simplest way to cool a piston is by means of spray jet cooling; Figure 5.6. The interior of 
the piston is continuously sprayed over as large an area as possible with oil from a cooling oil 

nozzle. This technology is most common in gasoline engines because the low overall height 

often leaves no room for cooling galleries. For gasoline engines with direct injection, the use 

of a cooling gallery is facilitated, on account of the bowl-like shape of the piston crown. Spray 

jet cooling is also used for diesel engines in the lower power output segment.

5.7  Types of cooling

89

Figure 5.6:  
Diesel engine piston without or with spray jet 
cooling

5.7.3  Pistons with cooling galleries

If spray jet cooling does not reduce the piston temperature sufﬁciently, then pistons with a 

cooling gallery must be used. Cooling oil is continuously fed to the cooling gallery during 

operation.  One,  or  occasionally  more,  oil  spray  nozzles  feed  the  cooling  oil  through  inlet 

openings into the cooling gallery. The cooling oil leaves the cooling gallery through one or 

more drain holes.

Under engine operating conditions, only partial ﬁlling of the cooling gallery is possible, and 

the  cooling  oil  moves  up  and  down  in  the  cooling  gallery  synchronous  to  the  oscillating 
motion of the piston. This leads to a highly turbulent ﬂow in the cooling gallery, and thus a 

high heat transfer coefﬁcient.

Differentiation is made between salt core cooling galleries, cooled ring carriers, and machined 

cooling galleries, on the basis of the manufacturing process used.

5.7.3.1  Salt core cooling gallery pistons

For aluminum pistons with a salt core cooling gallery, the cavity in the piston is produced by 

a salt core that is placed in the mold prior to casting. After the piston blank is removed, the 

salt core is completely dissolved using water at high pressure.

If the salt core cooling gallery is placed on two support mandrels in the foundry mold, the 
inlet openings and drain holes are drilled after the salt has been removed; Figure 5.7. Inlet 
openings with pin hole bores are primarily used with vertically oriented cooling oil nozzles. 

This design also provides the best possible oil supply, and thus the largest cooling effect.

90

5  Piston cooling 

Figure  5.7:  Salt  core  cooling  gallery  piston  with 
pin hole bore

Figure 5.8: Salt core cooling gallery piston with 
funnel inlet

For cooling oil nozzles set at an angle, a kidney-shaped inlet opening is typically used in 
conjunction  with  a  funnel,  Figure  5.8,  in  order  to  compensate  for  the  varying  jet  impact 
point on the piston during the piston stroke caused by setting the nozzle at an angle, and 

to ensure that the oil ﬂow into the cooling gallery is interrupted as little as possible. For such 

a piston design, typically no or very little machining is needed at the inlet and openings and 

drain holes.

The salt core cooling gallery should be placed as close to the combustion bowl as possible. 

Limits are set here, however, by the mechanical load carrying capacity and castability of the 
piston, as well as the geometric conditions (bowl diameter, location of the top ring groove).

The salt core cooling gallery reduces the temperature at the bowl rim by up to 20°C in com-
parison with spray jet cooling; Figure 5.9. This improved cooling effect amounts to about 
10°C at the top land and in the top ring groove.

5.7.3.2  Pistons with cooled ring carrier

For pistons with cooled ring carriers, a sheet metal channel is welded onto the Ni-resist ring 
carrier, creating a closed cooling gallery; Figure 5.10. This component is given an alﬁn coat-
ing prior to casting of the piston, then placed in the mold and cast into the piston blank. The 

inlet openings and drain holes are produced by drilling.

The same design criteria apply for the inlet and outlet areas as for a piston with salt core 

cooling gallery, depending on the spray direction of the cooling oil nozzles.

5.7  Types of cooling

91

Piston with spray jet cooling

Funnel cooling gallery piston

Figure 5.9: Temperature profiles for different types of cooling

Figure 5.10:  
Piston with cooled ring carrier

92

5  Piston cooling 

Cooled ring carrier

Salt core cooling gallery

Figure 5.11: Temperature field of the piston with cooled ring carrier and with salt core cooling gallery

A cooled ring carrier reduce the temperature at the bowl rim a bit more in comparison with a 
salt core cooling gallery; Figure 5.11. In the top ring groove a cooled ring carrier brings about 
a temperature reduction of up to 50°C.

Clearly,  the  surface  temperature  at  the  cooling  gallery  rises  the  closer  the  location  of  the 

cooling gallery is to the combustion chamber surface. The maximum surface temperature 

of about 250°C should not be signiﬁcantly exceeded. Above this temperature, increased oil 

aging, thermally induced decomposition of the cooling oil, and deposits of oil carbon can be 

expected.

5.7.3.3  Machined cooling galleries

For forged steel pistons, the cooling galleries cannot be generated with salt cores or in the 
form of cooled ring carriers. Therefore, the upper part of the cooling gallery is machined. The 
lower part of the cooling gallery in the FERROTHERM® piston is formed by shaker pockets 
in the articulated skirt or a cover plate that closes off the bottom of the cooling gallery. The 
single-piece  design  of  the  MONOTHERM®  piston  uses  the  cover  plate;  Figure  5.12.  For 
welded piston designs (MonoWeld®, TopWeld®) the cooling cavity is closed by joining the 
two components of the piston.

5.7.4  Composite pistons with cooling cavities

The multipiece piston design enables the machining of cooling cavities. Composite pistons 

also feature an inner cooling cavity behind the ring belt, in addition to the outer cooling cavity. 

The shape and size of the outer cooling cavity is primarily determined by the combustion 

bowl geometry and the location of the piston ring pack. The geometry of the inner cooling 

5.7  Types of cooling

93

Figure 5.12:  
MONOTHERM® piston with cover plate  
to close the cooling gallery

cavity  is  inﬂuenced  by  the  combustion  bowl  geometry  and  the  type  of  screw  joint  of  the 

piston.

For pistons with central screw joints, the inner cooling cavity is smaller, on account of the 
screw joint that is located there; Figure 5.13. In this design, the oil in the cooling cavity is 
ﬂowing around the screw.

For  pistons  with  multiple  screw  joints,  the  screw  joints  are  located  in  the  contact  surface 

between the cooling cavities. The inner cooling cavity can therefore be signiﬁcantly larger; 
Figure  5.14.  The  outer  and  inner  cooling  cavity  are  connected  to  each  other  by  multiple 
scavenging ports or bores.

The cooling oil is typically fed into the outer cooling cavity. Drain holes are located both in 

the outer and in the inner cooling cavity. In exceptional cases, the inlet opening is centered 

in the inner cooling cavity. Drain holes are then located only in the outer cooling cavity. The 

cooling oil ﬂow in composite pistons is divided, with the typical ﬂow direction from the outer 

to the inner cooling cavity, at approximately the ratio of the outer to the inner outﬂow cross 

section. One partial oil ﬂow leaves the piston after ﬂowing through the outer cooling cavity, 

and the second partial oil ﬂow enters the inner cooling cavity through the scavenging bores 

and ﬂows from there back into the crankcase. Depending on the shape of the outer cooling 

cavity, composite pistons are divided into shaker cooling and bore cooling types.

5.7.4.1  Shaker cooling

In the case of shaker cooling, the outer cooling cavity has an axisymmetric cross section; 
Figure  5.13.  The  inner  cooling  cavity  is  typically  connected  to  the  outer  cavity  by  several 
milled scavenging ports that are located at about half the height of the outer cooling cavity.

94

5  Piston cooling 

Figure 5.13: Composite piston with central screw 
joint and shaker cooling

Figure  5.14:  Composite  piston  with  multiple 
screw joint and bore cooling

5.7.4.2  Bore cooling

In the case of bore cooling, the lower part of the outer cooling cavity is likewise axisymmetric. 

Cooling oil bores run from this side in the direction of the piston crown rim. Some of the 

cooling oil bores are connected to the inner cooling cavity by means of scavenging bores; 
Figure 5.14.

The  advantage  of  bore  cooling,  compared  with  shaker  cooling,  is  the  increased  stiffness 

of the piston crown. Material between the cooling oil bores can lead to local temperature 

maxima on the combustion chamber side. The effort required to machine the cooling cavity 

is signiﬁcantly greater.

5.8  Feeding the cooling oil

The  cooling  medium  for  piston  cooling  is  the  engine  oil.  The  cooling  oil  delivered  by  the 

engine oil pump is distributed via galleries in the crankcase. There are essentially two meth-

ods for feeding the cooling oil to the piston. It can be fed to the cooling gallery as through 

5.8  Feeding the cooling oil

95

a jet, with nozzles mounted in the crankcase; this solution is typical for passenger car and 

commercial vehicle engines. Large-bore pistons typically use oil transport from the crank-

shaft, through the connecting rod and the piston pin, to the piston.

5.8.1  Jet feeding of cooling oil

The cooling oil reaches a nozzle that is ﬁxed to the crankcase through oil galleries, and from 
there spray nozzles deliver it as a jet to the piston; Figure 5.15.

A pressure-regulating valve is typically located between the oil gallery in the crankcase and 

the nozzle, allowing ﬂow of cooling oil to the nozzle only above a predetermined operating 

pressure.  This  ensures  that  all  bearing  locations  are  provided  with  enough  lubricating  oil 

when starting the engine as well as at low speeds and loads. Cooling of the piston is not yet 

necessary under these operating conditions, because of the low thermal load.

The jet expands as it leaves the nozzle. This expansion depends signiﬁcantly on the geom-

etry and shape of the cooling oil nozzle.

Figure 5.15:  
Diesel engine piston with 
jet feeding of the cooling oil 
(spray jet cooling), slanted 
nozzle

5.8.1.1  Nozzle designs for spray jet cooling
Cooling oil nozzles for spray jet cooling should produce a large spread angle (cid:68) of the oil 
jet in order to impinge on a large area of the inner contour with the cooling oil; Figure 5.16.

A large spread angle (cid:68) can be achieved by running the cooling oil nozzle at a supercritical 
point (Reynolds number >2,300). This requires that the ratio of the nozzle diameter d to the 
length of the ﬂow-calming section l be chosen to be as large as possible, and sharp edges 
eliminated from the end of the nozzle (e.g., with a chamfer). This jet characteristic can also 

arise unintentionally with an oriﬁce that has been deburred excessively.

96

5  Piston cooling 

Figure 5.16:  
Jet shape for spray jet cooling

Figure 5.17:  
Jet shape for cooling gallery supply

5.8.1.2  Nozzle design for supplying cooling galleries and cooling cavities

Cooling oil nozzles for supplying cooling galleries and cooling cavities should have as small 

a spread angle as possible, so that the jet reliably hits the inlet opening of the cooling gallery 
and cooling cavity throughout the entire piston stroke; Figure 5.17. This bundled jet can be 
achieved  by  operating  the  cooling  oil  nozzle  subcritically  (Reynolds  number  <2,300).  This 
requires that the ratio of the nozzle diameter d to the length of the ﬂow-calming section l be 
chosen to be as small as possible (l = 4 ... 6 · d), and the nozzle end be sharp edged, but 
free of burr.

5.8.2  Feeding via crankshaft and connecting rod

For this method of feeding the cooling oil, the oil ﬁrst ﬂows through the main bearing into 

bores  in  the  crank  web  of  the  crankshaft.  From  here,  the  oil  ﬂows  to  the  conrod  bearing 

journals, onward through cross-drilled holes in the crankshaft pin, a groove in the lower rod 

bearing, and a longitudinal bore in the connecting rod, to the small end bore. In this manner, 

5.9  Heat flows in the piston

97

the ﬂowing cooling oil lubricates all the bearing locations of the crankshaft and the rod bear-

ings. There are two main concepts for further transport to the cooling galleries and cooling 

cavities.

5.8.2.1  Feeding via piston pin and piston pin boss

The  cooling  oil  ﬂows  through  a  circumferential  groove  in  the  small  end  bore  and  several 

cross-drilled holes in the piston pin, which has a longitudinal bore and is closed off at the 

ends. From there,  it reaches  a groove  in  the  boss  of  the  piston  through  additional  cross-

drilled  holes  of  the  piston  pin.  These  grooves  are  connected  to  the  outer  cooling  cavity 

through bores.

5.8.2.2  Feeding via slide shoe

In this case, cooling oil is fed through a circumferential groove in the bearing of the small 
end bore to a bore, and ﬂows from there through a slide shoe mounted on the piston, which 
feeds it to the inner cooling cavity of the piston. In this case, the cooling oil ﬂows through 

the piston from the inner to the outer cooling cavity. One advantage of this design is that the 

piston pin is not weakened by cross-drilled holes.

5.9  Heat flows in the piston

The heat ﬂows in the piston vary according to the type of piston cooling; Figure 5.18. Follow-
ing the principle of conservation of energy, the sum of the heat ﬂows into the piston is equal 

to the sum of all heat ﬂows out of the piston.

For  an  aluminum  piston  with  spray  jet  cooling,  about  55  to  65%  of  the  impinging  heat  is 

transferred to the cylinder wall through the piston ring pack and the associated ring land 

surfaces. The remaining 35 to 45% is dissipated through the inner contour and the cooling 

oil, and partially through the bottom part of the piston skirt, including the piston pin boss. If a 
cooling gallery is used instead of spray jet cooling, Figure 5.18, right, the heat ﬂow dissipated 
through the piston ring pack is reduced to 30 to 40%, depending on the position of the cool-

ing gallery. The heat ﬂow dissipated via the inner contour and the bottom part of the piston 

skirt is reduced to 15 to 25%. The remaining heat ﬂow of 35 to 55% is dissipated directly by 

the cooling oil via the cooling gallery. Salt core cooling galleries, typically positioned at the 

height of the oil ring groove, reduce the heat ﬂow from the bowl to the piston ring pack and to 

the inner contour by a slight amount in comparison with the cooled ring carrier. The cooled 

ring carrier is located directly in the main direction of the heat ﬂow toward the cylinder wall 

and therefore dissipates signiﬁcantly more partial heat directly to the oil.

98

5  Piston cooling 

Piston with spray jet cooling

Piston with cooling gallery

Figure 5.18: Heat flows in the piston as a function of the cooling type

Figure 5.19: Dissipated heat quantity and specific cooling oil quantity

5.11  Numerical analysis using FE analysis

99

Since  the  absolute  quantity  of  cooling  oil  depends  on  the  size  and  power  output  of  the 

engine, the basis for comparison is the speciﬁc quantity of cooling oil. It is deﬁned as the 

ratio  of  the  absolute  quantity  of  cooling  oil  and  the  engine  output,  expressed  in  kg/kWh. 

Reference values for the speciﬁc cooling oil quantity required at the cooling nozzle are:

■  For spray jet cooling:  

■  For jet feeding:  

3–5 kg/kWh

5–7 kg/kWh

■  For feeding via crankshaft and connecting rod (large-bore engines):   3–5 kg/kWh

Figure 5.19 shows the relationship between the speciﬁc cooling oil quantity, the quantity of 
heat dissipated by the cooling oil, and the difference between the oil inﬂow and return ﬂow 

temperatures.  For  a  quantity  of  heat  to  be  dissipated  of,  for  example,  8%  of  the  effective 

power output and a permissible temperature increase of the cooling oil of 30°C, a speciﬁc 

cooling oil quantity of 4.4 kg/kWh is required.

5.10  Determining thermal load

Various methods for determining the temperatures at the piston and the effects of piston 

cooling are in use. They exhibit different levels of effort and precision in the engine.

The methods and their effect on piston temperatures are described in detail in Chapter 7.2.

5.11  Numerical analysis using FE analysis

The initial design of a new piston and comparison of variants typically uses ﬁnite element 
analysis (FEA); Figure 5.20. The boundary conditions are varied, on the basis of tempera-
tures measured in the engine, until the calculated and measured temperatures conform to a 

sufﬁcient degree. The heat ﬂows can then be determined. If no temperature measurements 

are available, then the boundary conditions from similar designs can be carried over in order 

to obtain a ﬁrst estimate of the expected thermal load.

By varying the piston geometry (e.g., bowl geometry, shape and position of the cooling gal-
lery, position of the ring pack), its inﬂuence on the piston temperature ﬁeld is investigated. 

Optimization efforts are made signiﬁcantly faster and simpler in this manner than would be 

possible with engine temperature measurements.

100

5  Piston cooling 

Figure 5.20: FE model and calculated temperature field

The boundary conditions on which the analysis is based are derived from theoretical con-

siderations and experimental test results. The alignment of results of the analysis and the 

temperature measurements in the engine is regularly checked.

5.12  Laboratory shaker tests

The motion of the cooling oil along the inner contour of the piston and in the cooling gal-

leries and cooling cavities has a decisive inﬂuence on the achievable heat dissipation. This 

oil motion cannot be measured during engine operation. Shaker tests provide a substitute. 

The kinematic and ﬂuid dynamics conditions of the engine are simulated on appropriate 

test benches. Piston models made of PMMA allow oil motion in the cooling gallery to be 

studied.

5.13  Characteristic quantities

101

5.13  Characteristic quantities

In order to evaluate the feeding and throughput of oil through the cooling gallery or cooling 
cavity when feeding cooling oil through a spray nozzle, the dynamic catching efﬁciency ηF , 
Figure 5.21, is used. It is deﬁned as:

ηF

=

(cid:5)
V
out
(cid:5)
V

in

where:

(cid:5)Vout   volume ﬂow at the drain hole of the cooling gallery (on a moving piston model)

(cid:5)Vin   volume ﬂow through the cooling oil nozzle

Figure 5.21:  
Definition of dynamic catching efficiency

In order to achieve best possible heat dissipation, the cooling oil supplied by the oil nozzle 

must enter the cooling gallery or cooling cavity as completely as possible, i.e., the highest 

possible dynamic catching efﬁciency is required. This dynamic catching efﬁciency must not 

be  confused  with  the  static  catching  efﬁciency  used  by  the  manufacturers  of  cooling  oil 

nozzles, which is based on the jet ﬂow rate through a deﬁned static mask.

The ﬁlling ratio  ψF  is a measure of the expected cooling effects due to the shaker effect in 
a partially ﬁlled cooling gallery (Figure 5.22), and is deﬁned as:

102

5  Piston cooling 

Figure 5.22:  
Definition of filling ratio

ψF

=

  and   ψFA

=

   and   ψFh

=

A

oil

A

KK

h

oil

h

KK

 

V
V

oil

KK

where:

Voil   volume of the cooling gallery ﬁlled with oil

VKK  volume of the cooling gallery

Aoil   cross sectional area of the cooling gallery ﬁlled with oil

AKK  cross sectional area of the cooling gallery 

hoil   height of the cooling gallery ﬁlled with oil

hKK  height of the cooling gallery

Since the cross sectional area is proportional to the volume for axisymmetric cooling gal-
leries,  the  area-related  ﬁlling  ratio  ψFA   can  be  used  for  analysis.  For  a  nearly  rectangular 
cross sectional area, the height-related ﬁlling ratio  ψFh  can be used to further simplify the 
calculation.

An intensive convective heat transfer, which can be attributed to the highly turbulent mixing 

motion that enhances energy exchange, prevails at the cooling cavity surfaces of the moving 

piston because of the shaker effect. A completely ﬁlled cooling gallery or cooling cavity would 

exhibit a lower heat transfer coefﬁcient as a result of the lower oil velocities. Basic tests with 
a heated model show that the ﬁlling ratio affects the heat transfer coefﬁcient (cid:68); Figure 5.23. 
The optimum ﬁlling ratio under the selected conditions was 30 to 60%. In this case, the heat 

transfer coefﬁcient drops off again above a ﬁlling ratio of 60%, on account of the reduced 

turbulence in the gallery ﬁlled to a higher level. 

5.13  Characteristic quantities

103

Figure 5.23: Relationship of filling ratio and heat transfer coefficient

The  main  variables  that  affect  the  catching  efﬁciency  and  the  ﬁlling  ratio  are  the  engine 
speed, the quantity of oil available, and the design of the inlet and outlet areas; Figure 5.24.

Both the catching efﬁciency and the ﬁlling ratio decrease with increasing engine speed. To a 

small extent, this can be attributed to the change in relative velocity between the piston and 

the oil jet. During the downward stroke, the velocity vectors of the piston and the cooling oil 

jet point in opposite directions. This results in a large relative velocity between the piston and 

Figure 5.24: Factors affecting the catching efficiency and filling ratio

104

5  Piston cooling 

the cooling oil jet. In this time interval, a great deal of cooling oil enters the cooling gallery 

or cooling cavity at high velocity. The piston speed is nearly zero in the region around the 

top and bottom dead centers. At these points in time, the cooling oil enters the cooling gal-

lery or cooling cavity at the speed of the oil jet. The particularly critical range is the upward 

stroke, during which the velocity vectors of the piston and the cooling oil jet point in the same 

direction. If the piston speed is greater than the speed of the cooling oil jet, then no fresh 

cooling oil will enter the cooling gallery for a brief period of time, which may slightly reduce 

the catching efﬁciency and ﬁlling ratio. This phenomenon can be compensated for in part by 

a properly designed infeed area. Pin hole bores, for instance, have a positive effect on the 

catching efﬁciency as well as the ﬁlling ratio. 

An increasing quantity of oil for a constant cooling oil nozzle cross section leads to increased 

catching efﬁciency and ﬁlling ratio. They can be affected signiﬁcantly by the size of the drain 

hole. 

Another measured variable can be derived from direct measurement of the local heat ﬂow in 

the shaker test. To this end, heat ﬂow sensors are installed in the piston model to be tested. 

Their measurement signals are transmitted by a telemetry system.

5.14  Test facilities

The test benches for laboratory shaker testing are based on a kinematic arrangement that 

corresponds to the major dimensions of a passenger car or commercial vehicle engine and 
that is driven at an adjustable speed; Figure 5.25. The test setup consists of a push rod and 
a model piston made of PMMA. Cooling oil is fed to the model through PMMA tubes via the 

original cooling oil nozzles. The cooling oil that exits the outlet of the piston is also guided 

through PMMA tubes, and is captured in a test device in order to determine the catching 

efﬁciency. The ﬁlling ratio is determined using computer-aided image processing of video 

recordings taken at certain crank angles.

A nozzle test stand is also available and can be used to determine the characteristic ﬂow 

curves and jet shapes for evaluating cooling oil nozzles. These tests form the basis for an 

optimized nozzle jet shape.

5.15  Simulation of oil motion

105

Figure 5.25: Shaker test bench and test setup

5.15  Simulation of oil motion

Another option for analyzing piston cooling is a CFD (Computational Fluid Dynamics) simula-

tion of the oil motion, including the heat transfer. This is based on modeling approaches from 

thermal ﬂuid dynamics, which are incorporated into the simulation programs. The theoretical 

approaches, and their numerical conversion, must be conﬁrmed by experimental measure-

ments.

The ongoing development of commercial computation and simulation programs for describ-

ing the oil ﬂow from the nozzle or the conrod to the piston, through the cooling galleries and 

cooling  cavities,  and  back  into  the  oil  sump  will  make  even  more  realistic  simulation  and 

analysis  possible  in  the  future.  Both  the  complex  ﬂow  characteristics  (three-dimensional, 

turbulent, transient, and multiphase) and the heat transfer present great challenges for accu-

rate, detailed representation of the conditions in the simulation model. Near-reality simulation 

of oil motion and validation of the calculation results with experimental data will still require 

substantial development work.

6  Component testing

107

Component strength of the piston can be ensured in various ways. Finite element analysis 

(FEA) is typically used for this purpose on a regular basis. A strain gauge measurement or 

pulsator  test  is  used  less  often.  In  mathematical  component  analysis,  all  relevant  thermal 
and mechanical loads, shrinkage, joining, and residual stresses can be analyzed. The basis 

of the FEA model is the ideal contour as outlined by the CAD dataset. The computational 

and strain gauge measurement results are analyzed using temperature-dependent material 

fatigue data. This is based on statistically conﬁrmed test values, determined using test bars 

taken from pistons and artiﬁcially aged at the test temperature prior to testing. This ensures 

that the least favorable material parameters are taken as a basis.

Strain  gauge  measurement  and  component  testing,  in  comparison  with  FEA,  are  based 

only  on  individual  load  cases,  but  they  use  the  actual  component  geometries,  tolerances, 

and, for the component-based strength test, incorporate technical inﬂuences such as the 

alloy composition, heat treatment, and casting quality. The results of the three methods thus 

complement one another. For strain gauge measurement as well as pulsator testing, how-

ever, ﬁnished components are required, while computational analysis is based on the CAD 

data of the piston design.

Strain  gauges  are  applied  to  highly  stressed  areas.  Static  or  cyclic  loading  is  applied  in 

the laboratory in order to determine local stress amplitudes. Dynamic measurements in the 

engine can provide additional insight about the stresses.

Several  standardized  tests  have  been  established  for  component  testing  of  pistons.  Spe-

cially adapted loading ﬁxtures are used. It is important that the test devices apply load to 
the component as realistically as possible. Because of the wide range of load/temperature 

combinations,  an  individual  test  installation  must  normally  be  conceived  for  each  loading 

situation. Correct phasing of the combination of several dynamic mechanical loads, however, 

is difﬁcult to implement.

Component testing in the lab is carried out primarily when an absolute conclusion about the 

strength or wear behavior is expected, or in order to compare different design variations. For 

engine components, purely static loads typically play a secondary role. Therefore, it is prefer-

able to perform durability tests with a high number of load cycles. The time required often 

does not allow a sufﬁcient number of test parts to be tested in order to obtain statistically 

reliable results. The staircase method is typically used for evaluation. Additionally, accelerated 

testing at excessive loads is used, but here the applicability of the results to actual engine 

conditions must be ensured.
Component testing

6.1  Static component testing

Stress analysis with strain gauges and tear-off or failure load testing, where the component 

is statically loaded with a continuously increasing load until fracture, are among the com-
monly used static test methods; Figure 6.1. A comparison with empirical values allows the 
strength reserves of a component to be derived, such as for loading due to inertia forces at 

high speeds or the critical load, e.g., in the case of piston seizing.

Strain gauge measurement enables analysis of the geometric inﬂuences (overall design, local 
radii and transitions, elasticity, etc.) on the locally measured stress; Figure 6.2. The stresses 
thus derived can be compared with empirical values, on the basis of the local component 

temperature. The test results can also be used to conﬁrm computational results, and thus 

validate the boundary conditions used.

Using the sectioning method, it is possible to determine the local residual stress state in the 

component, in order to adequately consider these stresses in the strength analysis. For local 

residual stress analyses, the hole drilling method can also be used.

Figure 6.1:  
Static tear-off testing of a piston

6.1  Static component testing

109

Figure 6.2: Example for strain gauge measurements on a piston

Other  static  component  tests  include  deformation  and  stiffness  measurements  as  well  as 

investigation  of  pressure  distribution  between  loaded  surfaces.  For  deformation  measure-

ments, a deﬁned force is applied to the structure. The deformation is measured at selected 

locations. The stiffness can be derived from the deformation at the point at which the load 

is applied.

Pressure distribution in a ﬂange connection, for example, or between the piston skirt and the 

cylinder is measured with a pressure-sensitive ﬁlm placed between two surfaces that are in 

contact with each other. Depending on the local compression force, a measurement signal 
or color change is induced; Figure 6.3.

Figure 6.3: 
Pressure distribution on piston skirt

110

6  Component testing

Creep tests on components are also part of the static test program. They are used to deter-

mine permanent deformations as a function of load, time, and temperature. For bolt joints, 

the bolt force may experience a decrease due to relaxation. Other components exhibit set-

tling or creep-related permanent deformation.

6.2  Cyclic component testing

Primarily cyclic mechanical loads occur in the engine, in addition to variable thermal stresses. 

Therefore, in order to analyze the actual component behavior, tests with pulsating or alter-

nating  loads  are  most  suitable.  The  variable  mechanical  load  is  typically  applied  by  reso-

nant or hydraulic test machines, which may also include the inﬂuence of temperature. The 

temperature gradients found in the piston during actual engine operation, however, cannot 

be realistically simulated in the laboratory. Tests at a constant component temperature are 

used as a substitute. In order to perform a useful analysis of the results of cyclic component 

testing, it is necessary to have knowledge of the damage scenarios that occur in the engine 

under speciﬁc operating conditions. A correlation between the lab tests and engine loading 

can then be derived.

Typical examples of cyclic endurance tests on the component include
■  crown pulsator test on pistons;

■  skirt pulsator test on pistons in order to simulate normal force loads;

■  hydropulsator  tests  to  determine  the  pin  bore  load  carrying  capacity  and  simulation  of 

inertial force; Figure 6.4;

Figure 6.4: 
Hydropulsator tests  
on piston

6.2  Cyclic component testing

111

■  tension-compression fatigue tests on connecting rods;

■  fatigue resistance tests on the piston pin, piston rings, and bearings;

■  thermal fatigue resistance of combustion chamber bowls;

■  cyclic tensile tests on blind bore cylinders.

Flame test benches are used to test thermal fatigue resistance, particularly of combustion 

bowls for diesel engines. The bowl rim is heated rapidly by a gas-powered burner, similar to 

the conditions in the engine, and is cooled quickly by water spray after reaching the target 

temperature (e.g., 400°C). The surface is checked regularly for cracks. Typical cycle counts 

are  500  to  3,000.  This  test  enables  the  comparison  of  different  coatings  and  geometries; 
Figure 6.5.

Figure 6.5: Flame bench test, influence of different bowl rim radii

Various test benches are used to analyze the oil motion in cooled pistons; cf. Chapter 5. Tests 

are performed

■  for the amount of oil present in the cooling cavity as a function of the oil inﬂow and speed; 

■  in the case of free jet nozzles, for the catching efﬁciency, i.e., the proportion of oil trans-

ported through the cooling cavity relative to the total amount of oil available.

The  test  benches,  Figure  6.6,  are  designed  as  crank  mechanisms  or  based  on  modiﬁed, 
externally driven single-cylinder assemblies. They simulate the kinematic conditions of a pas-

senger car or commercial vehicle engine. The models are sometimes made of transparent 

synthetic resin, in order to be able to determine the instantaneous quantity of oil at a spe-

112

6  Component testing

Figure 6.6: 
Shaker test bench

ciﬁc location in the cooling cavity, using video recordings. The test results serve to optimize 

geometries and oil feed cross sections. Comparisons to temperature measurements in the 

engine are used to derive the ideal parameters.

6.3  Wear testing

Characterization  of  the  wear  properties  in  lab  tests  is  an  important  means  for  optimizing 

surfaces  and  coatings.  Signiﬁcant  factors  for  wear  include  the  running  partners,  surface 

condition, mechanical load, relative velocity, lubricant, and possibly the atmosphere and tem-

perature. Therefore, for near-actual test conditions, lab methods using models such as the 

pin-on-disc, block-on-ring, SRV (vibrational frictional wear), and the like provide results with 

only limited applicability, particularly if the parts used do not represent the ﬁnish or manufac-

turing process of the real component. As a result, test concepts in the lab generally use the 

complete, actual component, or at least parts of it.

6.3  Wear testing

113

In order to characterize the pivoting motion 

of the connecting rod about the piston pin 

under pulsating load, MAHLE has conceived 
a pin/boss test machine; Figure 6.7.

A sample boss moves about a deﬁned pivot-

ing angle relative to a ﬁxed, heatable piston 

pin and is fed with a metered quantity of oil. 

The  axial  force  drops  to  nearly  zero  at  the 

dead center points and reaches a maximum 

at the time of greatest rotational speed. The 

surface  roughness,  dimensional  changes, 

frictional  torque,  optical  appearance,  and 

any signs of seizing are evaluated.

The  piston  skirt  or  piston  ring  and  cylin-
der  segments  are  used  to  characterize  the 

piston/ring/cylinder  contact.  The  inﬂuence 

of  piston  ring  coatings,  ring  surface  ﬁnish, 

Figure 6.7: Pin/boss test machine

cylinder material, and honing on the wear or 

114

6  Component testing

susceptibility to seizure of the system can thus be investigated. In both cases, the testing 

is limited to simulating the top dead center point of the piston ring that is at risk of mixed 

friction and the wear or susceptibility to seizure that occurs there. Because the effects of oil 

additives are not intended to be tested as a priority system parameter, the tests are typically 

performed  without  additional  heating.  Wear  is  determined  by  measuring  and  obtaining  a 

surface proﬁle, and sometimes by contact-free analysis of the sample topography using a 
white-light interferometer; Figure 6.8.

Figure 6.8: White-light interferometer: topography of worn cylinder surface

7  Engine testing

115

In the past decade, numerical calculation has increased in signiﬁcance for development. The 

importance of engine testing, however, has by no means been relegated to the sidelines. It 

is no longer used just for direct component development, but is also employed for validating 
new simulation programs and systematically establishing design speciﬁcations.

In order to reduce expensive running times, extensive special measurement techniques are 

also used increasingly today in the development of engine mechanics. Without them, mecha-

nisms and background circumstances can no longer be sufﬁciently well understood. Indi-

vidual engine problems are analyzed precisely, corresponding critical boundary conditions 

and running programs are deﬁned, and complex measurement and evaluation methods are 

developed and—wherever possible—automated.

Systematic  parameter  studies  ultimately  lead  to  extensive  action  plans  that  allow  design 

engineers and developers to select initial values in the early design phase that are as close to 

series production as possible. These eventually lead to a reduction in the number of experi-

mental iterations on the test bench during the subsequent development phase, thus helping 

to reduce development time and expenses.

In the course of these process developments, new speciﬁc measuring instruments, running 

programs, and measurement and analysis methods for effective engine testing are continu-

ously created at MAHLE. Some selected subjects are addressed in this volume.

7.1  Test run programs with examples of test results

In order to test engine components, MAHLE uses test run programs in its engine testing, 

some of which are described as examples below. They include 

■  full-load curves;

■  development runs;

■  durability tests (standard for every development program).

Special test programs allow ongoing development of components, particularly for obtaining 

speciﬁc characteristics. They include
■  cold start tests for testing cold friction resistance of piston coatings;

■  burning mark tests for evaluating scufﬁng resistance of piston ring running surfaces.
Engine testing 

MAHLE engine test laboratories are thus able to perform all of the tests required by custom-

ers for series production development. In addition, in the course of product development, 

new in-house inspection procedures and facilities that are speciﬁcally adapted to the new 

task at hand are continuously being created and reﬁned.

7.1.1  Standard test run programs

7.1.1.1  Full-load curve 

The performance settings of the engine are checked in the full-load curve. To this end, the 

relevant  associated  operating  values  under  full  load  at  various  engine  speeds  are  deter-

mined. Depending on the engine type, these may include

■  performance;

■  torque;

■  fuel consumption;

■  lambda value;

■  smoke value;

■  intake air temperature;

■  charge air temperature;

■  charge air pressure;

■  exhaust gas temperature;

■  exhaust back pressure;

■  peak cylinder pressure;

■  blow-by value.

Figure 7.1 shows examples of selected operating values of an internal combustion engine 
under full load as a function of engine speed.

7.1.1.2  Blow-by behavior

Figure 7.2 shows the behavior of the blow-by value as a function of load and engine speed. 
This is the amount of gas that ﬂows out of the combustion chamber into the crankcase via 

the  piston,  piston  rings,  and  cylinder.  Oil  is  removed  from  these  gases  and  then  they  are 

fed back into the combustion process via the intake section. It is common to measure the 

amount of gas at deﬁned points across the entire speed range of the engine, such as under 

no load, partial load, and full load.

7.1.1.3  Seizure test

The seizure test is used for testing seizure resistance of pistons, piston rings, and cylinders 
under extreme engine conditions; Figure 7.3.

7.1  Test run programs with examples of test results

117

Figure 7.1:  
Full-load curve for a combus-
tion engine, with correspond-
ing operating values

TRED 

P40 

T10 

OR 

PRED 

T40 

P_Z1 

BH 

N 

Torque reduced to 
standard state
Exhaust back  
pressure after TC
Intake air tempera-
ture
Specific fuel  
consumption
Power reduced to 
standard state
Exhaust gas tem-
perature after TC
Peak cylinder pres-
sure cylinder 1
Fuel consumption 
per hour
Engine speed

Figure 7.2:  
Blow-by behavior of a  
gasoline engine

Torque

MD 
Blow-by  Blow-by value
Engine speed
N 

i

]
n
m
L
[
 

/

y
b
-
w
o
B

l

118

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.3: 
Visible seizure damage on a 
cylinder bore

To this end, the engine is operated at full load and nominal speed with increased coolant 

and oil temperatures. Increasingly, the piston installation clearance can also be reduced and 

a run-in phase can be eliminated. The engine is run under full load at nominal speed imme-

The running times for seizure tests are typically between 0.5 and 5 hours.

In the course of development, the piston, piston rings, and cylinder are tested for the follow-

diately after starting.

7.1.1.4  Development test

ing behavior:

■  Blow-by

■  Oil consumption

Further key development areas are
■  wear patterns on pistons and piston rings;

cylinder polishing.

■  carbon buildup on the top land and in the region of the ring belt, and therefore potential 

The running times of development tests are typically 50 to 100 h.

The programs typically contain a high proportion of full load points at nominal speed and 

points of maximum torque. Depending on the development goal, other points, such as partial 
load and no load points, can also be run; Figure 7.4.

In order to achieve the test objectives indicated previously, primarily geometric changes are 

made to the components. These substantially affect ﬁne optimization of shapes and clear-

ances. For the piston, this means changes to clearances on the piston crown and skirt, as 

well as adjustment of chamfers in the ring belt area. The axial groove clearances must be 

tuned along with the piston rings, because it is important both to ensure sufﬁcient sealing 

7.1  Test run programs with examples of test results

119

Figure 7.4:
Test run diagram for an exam-
ple of a development test

M_B 

Fuel consumption 
for each operating 
cycle and cylinder

TOELIST  Current oil tem-

perature
Oil consumption
QOEL 
BETR_ST  Operating hours

against blow-by and oil pumping, and to provide resistance against piston ring sticking due 

to  carbon  buildup—particularly  in  diesel  engine  pistons.  Further  optimization  can  be  per-

formed at the oil drain points in the oil ring groove.

For piston rings, the potential inﬂuences include the various parameters of ring geometry, 

including ring width and depth, running surface shape, and internal bevels.

The design of the cylinder and engine block can inﬂuence the distortions and thus the blow-

by and oil consumption behavior. Oil consumption can also be inﬂuenced by the type and 

roughness of honing.

7.1.2  Long-term test run programs

7.1.2.1  Standard endurance test

On account of the long running times of up to 1,000 hours for passenger car engines and up 

to 3,000 hours for commercial vehicle applications, and the associated high costs, endur-

ance tests are performed only after the development of the components involved has been 

completed.  They  document  the  effectiveness  of  design  measures  developed  in  previous, 

shorter development tests.

The purpose of endurance tests is to verify the
■  unrestricted  long-term  functionality  of  engine  components  with  respect  to  low  oil  con-

sumption, blow-by, and wear, for example; and

■  durability of the developed components.

Successful endurance tests are often the basis for series production approval for the tested 

components.

120

7  Engine testing 

7.1.2.2  Cold-warm endurance test

One variant of the standard endurance test is a cold-warm endurance test. As a result of 

thermal expansion, extreme temperature cycles of the coolant cause signiﬁcant changes in 

stress in the material of the affected components, such as the pistons, piston rings, cylinder 

head, and cylinder head gasket. In the worst case, cracks will form, as seen here on the run-
ning surface of a piston ring; Figure 7.5.

Figure 7.6 shows an example of a cold-warm cycle of this kind with a cycle time of about 
10 min.

Figure 7.5: 
Crack network in the piston ring 
running surface

Figure 7.6: Temperature cycle in cold-warm endurance test

Engine speed
Torque

N 
MD 
PRED  Power reduced to a standard state

TOELIST  Current oil temperature
TWA 
TWE 

Coolant temperature at engine outlet
Coolant temperature at engine inlet

7.1  Test run programs with examples of test results

121

7.1.3  Specialized test run programs

7.1.3.1  Cold-start test

The cold-start test is used in trials of piston coatings to prevent “cold start scufﬁng.” This 

occurs in gasoline engines when increased fuel injection washes away the lubricating ﬁlm 

from  the  cylinder  bore  in  a  cold  engine.  Uncoated  pistons  that  exhibit  cold  start  scufﬁng 

are initially used as the basis in the cold-start test. Various coatings are then tested in direct 
comparison.

The engine can be run without load for the cold-start test. Prior to actual testing, the engine 

runs at room temperature, in order to ensure uniform distribution of the oil in the engine. 

The engine, including the oil and water, is then chilled down to –25°C in the cold chamber. 
Figure 7.7 shows a detailed example of a cycle of this kind.

Figure 7.7: 
Speed and tem-
perature profile in 
cold-start testing

7.1.3.2  Microwelding test

Microwelding, or groove ﬂank damage, refers to a local process of destruction on the lower 
ﬂank of the piston ring groove in an aluminum piston; Figure 7.8. It occurs primarily in the top 
ring groove of gasoline engine pistons. Sporadic cases of microwelding in the middle piston 

ring groove of aluminum pistons for diesel engines are also known, because this ring groove 

is typically not protected against wear by a ring carrier, as the top ring groove is.

Microwelding occurs as follows: material is locally torn out of the loaded ﬂank of the top ring 

groove, microwelded onto the ﬁrst piston ring, and then pressed back into the groove ﬂank 

at another location.

Because microwelding can be identiﬁed after just a brief running time—e.g., after run-in or 

audit test runs on the engine—the running time for the test program developed speciﬁcally 

for this problem is only 23 hours. This includes run-in, full-load curves, and the actual micro-

welding cycle, which lasts three hours and is repeated several times. In this cycle, the maxi-

122

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.8: 
Microwelding damage in the lower flank of 
the top ring groove of a piston without a ring 
carrier

mum torque, rated power, and governed speed are run in an alternating sequence. Visual 

assessment of the damage is carried out after the test. For less severe damage, optimization 

of the piston ring may be sufﬁcient. This can mean, for example, rounding off the edges of 

the ring (tumbling), ﬁne grinding the lower ﬂank to increase the bearing surface, or coating 

the lower ﬂank of the ring. A remedial measure for severe microwelding is hard anodizing 

the top ring groove.

7.1.3.3  Fretting test

Fretting refers to vibrational frictional wear and occurs primarily in highly stressed commer-

cial vehicle diesel engines, on the lower ﬂank of the top ring groove and the ﬁrst piston ring.

Similarly to microwelding, material is locally torn out of the piston and piston ring and pressed 

back in at another location, sometimes in combination with hard carbon deposit residues. In 
the beginning, only slight surface damage of just a few μm is evident, but during the course 
of later runs, local cavities of up to 1/10 mm  can arise; Figures 7.9 and 7.10.

A full-load program is used to test surface modiﬁcations or coatings on the piston groove 

or the ring side face. The running time is 100 hours. This allows a good initial assessment 

Figures 7.9 and 7.10: Fretting damage on the lower flank of a 1st piston ring

7.1  Test run programs with examples of test results

123

of the effectiveness of the measure performed on the piston or the ring. Further tests are 

then  performed  as  part  of  the  standard  endurance  tests.  Depending  on  the  running  time 

and assessment, measures such as full nitriding over the entire cross section of the ring, or 

chrome-plating of the lower ﬂank of the ring may be considered.

7.1.3.4  Burning mark test

The burning mark test is used in the development of piston rings. Burning marks occur on 
the piston ring running surface under high thermal loads. This is a type of damage in which 
larger cracks and breaks can occur on the running surface; Figure 7.11.

Figure 7.11: 
Scuffing on the piston ring 
running surface

In advanced stages, the burning marks become more severe, such that the running surface 

of the piston ring starts to fall apart. This ultimately leads to damage to the cylinder running 

surface. In the end, this damage can cause seizing in the affected cylinder, resulting in total 

failure of the engine. In order to prevent such damage, it is necessary to develop piston ring 

materials and coatings that are highly resistant to burning marks.

One important step in this development is to be able to determine burning mark resistance 

directly  in  the  engine  under  more  difﬁcult  conditions.  Tribometer  tests  cannot  sufﬁciently 

simulate the entire complexity of the stresses in the actual engine. Therefore, a special test 

procedure, known as the burning mark test, had to be developed for this purpose. Although 

piston rings in diesel and gasoline engines have to fulﬁll similar tasks in the engine, there are 

differences with respect to geometry and material selection. It was therefore necessary to 

develop dedicated test procedures for both types of engine. The test conditions for a burning 

mark test are signiﬁcantly more severe than in conventional test run program. They are listed 
in Figure 7.12, using the diesel engine as an example.

124

7  Engine testing 

Type of test

Piston type

Cooling oil supply

Top land width

Top land clearance

Gap clearance, 1st ring

Axial clearance, groove 1

Axial clearance, groove 2

Cooling fluid temperature

Oil temperature

Charge air temperature

Standard

Burning mark test

Cooling gallery

Spray jet cooling

Large 

Large 

Small

Small

Small

Small

90°C

130°C

50°C

Small

Small

Large 

Large 

Large 

Large 

150°C

90°C

Cooling fluid

50% water / 50% antifreeze

100% antifreeze

100, 110, 120, 130°C

Test run program

Customer-defined

10 h at rated power

Figure 7.12: List of intensified test conditions for diesel engine burning mark test

What sets the burning mark test apart from all other laboratory test procedures, such as tri-

bometer tests, is the ability to evaluate and classify ring surface materials and especially ring 
coatings with respect to burning mark resistance under actual operating conditions.

In order to determine the burning mark limit of a piston ring material, a new test setup (new 

engine block, new piston rings) is used to run each test with the cooling ﬂuid temperature 

in the range of 100, 110, 120, and 130°C, increasing by 10°C each time. To evaluate burning 

mark resistance, four classiﬁcation levels are applied for the severity of the burning marks 

that occur within the cooling ﬂuid temperature level achieved in the burning mark test. These 

four classiﬁcation levels are assigned the colors white, light gray, dark gray, or black. This 

allows simpliﬁed visual representation in tables and charts. The entire circumference of the 

ring is used for this analysis.

■  “White” classiﬁcation  

  — no burning marks

 

In the best case, the ring running suraces exhibit no burning mark or other changes what-

soever. Individual scratches are permissible.

■  “Light gray” classiﬁcation  

  — light burning marks

  This level allows isolated, light burning marks.

7.1  Test run programs with examples of test results

125

■  “Dark gray” classiﬁcation  

  — severe burning marks

  The  burning  marks  that  occur  extend  over  a  wide  area  of  the  running  surface  and  are 

signiﬁcantly more pronounced than for the classiﬁcation “light gray.” Clearly visible stripes 

or even slight seizure marks typically occur on the associated cylinder running surface at 

■  “Black” classiﬁcation  

  — seizure marks over a wide area of the circumference

  This  evaluation  is  applied  if  the  burning  marks  affect  nearly  the  entire  circumference  of 
the  running  surface  and  have  already  caused  some  disintegration  of  the  surface.  The 

associated cylinder typically shows very pronounced seizure marks over large areas of the 

the same time.

circumference.

After a test of the running surface performed in this manner, the results can be represented 
simply in chart form. Figure 7.13 shows an example of the burning mark limit reached for 
different running surface materials for a diesel engine application.

As a summary of all the tests, a ﬁnal assessment can be made as to which running surface 

material is best suited to which engine type, on the basis of the speciﬁc power output, with 

respect to burning mark resistance. An example of this overview for diesel engines is shown 
in Figure 7.14.

Figure 7.13: 
Burning mark resistance 
of thermal spray coatings 
(MSC280, MSC380, MSC480, 
MSC278) in comparison with 
a PVD coating (MIP230)

Ring running surface material Application range for diesel engines

Engines with very high specific power output

i

e
c
n
a
t
s
s
e
r
 
k
r
a
m
 
g
n
n
r
u
B

i

PVD coatings:  
MIP230

Galvanic chrome coatings:  
MCR236, MCR256

Thermal spray coatings:  
MSC480, MSC278

Thermal spray coatings:  
MSC280, MSC380

Engines with medium to high specific power output

Engines with low to medium specific power output

Figure 7.14: Burning mark resistance for various running surface materials

126

7  Engine testing 

7.2  Applied measurement methods for determining 

the piston temperature

Engine combustion is inseparably linked to substantial rises in pressure and temperature 

in  the  combustion  chamber,  which  puts  severe  mechanical  and  thermal  stresses  on  the 

piston.

Mechanical stresses on the piston are caused primarily by the gas force acting on the piston 

crown, the movable part of the combustion chamber, and inertia and lateral force loads.

The thermal stress arises from the impingement of hot combustion gases on the combustion 

chamber side of the piston crown. This produces a heat ﬂow from the combustion chamber, 

through the piston crown, and into the piston material. A large part of the heat ﬂowing into 

the piston material is dissipated via the piston rings, particularly the ﬁrst piston ring, into the 

cylinder wall, and then to the coolant that surrounds the cylinder. Another portion of the heat 

produced is dissipated to the engine oil, in engines with piston cooling.

These heat ﬂows give rise to a speciﬁc temperature ﬁeld, shown as an example for a pas-
senger car diesel engine in Figure 7.15.

The permissible stresses for the aluminum alloys (AlSi) typically used as piston materials are 

greatly dependent on the temperature. At ﬁrst, however, the stress ﬁeld and the temperature 

ﬁeld should be estimated using the engine data provided by the manufacturer and the safety 

factors should be calculated for highly stressed regions of the piston, on the basis of the 

required load spectrum.

Figure 7.15: 
Temperature field using the 
example of a passenger car 
ring carrier piston with eccen-
tric combustion chamber 
bowl for a diesel engine

7.2  Applied measurement methods for determining the piston temperature

127

If these safety factors are not sufﬁcient, despite additional optimization steps, then suitable 

measures can be suggested, as a result of piston temperature measurements, in order to 

obtain  sufﬁcient  safety  by  reducing  the  component  temperatures  (e.g.,  by  modifying  the 

engine calibration).

Temperatures  measured  at  various  positions  on  the  piston  are  needed  as  input  variables 

for the FE analysis of the temperature ﬁeld. Particularly when developing pistons for highly 

stressed passenger car diesel engines, measuring the piston temperature is an important 
and common step.

7.2.1  Methods for measuring the piston temperature

A distinction is made between thermomechanical (fusible plugs and templugs) and thermo-

electric measurement methods (NTC and thermocouples).

7.2.1.1  Thermomechanical methods for measuring the piston temperature

7.2.1.1.1  Use of fusible plugs

Fusible  plugs  help  to  determine  the  temperature  of  the  piston  during  steady-state  engine 
operation.  The  process  involves  placing  several—typically  three—small  metal  pins  made  of 
suitable  alloys  with  graduated  melting  points  in  a  range  of  10  to  15°C  at  the  appropriate 

measurement points on the piston. The melting points of the plugs are selected so that they 

cover the expected temperature range.

After the measurement run at a steady-state operating point, the fusible plugs are evaluated 

to see if they have started to melt. This allows the prevailing temperature at the measure-

ment point to be estimated, as it must lie within the interval between the melting points of the 

melted and unmelted fusible plugs.

Advantages:
■  Little outlay for equipment and measuring instruments

■  Short preparation and measurement time

Disadvantages:

■  Expected temperature must be estimated beforehand.

■  Low measurement precision due to the temperature intervals between melting points

■  Measurement of only one operating point for each run

The fusible plug method has been replaced by a more suitable process using templugs.

128

7  Engine testing 

7.2.1.1.2  Use of templugs

Templugs are small, hardened pins made of a special metal alloy; Figure 7.16. After a mea-
surement run at the desired operating point under constant conditions, the mean tempera-

ture during the measurement run is determined on the basis of the decrease in hardness of 

the templugs after removal.

are available in various sizes.

A single type of alloy is sufﬁcient for the required temperature range for pistons. Templugs 

The temperatures to which the templugs were exposed in the measuring piston are deter-

mined—after they have been removed from the piston—as a function of the decrease in hard-

ness and the measurement running time.

Advantages:
■  Little outlay for measuring instruments, preparation, and equipment

■  Relatively high measurement accuracy

■  On  account  of  their  small  dimensions,  a  large  number  of  measurement  points  can  be 

implemented for each piston.

Disadvantages:
■  Loss of time due to external analysis

■  Measurement of only one operating point for each run

■  A measurement run typically lasts ten hours.

Figure 7.16: 
Dimensions of 
templugs,  
left: standard 
templug with Allen 
socket,  
right: templug with 
predetermined 
breaking point

7.2  Applied measurement methods for determining the piston temperature

129

7.2.1.2  Thermoelectrical methods for measuring piston temperature

7.2.1.2.1  Use of NTC resistors

The transducers are NTC resistors (thermistors, NTC = Negative Temperature Coefﬁcient), 
which vary in electrical resistance as a function of the temperature; Figure 7.17.

Figure 7.17: 
Example of dimensions of an  
NTC resistor with glass insulation

The measurement value is transferred without contact by means of inductive coupling of two 

oscillating circuits at the bottom dead center of the piston. Ring coils are used on the piston 
and pin coils are used on the engine block. Figure 7.18 shows an example of a measuring 
piston equipped with NTC resistors.

Advantages:
■  Proven standard measurement method

■  Well suited to high speeds

Measuring point at the 
top ring groove

Figure 7.18: Measurement piston fitted with NTC resistors

7  Engine testing 

130

Disadvantages:

modulation

used.

■  Limited physical and mechanical stability of the sensor

■  Measurement range limited to 400°C, because of adhesives used in the application

■  Sensitive  to  interference  signals  and  impact  on  inductive  coupling  from  metal  near  the 

transmitters, because of the oscillating circuit principle of measurement using amplitude 

■  Depending on spatial conditions (piston diameter), a maximum of three sensors can be 

■  It may be possible in some circumstances to install only one ring coil in the piston, if the 

■  Different types of NTCs are needed, depending on the expected temperature loads at the 

piston has a very small diameter.

measurement point.

7.2.1.2.2  Use of NiCr-Ni thermocouples

In contrast to NTC resistors, NiCr-Ni thermocouples can be used universally, i.e., throughout 
the entire temperature range that occurs in the combustion engine. Figure 7.19 shows an 
application example of such a thermocouple.

Figure 7.19: Schematic construction of a NiCr-Ni sheath thermocouple

Advantages:

of the thermocouples.

■  Sensor positions can be selected almost without restriction, thanks to the small diameter 

■  The measurement range is typically between –200°C and 1,150°C. However, calibration for 

measuring the piston temperature is usually performed only up to 650°C.

■  Very well suited to measuring large temperature amplitudes in transient test run programs

7.2  Applied measurement methods for determining the piston temperature

131

7.2.1.3  Transferring the readings from thermocouples

7.2.1.3.1  Transferring the readings from thermocouples with measurement leads 

supported by linkage systems

The readings are transmitted out from the thermocouple in the piston through measurement 
leads supported by a linkage construction; Figure 7.20. One side of the linkage system is 
movably attached to the piston pin or the bottom side of the piston pin boss, and the other 

The number and type of NiCr-Ni thermocouples can be selected freely.

■  The number of measurement points is limited only by the geometric conditions.

■  Rapid  changes  in  temperature  can  be  captured  (resolution  based  on  degree  of  crank 

angle is also possible).

■  Good for steady-state and transient measurements

■  The required power supply can be provided using leads supported by the linkage system, 

side to the crankcase.

Advantages:

so no battery is required.

Disadvantages:

■  High level of design effort and mechanical modiﬁcations to the engine

■  Installation of a linkage system in individual cylinders is limited by the engine design.

■  Typically installation is possible at only one cylinder.

■  Maximum measurement speed is limited by the mechanical design of the linkage system.

■  Measurement duration is typically limited to a few hours because of the extreme stress on 

the measurement cables.

Figure 7.20: 
Principle of signal transmis-
sion with measurement leads 
supported by linkage systems

132

7  Engine testing 

7.2.1.3.2  Transferring the readings from thermocouples using telemetry

Readings are transmitted from the thermocouple in the piston via an RTM (Real-Time Teleme-

try Temperature Measurement) measurement system newly developed by MAHLE. The inte-
grated  sensor  signal  ampliﬁer,  Figure  7.21,  receives  the  power  it  needs  through  inductive 
coupling.

The readings are transmitted with each revolution in the range of the bottom dead center. 

The minimum coupling time per revolution is 0.8 ms.

Advantages:
■  Technical effort is lower for the same quality of results as for transmission of readings via 

measurement leads supported by a linkage system.

■  No limit on speed for series production applications

revolution).

■  Only slight changes to the engine block are required.

■  Temperature  changes  can  be  captured  rapidly  (data  transmission  with  each  crankshaft 

■  Up to seven temperatures can be captured on each piston. If several sensor signal ampli-

ﬁers are used in one piston, the number increases accordingly.

■  The sensor signal ampliﬁers used are temperature-stable up to 175°C.

■  In comparison with measurements using a linkage system and measurements using NTC 

resistors, a much longer service life is possible. 

■  The temperature-compensated sensor signals are digitized and thus insensitive to interfer-

ence when transmitted to the analysis unit.

■  With real-time visualization, the RTM system is well suited, particularly for optimizing com-

bustion parameters.

Figure  7.21:  Schematic  diagram  of  the  principle  of  measuring  and  transmission  of  readings  using 
telemetry (RTM system)

7.2  Applied measurement methods for determining the piston temperature

133

Disadvantages:

■  Relatively high effort in applying the measuring equipment to the piston

■  High ﬁnancial cost for electronic components (sensor signal ampliﬁers)

7.2.1.4  Evaluation of the methods used at MAHLE for measuring piston 

temperatures

The  selection  of  the  right  method  depends  on  the  requirements  proﬁle.  If  information  is 
needed only for one deﬁned operating point (e.g., the rated power point), then templugs can 
be used. If, however, a large number of measurements in the operating map or real-time visu-

alization is needed, then the use of sheath thermocouples and telemetry is recommended, 
i.e., the RTM system described above. Table 7.1 shows corresponding options, considering 
the preferred parameters in each case.

Table 7.1: Methods used at MAHLE for measuring piston temperatures

Measurement method

Templug

NTC

NiCr-Ni

NiCr-Ni

Inductive 
coupling

Linkage 
system

Telemetry

Transmission method

Process comparison

Classification of methods

Operating points per  
measurement run

Passenger cars

Typical 
number of 
measure-
ment points 
per piston

Residual 
hardness 
measurement

Thermo  
mechanical

Steady-state

1

8

Commercial vehicle

15

of the sensor

High

Robustness

of the reading  
transmisssion

–

Medium

Suitability for high engine speeds

High

Precision

Requirements for  
the workshop equipment

Project lead time

Medium

Low

50%

2–3

4

Low

High

High

Medium

10–20

7

High

Low

Low

High

High

High

High

High

High

medium

70%

100–200%

100%

Thermoelectric

Transient

No limit

134

7  Engine testing 

7.2.2  Piston temperatures in gasoline and diesel engines

When measuring the piston temperature, very speciﬁc positions are preferred for the sensor 
locations. They are shown in Figure 7.22, using the example of a passenger car diesel piston.

Figure 7.22: 
Examples for equipping a 
passenger car diesel piston 
with sensors for measuring 
piston temperature

7.2  Applied measurement methods for determining the piston temperature

135

The criteria for selecting these measurement points are as follows:

■  The bowl rim and base are subjected to heavy thermal and mechanical stresses, so cracks 

can occur if they are sufﬁciently overloaded.

■  The temperature in the top ring groove is essential to the function of the piston rings (resis-

tance to burning marks on the ring running surface). Buildup of residues in the top ring 

groove is also affected, and therefore the susceptibility to ring sticking.

■  The piston pin boss transmits the entire gas force to the piston pin and is highly mechani-

cally stressed. This can lead to the occurrence of pin boss cracks.

7.2.2.1  Typical temperature maxima on the piston

It is not possible to set an absolute limit for maximum permissible temperatures at various 

positions on the piston, because the load spectrum speciﬁed by the engine manufacturer or 

expected can vary greatly. The full-load portion in the range of the nominal speed over the 

engine service life will be substantially lower for a high-performance sports car than for a 

minivan with an entry-level engine.

Furthermore, owing to design boundary conditions, such as the location of the combustion 

bowl and the valve pockets, conrod design, etc., and the maximum gas pressure, different 

stresses can arise. The safety factors can therefore vary at the same temperature. The maxi-

mum permissible temperatures are therefore, of necessity, dependent on the application.

The values shown in Table 7.2 are not a recommendation for threshold values, but are simply 
orientation points for maximum measured values in current, highly stressed engines.

Table 7.2: Typical values for maximum temperatures on the piston for various applications

Application

Commercial vehicle

Passenger car

Diesel engine

Material

Bowl rim

Top ring groove

Piston pin boss

* = on piston crown

Al

340°C

260°C

190°C

Steel

470°C

260°C

180°C

Al

380°C

300°C

235°C

Steel

500°C

280°C

310°C

Gasoline 
engine

Al

290°C*

270°C

240°C

7.2.2.2  Influence of various operating parameters on piston temperature

When  measuring  temperatures  with  templugs,  because  of  the  limitation  to  one  operating 

point that is inherent to the principle, the rated power point under standard operating con-

ditions is typically selected. The highest temperatures are also expected here in nearly all 

cases.

136

7  Engine testing 

For methods that allow several operating points to be measured, the full-load curve under 

standard operating conditions is ﬁrst measured as a baseline. The result provides the maxi-

mum temperatures at the various measurement points, which also ﬂow into the numerical 

calculation as input variables. The temperature differentials between individual cylinders and 

the engine speed at which the maximum temperature occurs can also be determined.

If  needed,  the  inﬂuence  of  various  engine  operating  conditions  of  interest  on  the  piston 

temperature, while keeping the other parameters constant, can be determined as part of a 
measurement program.

Table 7.3 shows the average inﬂuence of the most important operating parameters on the 
temperature in the top ring groove of a diesel engine piston.

The inﬂuence on piston temperatures of the knock control characteristic in gasoline engines 

and  that  of  pre-injection  in  diesel  engines  is  also  of  interest,  for  example.  Such  a  typical 

measurement program is often supplemented with a measurement under “worst case” con-

ditions. In this case the coolant, engine oil, intake and charge air temperatures are all set to 

maximum values, such as would occur in a hot country test, for example.

Table 7.3: Influence of various operating parameters on the temperature in the top ring groove of a 
diesel engine piston

Operating parameters

Change in engine conditions

Change in temperature in the 
top ring groove

Coolant temperature

Water cooling

Lubricating oil temperature 
(without piston cooling)

Charge air temperature

50% antifreeze

10°C

10°C

10°C 

Piston cooling with oil

Spray nozzle at conrod big end

–8°C to –15°C on one side

Fixed nozzle

Salt core cooling gallery

–10°C to –30°C

–25°C to –50°C

Cooled ring carrier

–50°C  
(Additional reductions in  
temperature, relative to the  
salt core cooling gallery)

Cooling oil temperature

Mean effective pressure MEP 
(n = constant)

Engine speed   
(MEP = constant)

Ignition point, port closing

Air  ratio (cid:79)

10°C

1 bar

100 rpm

1°CA

Range of variation   
(cid:79) = 0.8–1.0

4–6°C 

5°C

1–2°C

1.5–3°C

4–7°C

4–8°C

2–4°C

1.5–3°C

< 10°C

7.2  Applied measurement methods for determining the piston temperature

137

Figure 7.23: Relationship between engine operating values for the air ratio (cid:79) using a gasoline engine

The result of a variation of the air ratio (cid:79) for a passenger car gasoline engine is shown as an 
example in Figure 7.23. It is evident that the maximum piston temperatures occur at approxi-
mately the same air ratio (cid:79) as the maximum power output.

The lowest speciﬁc fuel consumption is seen at approximately (cid:79) = 1. However, the highest 
exhaust gas temperatures occur at this point. Owing to the maximum permissible exhaust 

gas temperatures at the inlet of the exhaust gas aftertreatment system (such as a catalytic 

converter), or at the turbocharger inlet in a turbocharged engine, this “lean” range may be 

limited.

The lowest piston temperatures, and simultaneously the lowest exhaust gas temperatures, 
occur in the “rich” range, such as at (cid:79) = 0.8 or less. The speciﬁc fuel consumption, however, 
increases drastically at this point.

138

7  Engine testing 

For engine calibration, the best possible compromise should be made while considering the 

various boundary conditions. Varying other parameters, such as the ignition angle or start of 

injection, can also lead to such conﬂicting goals as a result of the different requirements for 

the operating values.

7.2.2.3  Influence of cooling oil quantity on the piston temperature

For engines equipped with piston cooling, the optimal amount of cooling oil is often a topic of 
discussion. The engine manufacturers always tend toward the lower values, with the objec-
tive  of  reducing  the  required  oil  pump  power  and  oil  foaming.  From  the  piston  manufac-

turer’s point of view, on the other hand, a large amount of cooling oil is desirable for optimal 

piston cooling. This must be ensured even for engines with a long service life and low oil 
pressure associated with advanced bearing wear. As is shown as an example in Figure 7.24, 
the speciﬁc cooling oil quantity should not fall below 3 kg/kWh.

Figure 7.24: 
Influence of specific cooling 
oil quantity on piston tem-
perature (six measurement 
points) in a passenger car 
piston with cooling gallery

7.2  Applied measurement methods for determining the piston temperature

139

Table 7.4: Recommended specific cooling oil quantities

Spray jet cooling  
(passenger cars)

Cooling gallery piston 
(aluminum, passenger cars 
and commercial vehicles)

Cooling gallery piston 
(steel, commercial  
vehicles)

Recommended 
specific cooling 
oil quantity

3 kg/kWh

5 kg/kWh

5–7 kg/kWh

The optimum point can be determined using appropriate piston temperature measurements 

and variable quantities of cooling oil.

The ratio of the cooling oil mass ﬂow to the effective power output is known as the speciﬁc 
cooling oil quantity. The recommendation from Table 7.4 for speciﬁc cooling oil quantities is 
based on the operating oil pressure at nominal speed and the engine oil temperature speci-

ﬁed for the rated power point.

In addition, the cooling oil nozzles must meet speciﬁc requirements with regard to jet forma-

tion and the function of the pressure retention valve. It is therefore important to calibrate the 

cooling oil nozzles, including the pressure retention valves, on a suitable test bench prior to 

measurement of piston temperatures.

The  opening  and  closing  pressures  of  the  cooling  oil  nozzles  are  controlled  by  pressure 

retention valves that are either central (in the main oil gallery) or inside the nozzle, and must 

be tuned to the boundary conditions of the engine. Using this type of valve, the minimum oil 

pressure needed for the bearings is ensured at low rpm, such as at idle speed.

Extensive piston temperature measurements are needed to optimize systems with demand-
controlled piston cooling. The cooling oil nozzles are then supplied with cooling oil only in 

those engine operating map areas in which there is a veriﬁable need for a reduction in piston 

temperature. Reducing the oil pump power, and therefore fuel consumption, is the advanta-

geous associated effect.

7.2.2.4  Piston temperature measurement in transient running programs

Figure 7.25 shows a cross section of a commercial vehicle aluminium diesel piston. Pistons 
of this type were used in an engine that was the subject of a so-called thermoshock run.

The engine is ﬁrst run under overload conditions—increased injection quantity, higher peak 

cylinder pressure, increased coolant temperature. In a thermoshock run, a sudden change 

is then made from full load to no load, while switching from a hot coolant circuit to a cold 

coolant circuit.

140

7  Engine testing 

Figure  7.25:    Section  view  of  an  aluminum  commercial  vehicle  diesel  piston  with  six  temperature 
measurement points, and associated results of measurements made during a transient thermoshock 
cycle. Piston temperatures were measured using the RTM system.

The diagram shows the time trace of the temperatures at prescribed measurement points 

during the thermoshock cycle, using the piston mentioned above as an example. One of the 

results that can be seen here is that the bowl rim sees the highest temperature cycle stress, 

with a temperature amplitude of about 240°C. Together with the temperature gradients that 

occur, stresses on the piston can be calculated and used to determine service life.

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

141

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses 

on a fired engine

Continuously rising crude oil prices and the declared goal of reducing environmental impact 

by minimizing emissions of toxic exhaust gas components as well as carbon dioxide have 

led to the demand for drastically reducing fuel consumption in combustion engines.

In  addition  to  downsizing  with  turbocharging,  the  development  of  new  combustion  pro-

cesses, and dethrottling of the intake system, the reduction of mechanical losses is an impor-

tant approach for reducing fuel consumption. It is important that the association between 

mechanical  losses  and  various  components  is  understood.  Loss  distributions  have  long 

been discussed in literature, but are mostly based on motored engines.

Figure 7.26 shows an example of the distribution of mechanical losses in gasoline engines, 
as determined back in 1984 by motored engine testing.

The  proportions  of  mechanical  losses  shown  on  the  right  in  Figure  7.26,  obtained  from 
motored engine tests, are small relative to the thermal losses in a ﬁred engine, on the left 

in the ﬁgure. It can be assumed, however, that the actual distribution of mechanical losses 

changes signiﬁcantly in the ﬁred engine. The piston group, in particular, takes on a greater 

share  of  the  mechanical  losses  with  increasing  engine  load.  It  therefore  makes  complete 

sense to determine and optimize the friction power loss under load of this assembly, known 

as the power cell unit (PCU). The PCU includes the following components:
■  Piston

■  Piston rings

■  Piston pin

■  Piston pin circlips

■  Connecting rod with bearings

■  Cylinder liner

Figure  7.26:  Loss  distribution  (averages  of  three  different  2.0-liter  gasoline  engines  at  5,000  rpm, 
motored operation)

142

7  Engine testing 

The prerequisites for sensible optimization are very precise and reproducible measurements 

of the friction losses under real engine operation, using a suitable method of measurement 

and analysis.

7.3.1  Measurement methods for determining friction losses

A few measurement methods are described below that serve to determine the friction losses, 
but which vary greatly in precision and in the technical effort required. Figure 7.27 shows 
a series of methods for determining friction in individual frictional pairings and in complete 

engines. These range from laboratory testing (e.g., tribometer testing) for individual engine 

components, to processes that use a motored engine, to several processes based on dif-

ferent principles of measuring on a ﬁred engine. Depending on the parameter being investi-

gated, the most suitable measurement method must be selected.

Figure 7.27: Measurement methods for determining friction in individual frictional pairings and com-
plete engines

7.3.1.1  Willans line method

This method is based on a measurement of fuel consumption per operating cycle, at a con-

stant engine speed, with varying brake mean effective pressure.

In order to determine the friction mean effective pressure, a tangent is drawn from the linear 

portion of the consumption curve, which is extrapolated to the axis of the brake mean effec-

tive  pressure  (x-axis).  The  intersection  point  yields  the  value  of  the  friction  mean  effective 
pressure of the engine (negative brake mean effective pressure); Figure 7.28.

This graphical method is a simple way to estimate the friction mean effective pressure of a 

complete engine. On account of the extrapolation, however, only an approximate trend fore-

cast can be made for comparing different engine types.

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

143

Figure 7.28: Willans line—4-cylinder diesel engine at 1,500 rpm

7.3.1.2  Motoring and tear down methods

When motored, the combustion engine is driven by an electric motor and the ignition and 

fuel supply are switched off to prevent combustion. The temperatures of coolant and oil are 

maintained  at  operating  temperature  by  means  of  external  conditioning  units.  The  friction 

mean effective pressure of the engine, including gas exchange losses, can be derived from 

the driving power consumed by the electric motor.

One special form of motoring is known as the tear down method. The engine is motored and 

disassembled, or stripped, step by step. In this manner, friction losses can be determined for 
each individual engine component.

General disadvantages of motoring, compared with measurements on a ﬁred engine, include 

the following:
■  The loads on the affected components are very low because of the absence of gas force.

■  The operating and component temperatures are lower, and the operating clearance condi-

tions are signiﬁcantly different.

■  Gas exchange losses are assigned to friction.

■  The high-pressure loop of the four-stroke engine does not do any work. Because of leak-

age  and  wall  heat  transfers,  the  indicated  mean  effective  pressure  has  a  negative  sign, 

which is interpreted as friction.

7.3.1.3  Cylinder deactivation

In order to determine the friction mean effective pressure, the power output from the engine 

is measured, and then one cylinder of a multicylinder engine is switched off by interrupting 

the fuel supply. The power that is then output by the engine is measured as well. By compar-

ing the two power output levels, the friction mean effective pressure of the engine can be 

7  Engine testing 

144

determined.

The disadvantages described above for motoring also apply to cylinder deactivation.

7.3.1.4  Coast down test

In order to calculate the friction mean effective pressure using this method, the decrease in 

speed level (change in speed as a function of time) is measured, which yields the internal fric-

tion in an unbraked, coasting engine. If the mass moment of inertia of the engine is known, 

then the drop in speed level can be used to calculate the loss of engine torque, from which 

the friction mean effective pressure can be determined.

7.3.1.5  Floating liner method

In  the  ﬂoating  liner  method,  the  friction  forces  caused  by  the  piston  group  are  measured 

directly.  The  level  of  design  and  technical  effort  required  is  very  high,  which  is  why  this 

method is used only on single-cylinder units. The cylinder liner is supported such that it ﬂoats 

with very low friction, and the lower end is supported on load sensors. This makes it possible 
to represent the friction force curve in the stroke direction over one operating cycle. Figure 
7.29 describes the design principle of a ﬂoating liner system.

The results, tracked against the crank angle, are very helpful for validating numerical calcu-

lations and for interpreting mechanisms of action. The friction mean effective pressure can 

then be derived from the measured friction force curve.

Figure 7.29: 
Floating liner system [10]

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

145

A disadvantage of this measurement method is that the maximum achievable engine speeds 

and loads are severely constrained by the design. In addition, owing to the ﬂoating support of 

the cylinder liner, the cylinder distortions that arise are not representative of those for actual 

complete engines.

7.3.1.6  Indication method

The  indicated  mean  effective  pressure  (IMEP)  in the  combustion  chamber  is  determined 
using  pressure  sensors.  Measurement  of  the  output  torque  at  the  ﬂywheel  can  be  used 

to  derive  the  brake  mean  effective  pressure  (BMEP).  The  friction  mean  effective  pressure 

(FMEP) is the difference between these two values:

FMEP = IMEP – BMEP

The principle behind the derivation of the friction mean effective pressure is seemingly quite 

simple. The greatest challenge, however, is the very high measurement accuracy and repro-

ducibility required for IMEP and BMEP, because they are very close in value and are sub-

tracted to get the result.

Unlike the other measurement methods, this principle enables friction mean effective pres-

sure to be measured during real engine operation. The ranges of speed, load, and tempera-

ture are not limited. Operating temperatures, and thus the local operating clearances and 

distortions, correspond to the actual conditions.

7.3.2  Friction mapping using the indication method

7.3.2.1  Profile of requirements

The friction power test bench is a development tool that can be used throughout the entire 

engine  operating  map  to  examine  parameters  for  the  following  engine  components  and 

frictional pairings:

■  Crank mechanism and bearing

– Piston and cylinder bore

– Rings and cylinder bore

– Rings and piston grooves

– Big end bore and crankshaft

– Main crankshaft bearing

■  Valve train

– Camshaft and bearing

– Cams and rocker arms

– Piston pin bearing in piston and connecting rod

7  Engine testing 

146

■  Engine auxiliaries

– Coolant pump

– Oil pump

– Generator

– Vacuum pump

■  Timing chains (belts) and drive chains (belts)

– Crankshaft/camshaft connection

– Connection to engine auxiliaries

■  Inﬂuence of operating media and temperatures

The  results  of  measurements  of  the  power  cell  unit  based  on  the  measurement  method 

described here are discussed as an example in Chapter 7.3.3. The main focus of attention 

is the crank mechanism and its bearing, and here in particular the piston friction, piston ring 

friction, and piston pin friction.

Parameters such as  installation  clearance,  piston  pin  offset,  piston  proﬁle,  as  well  as  skirt 

roughness and coating are of particular interest for piston friction.

In relation to the ring pack, the parameters of ring width and tangential force, as well as coat-

ing and geometry of the running surface of the rings, are of great interest.

For friction in the piston pin bearing, parameters such as coating and installation clearance 

are critical.

Parameter investigations should be feasible on all engine types and concepts.

The engines should be able to be measured under the following conditions, whether motored 

or ﬁred:
■  Fired operation is possible up to a maximum rated power of 200 kW.

■  Motored operation should also be possible with external loading (max. combustion cham-

ber pressure can be set continuously, up to over 200 bar).

■  Basic prerequisites for obtaining reproducible results are precise conditioning and adjust-

ability of the engine operating media.

The operating values for the engine, including the cylinder pressure curves, must be exten-

sively documented in order to have sufﬁcient input data for the numerical calculation.

7.3.2.2  Friction power test bench for passenger car engines

Figure 7.30 shows the schematic construction of the friction power test bench. It shows the 
engine being operated without auxiliaries. A detailed description of the test bench can be 

found in [11].

The  oil  and  coolant  pumps  are  replaced  by  external  conditioning  systems.  An  externally 

driven high-pressure fuel pump is used to generate pressure in the fuel rail.

The  use  of  external  systems  ensures  that  reproducible  operating  conditions  can  be  set 

up. Using the indication method, the friction losses in the engine auxiliaries would also be 

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

147

Figure 7.30: Schematic construction of the friction power test bench

included  in  the  friction  mean  effective  pressure  calculation  for  the  complete  engine.  Any 

ﬂuctuations  within  these  engine  auxiliaries  would  therefore  cause  signiﬁcant  errors  in  the 

derivation of the friction mean effective pressure. The use of external conditioning systems 

and drives can minimize this error potential.

An indication system with water-cooled pressure sensors is used to determine IMEP with a 

high level of precision. Precise association of the cylinder pressure to the crank angle over 

time  is  critically  important.  The  crank  angle  sensor  used  must  therefore  have  the  highest 

angular accuracy possible. The top dead center is determined dynamically with a capacita-

tive sensor in the cylinder head.

A  high-precision  dynamometer  is  used  to  determine  BMEP,  which  is  calculated  from  the 

torque. Precise observance and reproducibility of the boundary conditions are indispensable 

for accurately determining the friction losses. In addition to the engine operating media of 

coolant, oil, and fuel, the ambient air temperature must also be precisely and reproducibly 

controlled. One external conditioning unit each is available for conditioning the engine oil and 
coolant. They replace the pumps and controllers on the engine; Figure 7.31. The fuel is also 
externally conditioned.

In motored operation, the engine can be run by means of an external charging system with a 

deﬁned cylinder pressure (load). The pressure of the intake air in the intake manifold can be 

increased accordingly. The greater charge density in the combustion chamber that results 

after “close intake” can reach peak cylinder pressures of over 200 bar because of compres-

sion in so-called “motored externally charged” mode.

Figure 7.32 shows the setup of the test bench, with test engine and dynamometer.

The key data for the friction power test bench are compiled in Table 7.5.

148

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.31: Conditioning systems for coolant circuit (left) and oil circuit (right)

Figure 7.32: Test engine with external charging system connected

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

149

Table 7.5: Technical data of the friction power test bench

Dynamometer 

Engine speed

Torque

Max. 12,000 rpm

Max. 525 Nm (cid:114) 0.3 Nm

Coolant conditioning system 

Temperature setting

40 ... 120ºC ± 1 K

Flow rate

50–200 l/min (cid:114) 5 L/min

Engine oil conditioning system 

Temperature setting

40 ... 120ºC (cid:114) 1 K

Oil pressure

1 ... 10 bar (cid:114) 0.05 bar

Allows engine to be operated with dry sump lubrication

External charging system 

Air flow rate

Air pressure

Air temperature

Max. 25 m3/min

Max. 5 bar

25ºC (cid:114) 1 K

Fuel conditioning and consumption measurement

Temperature stability

(cid:114) 0.1 K

Flow rate

Max. 125 kg/h (cid:114) 0.15 kg/h

Ambient air temperature controller 

Air temperature

25ºC (cid:114) 2 K

7.3.2.3  Measurement and analysis method

In order to determine the inﬂuence of PCU design parameters on the friction mean effective 
pressure, different variants are analyzed. The measurement program includes measurement 

of the friction mean effective pressure during the run-in phase, over full-load curves, and for 

the engine operating map for each variant. Engine operating map measurements are made 

both in ﬁred mode and in motored externally charged mode.

The operating maps, for which the inﬂuence of the parameters of load, speed, and engine 

temperature on the friction mean effective pressure of a combustion engine is to be deter-

mined, are created using a statistical test planning method, “design of experiments” (DoE). 

The core of this approach is the deﬁnition of a multidimensional experiment space and the 

optimal distribution of the measurement points in this space.

The advantages of DoE are that the results can be displayed as a function of all the selected 

parameters, and the test time required can be signiﬁcantly reduced.

Figure 7.33 shows the variation parameters and desired response variables selected for the 
DoE  analysis,  as  well  as  the  set  boundary  conditions  and  the  dependencies  between  the 

individual parameters.

150

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.33: Variation parameters and response variables for compiling a DoE test plan

Figure 7.34 shows two friction mean effective pressure maps at different engine tempera-
tures, 50°C and 100°C, which were compiled using a mathematical approximation from the 

DoE  program.  The  friction  mean  effective  pressure  is  shown  as  a  function  of  the  engine 

speed and load (indicated mean effective pressure). In this case, engine temperature means 

the same value for coolant temperature and oil temperature. 

A comparison of the two operating maps shows that engine friction depends on the engine 

temperature. The higher the operating ﬂuid temperatures, the lower the friction mean effec-

tive  pressure.  It  can  also  be  seen  that  the  friction  mean  effective  pressure  increases  with 

rising  rpm,  and  that  the  friction  mean  effective  pressure  is  signiﬁcantly  dependent  on  the 

load.

Figure 7.34: FMEP maps at different engine temperatures; Operating map A: water and oil tempera-
ture 50°C, operating map B: water and oil temperature 100°C

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

151

Figure 7.35: 
Friction mean effective pressure differ-
ence map, calculated from the friction 
mean effective pressure operating maps of 
operating maps A and B. The differential 
can be attributed to a difference in engine 
temperature of 50°C.

A detailed interpretation by visually comparing the operating maps is difﬁcult, because the 

differences are very slight. If the difference between the two is considered, however, even 

small  differences  can  be  displayed  clearly.  A  positive  differential  represents  the  savings 
potential due to the higher temperature; Figure 7.35.

A comparison of the different engine temperatures with the aid of the friction mean effective 
pressure  difference  map,  Figure  7.35,  shows  no  signiﬁcant  dependence  on  speed,  but  a 
strong dependence on load.

The  interpretation  of  such  friction  mean  effective  pressure  difference  maps  allows  funda-

mental statements about the inﬂuences of the parameter changes made on the characteris-

tic curve of the friction mean effective pressure in the operating map.

Further information on the measurement and analysis method used, including error analysis, 

can be found in [11].

7.3.3  Selected results from tests on a passenger car diesel 

engine

The  following  results  were  obtained  from  a  turbocharged  4-cylinder  2.0  L  passenger  car 

diesel  engine  with  a  gray  cast  iron  block.  The  results  presented  were  supplemented  and 

expanded on with [11, 13].

The  friction  mean  effective  pressure  values  obtained  are  shown  for  an  engine  operating 

temperature of 100°C. The friction mean effective pressure difference map for the motored 

externally charged mode is compared with that of the ﬁred mode in each case.

152

7  Engine testing 

7.3.3.1  Piston installation clearance

If two extremely different installation clearances are run under identical external boundary 

conditions,  then  the  result  is  the  friction  mean  effective  pressure  difference  maps  shown 
below; Figure 7.36.

The variant with the enlarged installation clearance, as expected, shows a lower friction mean 

effective pressure in both operating modes. This is evident in the positive friction mean effec-

tive pressure difference.

A signiﬁcant dependence on speed can be seen in the difference map for the motored exter-

nally charged mode, but only a very slight dependence on load is detected.

By contrast, a very signiﬁcant dependence on load is present in the ﬁred mode. With increas-

ing load, i.e., increasing indicated mean effective pressure, increasingly great advantages are 

seen for the variant with enlarged installation clearance.

This difference in the characteristic, especially for increasing load, can be attributed to the 

fact that the motored externally charged mode has excluded the component temperature 

from the net inﬂuence of the gas force on friction, because the piston temperature increases 
only slightly at peak pressure; Figure 7.37. In ﬁred mode, in contrast, this effect due to the 
gas force also has a thermal effect superimposed on it. This is evident in Figure 7.37 in the 
signiﬁcantly greater increase in the piston temperature with increasing load. Therefore, the 

pistons have different operating clearances at the same peak cylinder pressure in the two dif-

ferent engine operating modes. For the piston with the smaller installation clearance, under 

increasing load in ﬁred operation, the operating clearance is used up sooner than that of the 

piston with the enlarged installation clearance. This leads to the severe increase in friction 
mean effective pressure difference in ﬁred operation; Figure 7.36, right. In the motored exter-
nally charged operating mode, this increase does not occur, owing to the lesser increase in 
component temperature; Figure 7.36, left.

Figure 7.36: Friction mean effective pressure difference maps, different piston installation clearance 
(17 μm compared with 101 μm), motored externally charged (left) and fired mode (right), engine tem-
perature 100°C

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

153

Figure 7.37: Measured piston temperatures (piston pin boss) for motored externally charged and fired 
engine operation, with equal peak cylinder pressures

For  the  reasons  just  listed,  a  motored  externally  charged  friction  mean  effective  pressure 

difference  map  is  of  only  limited  use  in  engine  optimization  for  actual  driving  operation. 

However, because it can be compared with ﬁred operation, it contributes signiﬁcantly to the 

understanding  of  friction  mechanisms,  especially  for  detecting  thermal  inﬂuences.  Differ-

ence maps for ﬁred operation can be used unconditionally for determining the potential of a 

change to a parameter in real driving operation.

7.3.3.2  Surface roughness of the piston skirt

In order to investigate the inﬂuence of surface roughness, pistons without skirt coatings were 
used. This allowed precise adjustment of deﬁned surface parameters. For the piston with a 
smooth skirt surface, an average roughness of Ra = 0.2 μm was selected, and for the piston 
with a rough skirt surface, it was Ra = 2.1 μm. In order to exclude any potential run-in effects, 
the values indicated were measured after the run.

An increase in the friction mean effective pressure difference, i.e., an improvement in friction 

mean effective pressure, occurred under increasing load for the variant with the smooth skirt 
surface; Figure 7.38. The cause for this is that a hydrodynamic lubricating ﬁlm can form more 
easily on the piston with the smooth skirt surface. This positive effect is more extensive in 

ﬁred operation, owing to the tighter operating clearances caused by the different thermal load.

Roughness measurements on the skirt surfaces before and after the test show clear run-in 

effects of the rough piston. The roughness peaks are severely worn away, which give the 

154

7  Engine testing 

Figure  7.38:  Friction  mean  effective  pressure  difference  maps,  different  surface  roughness  of  the 
piston  skirt  (Ra  =  2.1  μm  compared  with  Ra  =  0.2  μm),  motored  externally  charged  (left)  and  fired 
(right), engine temperature 100°C

piston the opportunity to adapt its wear to the distortions in the individual cylinder. For the 

smooth piston, this effect is deﬁnitely lessened, or even undetectable.

For current production pistons with relatively tight installation clearance, the two described 
effects  can  be  combined  by  using  GRAFAL®.  Coating  a  relatively  rough  piston  skirt  with 
GRAFAL® allows the piston proﬁle to be adapted to the cylinder distortions by wearing off the 
remaining roughness. At the same time, the supporting area on the skirt smoothes out after 

just a short run-in period, leading to low friction power losses. In engines with greater clear-

ance design, smoothing coating wear during run-in is undesired. For this reason, a more resis-

tant coating, such as EvoGlide, is applied to the parts whose surface is less rough. This is the 

case in particular for friction power loss optimized engines with reduced cylinder distortions.

7.3.3.3  Piston pin offset

A piston pin offset can be used to affect the secondary motion of the piston, and therefore 
the formation of a lubricating ﬁlm on the piston skirt. For this reason, a parameter study was 
performed with a stepwise change in the piston pin offset, from a value of 0.5 mm toward 

the antithrust side (ATS) to 0.5 mm toward the thrust side (TS).

The results of the comparison of piston pin offsets, from 0.5 mm toward the antithrust side 

and 0.5 mm toward the thrust side, are described below. The difference maps for ﬁred and 
motored externally charged operation, Figure 7.39, yield very different curves. This leads to 
the conclusion that the piston pin offset is a parameter that is strongly dependent on the 

component temperature.

In motored externally charged operation, Figure 7.39, left, the friction mean effective pres-
sure  difference  is  highly  dependent  on  the  peak  cylinder  pressure  at  lower  speeds.  The 

dependence  on  load  decreases  as  speed  increases.  The  greatest  apparent  advantage  of 

offsetting in the direction toward the thrust side is seen at low speed and high load.

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

155

Figure  7.39:  Friction  mean  effective  pressure  difference  maps,  different  piston  pin  offset  (0.5  mm 
toward the antithrust side compared with 0.5 mm toward the thrust side), motored externally charged 
(left) and fired mode (right), engine temperature 100°C

In actual ﬁred operation, however, Figure 7.39, right, a clear dependence on speed can be 
seen for low loading. The dependence on speed drops off clearly as the load increases. The 

greatest potential of the thrust-side piston pin offset for reducing friction mean effective pres-

sure can be detected at low load and high speed.

Figure 7.40 shows the friction power losses of the four piston pin offset variants that were 
tested, comparing different speeds. The variant with a piston pin offset of 0.5 mm toward the 

Figure 7.40: Friction power losses for four different piston pin offsets, at different speeds and IMEP = 
10 bar, engine temperature 100°C

156

7  Engine testing 

thrust side always exhibits the least friction power loss, regardless of the speed. A change 

in the piston pin offset in the direction of the thrust side, or in direction of the antithrust side, 

causes an increase in friction power loss.

7.3.3.4  Width of the piston ring in groove 1

In order to determine the inﬂuence of the width of the compression ring in groove 1 on the 

friction mean effective pressure, tests were run with piston rings having widths of 1.75 mm 

and 3.0 mm.

Because of design boundary conditions, the 3.0 mm wide ring also had the tangential force 

increased by 11 N per ring (44 N for the complete engine). This means that these two param-

eter changes are superimposed in the friction mean effective pressure difference map.

The friction mean effective pressure difference maps, Figure 7.41, show an advantage for the 
1.75 mm wide compression ring, both for motored externally charged operation and for ﬁred 

engine operation, across all speeds and loads.

The increase in savings potential with increasing speed, even at low loads or maximum pres-

sures, can be attributed to the change in tangential force and was also detected in purely 

motored experiments.

The load-dependent portion of the friction mean effective pressure difference comes from 

the increased contact pressure in the contact surface between the ring and the cylinder wall. 

This increase for the 3.0 mm wide compression ring results from the greater inner surface 

area of the ring at the same gas force load behind the ring, compared with the 1.75 mm wide 

compression ring, and thus the increasing contact pressure.

Owing to this increase in contact pressure, the mixed lubrication component of the 3.0 mm 

wide compression ring increases under gas force load. This results in the friction mean effec-

tive pressure becoming worse with increasing load.

Figure  7.41:  Friction  mean  effective  pressure  difference  maps,  different  compression  ring  widths 
(3.0  mm  compared  with  1.75  mm),  motored  externally  charged  (left)  and  fired  mode  (right),  engine 
temperature 100°C

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

157

Figure 7.42: Division of the measured friction power loss difference into components for ring width 
and for tangential force for a compression ring, fired engine operation, engine temperature 100°C

It  is  notable  that  in  this  variant,  the  friction  mean  effective  pressure  difference  maps  for 

motored  externally  charged  operation  and  for  ﬁred  operation  are  very  similar  in  terms  of 

values and curves. This indicates a subordinate inﬂuence of the component temperatures—in 

contrast to the changes to the piston.

In Figure 7.42, the difference in friction power losses for ﬁred operation at a speed of 2,500 
rpm is divided into a portion for the compression ring width and a portion for the tangential 
force. Measurements with different tangential forces were performed in advance.

7.3.3.5  Tangential force of the oil control ring

Preliminary experiments helped to ensure that if the tangential force is reduced by 18 N per 
ring (72 N for the complete engine) with the identical ring type, the engine boundary condi-
tions, such as oil consumption or blow-by, are not signiﬁcantly affected. 

An increase in the friction mean effective pressure difference with increasing speed can be 
observed for both the motored externally charged mode and the ﬁred operation; Figure 7.43. 
A slight increase in the difference with increasing load is evident only for ﬁred operation.

This  characteristic  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  mechanical  load,  i.e.,  the  peak  cylin-

der  pressure,  only  slightly  affects  the  savings  potential  in  friction  mean  effective  pressure 

obtained by reducing the tangential force on the oil control ring. Thermal effects, such as the 

reduction in operating clearance under increasing load, also exhibit only a subordinate inﬂu-

158

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.43: Friction mean effective pressure difference maps, reduction in tangential force of the oil 
control  ring  by  18  N,  motored  externally  charged  operation  (left)  and  fired  operation  (right),  engine 
temperature 100°C

ence. Results of additional variations of tangential force on the oil control ring, aimed at the 

conﬂicting goals of friction power loss and oil consumption, are presented in Chapter 7.9.5.

The comparison of the ﬁred friction power loss difference map with the results of an approxi-

mation formula derived from motored measurements conﬁrms both the value and the nature 
of this characteristic; Figure 7.44. 

Figure 7.44: Comparison of the friction power loss difference map measured in fired mode (black) to 
the results of the MAHLE approximation formula (red). The tested tangential force difference for the 
four oil control rings is 72 N for the complete engine, engine temperature 100°C.

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

159

Figure 7.45: Friction mean effective pressure difference maps, various piston pin surfaces (steel com-
pared with DLC coating), motored externally charged (left) and fired (right), engine temperature 100°C

7.3.3.6  Coating of the piston pin

In Figure 7.45, it is interesting to note that the response of the friction mean effective pres-
sure differences relative to increased load is quite different between the motored externally 

charged mode and ﬁred operation. While the largest potential is seen at low loads in ﬁred 

operation, in motored externally charged operation it is found at high peak pressures, i.e., at 

high loads.

This characteristic indicates that the varying parameter is strongly dependent on the ther-
mal  load  of  the  engine.  As  is  known  from  the  piston  temperature  measurements,  Figure 
7.37, component temperatures, particularly the piston temperature, increase only slightly with 
increasing peak pressure in motored externally charged operation. This means that the oper-

ating clearance in the piston pin bearing does not change signiﬁcantly, despite the different 
thermal expansion coefﬁcients of the piston and pin materials. In ﬁred operation, however, 

the  operating  clearance  in  the  boss  increases  with  increasing  load.  This  difference  in  the 

changes in operating clearance appears to lead to various mixed lubrication components, 

while  the  superior  dry  coefﬁcient  of  friction  for  DLC  can  have  a  greater  effect  in  motored 

externally charged operation under high loads.

7.3.3.7  Engine oil viscosity

In order to determine the inﬂuence of oil viscosity on friction losses, experiments were per-
formed using typical commercial oils of the viscosity classes 10W60 and 5W30.

When interpreting the test results of experiments with different oils, care must be taken that 

the oil type is changed not only around the piston group, but throughout all the relevant fric-

tion sources in the engine, such as the main bearings and valve train. The changes in the 

friction mean effective pressure due to changing the oil type, therefore, must not be assigned 

to only one frictional pairing.

160

7  Engine testing 

Figure  7.46:  Friction  mean  effective  pressure  difference  maps,  different  engine  oil  viscosities 
(SAE  10W60  compared  with  SAE  5W30),  motored  externally  charged  (left)  and  fired  mode  (right), 
engine temperature 100°C

Low-viscosity oil has a fundamental advantage with regard to friction power loss. This can be 
seen in that the friction mean effective pressure difference maps, Figure 7.46, have a similar 
frictional advantage for both motored externally charged operation and ﬁred operation. How-

ever, this is expressed quite differently in the characteristic in the operating map. In motored 

externally charged operation, the greatest advantage of the low-viscosity oil is at high speed 

and high peak pressure, while in ﬁred operation it is at very low loads. These difference maps 

may  reﬂect  the  inﬂuence  of  the  different  component  temperatures.  In  ﬁred  operation,  the 

operating clearances between the piston and cylinder get smaller and smaller with increas-

ing load because of the increasing component temperatures, and the load-bearing oil ﬁlm 

thickness gets thinner and thinner. The advantage of low-viscosity, thinner oil thus becomes 
less signiﬁcant as the load increases; Figure 7.46.

These results again show that only experiments under actual engine operating temperatures 

provide the information that is necessary for optimizing the friction power losses in actual 

driving operation.

7.3.3.8  Profile of the piston skirt 

In the present case, the inﬂuence of the piston skirt contour on the friction mean effective 

pressure was examined. The piston proﬁle design can affect the buildup and propagation of 
a hydrodynamic lubricating ﬁlm. Systematically varying the piston proﬁle leads to four basic 
piston skirt contours (Figure 7.47).

Piston proﬁles can be differentiated as “weak barrel-shaped”, “top feed”, “bottom feed”, and 

“strong barrel-shaped.” With the “top feed” piston proﬁle, the upper end of the piston skirt 

is considerably reduced in the direction of the piston’s central axis when compared with the 

weak barrel-shaped piston proﬁle. With the “bottom feed” piston proﬁle, the same applies to 

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

161

Figure 7.47: Schematic diagram of the examined piston skirt contours

the lower end of the piston skirt. The “strong barrel-shaped” piston skirt can be interpreted 

as a combination of the “top feed” and “bottom feed” piston proﬁles.

The “top feed” variant has the greatest friction mean effective pressure advantages across 

nearly  the  entire  operating  map  for  both  types  of  engine  operation.  For  the  weak  barrel-
shaped piston skirt, however, there are disadvantages in the frictional behavior. Figure 7.48 
shows a direct comparison between the two piston proﬁles “weak barrel-shaped” and “top 

feed”  with  respect  to  their  potential  friction  savings.  The  “top  feed”  variant  is  reduced  by 
about 40 μm.

Figure 7.48: Friction mean effective pressure difference maps, different piston profiles (“weak barrel-
shaped”  in  comparison  with  “top  feed”),  motored  externally  charged  (left)  and  fired  (right),  engine 
temperature 100°C

162

7  Engine testing

In ﬁred engine operation, slight disadvantages can be seen for the piston skirt with top feed, 

at high speed and low load only. Maximum savings are possible within the high load and low 

speed ranges.

Because of its proximity to the piston crown, which is directly exposed to the combustion, 

the upper piston skirt area is the zone of the piston skirt subjected to the highest thermal 

load. By reducing the upper skirt area  (“top  feed”),  such  interference  can  be  clearly  mini-

mized, especially under high load. As a result, the formation of a hydrodynamic lubricating 
ﬁlm occurs more easily, which consequently reduces friction.

The results from the motored externally charged engine operation conﬁrm that the friction 

mean effective pressure advantages of the “top feed” variant can be attributed largely to the 
thermal expansion of the piston; Figure 7.48, left. The motored externally charged operat-
ing mode represents the savings that can be attributed solely to the inﬂuence of the piston 

proﬁle on the buildup of the lubricating ﬁlm, isolated from the thermal inﬂuence. The other 
variants of piston proﬁle shown in Figure 7.47 are described in detail in [11].

7.3.3.9  Coating of the piston skirt

The main purpose of a coating on the piston skirt is to prevent local welding between the 
piston and the cylinder, or piston seizing. Under extreme engine operating conditions, the 
risk of a piston seizing is particularly high because of the expected interference (operating 

clearance less than zero).

Figure 7.49 shows a comparison between an uncoated piston skirt (aluminum) and a piston 
skirt coated with GRAFAL® in ﬁred engine operation. The installation clearance of the piston 
with no coating on aluminum and coated with GRAFAL® (measured after the run) was about 
100 μm.

There is a clear dependence on load, whereas the dependence on speed is comparatively 

low. The greatest frictional advantage is shown by the coated piston under high load at high 

Figure 7.49: 
Friction mean effective pressure difference 
map, different skirt coatings (uncoated in 
comparison with GRAFAL® coating), fired, 
engine temperature 100°C

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

163

speed. At high load, the heat input to the piston is greatest; therefore, the greatest thermal 

expansion  of  the  components  occurs  here  as  well.  If  the  piston  encounters  interference, 

then the mixed lubrication component on the piston skirt presumably increases. In this case, 

the  lower  friction  coefﬁcient  of  the  coating  in  comparison  with  aluminum  has  a  positive 

effect. The appropriate tests in motored externally charged operation—that is, without heat 

input—show no advantage after the run for the coated piston with the same roughness, as 

expected.

The friction differences with and without coating are based on the different series conditions 
with  either  rough  machined  aluminum,  or  the  relatively  smooth  GRAFAL®  coating,  which 
also have clear differences in surface roughness in the run-in condition. If the parameter of 

skirt roughness is investigated in isolation, then it can be seen that a smooth piston skirt sur-

face leads to substantial frictional advantages under high loads (see Chapter 7.3.3.2). A direct 

comparison of coated and uncoated piston skirts, with comparably smooth surfaces, indi-

cates only a slight potential for improvement with skirt coating. The appreciable advantage of 
a coating can mainly be attributed to the change in surface roughness shown in Figure 7.49. 
This result leads to the conclusion that the friction on the piston skirt can be chieﬂy improved 

by increasing the hydrodynamic proportion, less so by the coating material and its friction 

coefﬁcient. Particularly at low piston speeds in the region around the dead centers, however, 

a coating on the piston skirt can signiﬁcantly improve wear resistance.

The  potential  for  a  skirt  coating  to  reduce  piston  friction  is  relatively  low,  considering  the 

other parameters that have been investigated. Nevertheless, a coating for the piston skirt is 

indispensable in order to ensure operating safety under extreme conditions [14].

7.3.3.10  Stiffness of the piston skirt

In the case presented, the variation in skirt stiffness is the result of the ﬁnish machining of a 
base piston. The areas highlighted in blue in Figure 7.50 were milled to reduce the base pis-
ton’s skirt stiffness. In addition, the cooling oil gallery was slotted (red). The fatigue resistance 

was not taken into consideration in this context.

Figure 7.50: Reduction of the skirt stiffness by milling the base piston (blue) and slotting the cooling 
oil gallery (red)

164

7  Engine testing

Figure 7.51: Measurements of radial deformation on the thrust side; test load 2,000 N; 
variant A = base piston (black), variant B = piston with reduced skirt stiffness (red)

The reduction in skirt stiffness achieved by means of these measures can be determined by 

measuring the radial deformation at several points across the skirt contour and skirt height. 

The  radial  deformation  of  the  piston  skirt  under  a  test  load  of  2,000  N  around  the  skirt 
contour is shown in Figure 7.51. The radial deformations of the ﬁnish machined piston are 
considerably greater than those of the base piston. The skirt stiffness has been substantially 

reduced, particularly on the thrust side.

The variant with reduced skirt stiffness shows friction mean effective pressure advantages 

across the entire engine operating map in ﬁred engine operation compared with the base 
variant, Figure 7.52, right. There is a clear dependence on load, whereas the dependence 
on speed is comparatively low. Maximum reduction can be achieved at high load and high 

speed.

Under  high  load,  the  thermal  expansion  of  the  piston  is  particularly  large,  so  it  can  be 

assumed that the piston encounters interference. The increased mixed lubrication compo-

nent of the piston skirt friction leads to increased friction losses. However, a soft piston skirt 

can counteract the thermal expansion and thus reduce the contact pressures. This makes 

it  easier  to  maintain  a  largely  hydrodynamic  lubrication.  The  friction  losses  resulting  from 

piston skirt friction decrease accordingly. The reduction in skirt stiffness thus allows a local 

increase in operating clearance for the piston skirt. Particularly at the upper end of the skirt, 

where the heat input is greatest as a result of combustion, a reduction in stiffness has a posi-

tive effect on friction losses.

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

165

Figure 7.52: Friction mean effective pressure difference maps, varying skirt stiffness (skirt stiffness of 
the production condition in comparison with reduced skirt stiffness), motored externally charged (left) 
and fired (right), engine temperature 100°C

During motored externally charged engine operation, Figure 7.52, left, there is no substantial 
inﬂuence of the skirt stiffness on the friction mean effective pressure. Triggered by the lack-

ing heat input, the piston only heats up minimally, which in turn only leads to limited thermal 

expansion. The operating clearance differs signiﬁcantly from the clearance in ﬁred operation. 

The  mechanisms  described  above  for  ﬁred  operation  therefore  do  not  apply  to  motored 

externally charged operation.

7.3.3.11  Area of the piston skirt

In order to determine the inﬂuence of skirt area on friction mean effective pressure, the sup-

port area of the skirt was signiﬁcantly reduced. The location of the area was also varied while 

maintaining almost the same surface area. A distinction is made between a horizontal and a 
vertical orientation of the supporting skirt area; Figure 7.53.

According to Newton’s law of friction, the area’s orientation has no inﬂuence on the friction 

losses. It is assumed, however, that the location of the support area inﬂuences the buildup of 

the lubricating ﬁlm on the piston skirt. This makes it possible to change the shear rate and 

therefore inﬂuence the friction force. In addition, effects on the displacement and oil trans-

port mechanisms can be expected.

In motored externally charged engine operation, no signiﬁcant differences are evident for the 
horizontally oriented, reduced skirt area in comparison with the base; Figure 7.54.

In ﬁred operation, slight frictional advantages can be seen for the reduced, horizontally ori-

ented skirt area. As the load increases, the frictional advantages increase, and the maximum 

is under high load. The engine speed appears to have no signiﬁcant inﬂuence.

In motored externally charged operation, again no signiﬁcant friction mean effective pres-

sure difference is evident for the reduced skirt area. In ﬁred operation, the reduced, vertically 

166

7  Engine testing

Figure  7.53:  Horizontal  orientation  (left,  green)  and  vertical  orientation  (right,  blue)  of  the  reduced 
bearing skirt areas (height of the supporting profile 100–200 μm)

Figure 7.54: Friction mean effective pressure difference maps, different skirt area (base skirt area in 
comparison with reduced skirt area, horizontal orientation), motored externally charged (left) and fired 
(right), engine temperature 100°C

oriented skirt area also experiences slight frictional advantages, which become greater as 
the load increases and reach their maximum under high load at high speed; Figure 7.55. 
The variants with reduced skirt area thus show very similar frictional behavior, regardless of 

the orientation. It can be assumed that a reduction in bearing skirt area leads, in principle, 

to a reduction in friction. When optimizing  the  skirt  area,  however,  care  must  be  taken  to 

ensure that the reduction in skirt area does not cause an excessive increase in the contact 

pressure on the skirt, because otherwise the mixed lubrication component at the piston skirt 

increases disproportionately, which can result in a frictional disadvantage. As the wear pat-

tern becomes smaller, piston proﬁle optimization is gaining in importance.

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

167

Figure 7.55: Friction mean effective pressure difference maps, different skirt area (base skirt area in 
comparison with reduced skirt area, vertical orientation), motored externally charged (left) and fired 
(right), engine temperature 100°C

7.3.4  Simulation of fuel consumption and CO2 emissions values 

in the cycle

Evaluation of friction power loss potential with respect to the fuel and CO2 savings that can 
be achieved is only possible with the use of driving cycle calculation programs. A detailed 
description for determining CO2 emissions in the driving cycle and for validating the model 
can be found in [12].

In the present case, the New European Driving Cycle (NEDC) is used as the driving cycle. 

A  kinematic  calculation  method  is  used,  where  a  vehicle  speed  proﬁle  is  provided  to  the 

model, as well as the gear ratio, depending on the driving cycle being investigated. The angu-

lar  velocities,  efﬁciencies,  and  torques  of  the  various  vehicle  components  are  then  calcu-

lated backward along the powertrain, until the corresponding engine operating map points 

have been determined. In addition to the friction mean effective pressure maps derived from 

engine  testing,  geometric  vehicle  data  and  experimentally  derived  driving  resistances  are 

required. Using this approach, the fuel consumption for every investigated parameter can be 
calculated in the cycle under analysis. The resulting CO2 emissions can be derived from the 
cumulative fuel consumption over the cycle. The difference between both variants yields the 
corresponding CO2 savings in the driving cycle being investigated. This method is depicted 
schematically in Figure 7.56. 

Using the existing vehicle model, additional driving cycles can be investigated, such as the 

ARTEMIS cycle, or customer-speciﬁc running proﬁles. In addition, it is possible to demon-
strate  the  inﬂuence  of  a  stop-start  system  on  fuel  consumption  and  CO2  emissions  in  a 
driving cycle.

168

7  Engine testing

Figure 7.56: Driving cycle-relevant CO2 savings using friction mean effective pressure maps

7.3.5  Comparison of results

The maximum values of the measured friction mean effective pressure differences indicate 

the potential for the parameter change being investigated. A summary of these maximum 
potentials that can be achieved in the operating map is shown in Figure 7.57, top, for some 
of the investigated parameters. It is evident that the parameters installation clearance, skirt 

roughness, piston proﬁle, and piston pin offset have various degrees of potential for improv-

ing the friction behavior of the piston. In the ring pack, the tangential force of the oil control 

ring and the ring width, especially of the top ring, can be considered signiﬁcant inﬂuence 

variables.

Converting  the  friction  mean  effective  pressure  differences  into  friction  power  loss  differ-
ences  yields  the  ranking  shown  in  Figure  7.57,  center.  Because  there  are  potential  inter-
actions  between  different  parameters,  the  superposition  of  individual  measures  is  only 

somewhat accurate. In order to obtain an estimate of the entire friction power loss potential 

for the piston group, this must be taken into consideration. In the four-cylinder diesel engine 

investigated here, for a speed of 4,000 rpm and power output of about 100 kW, the ﬁndings 

indicate that there is a potential for improving the piston group to save about 3.5 kW.

Figure  7.57,  bottom,  shows  the  ranking  of  CO2  savings  calculated  in  the  NEDC  for  the 
selected variants. A comparison of the listed rankings shows that there are shifts with respect 

7.3  Measurement of friction power losses on a fired engine

169

Figure 7.57: Savings potential of various design parameters for the piston group in a 2.0-liter diesel 
engine.  Top:  maximum  values  from  friction  mean  effective  pressure  difference  maps;  center:  maxi-
mum values from friction power loss difference operating maps at 4,000 rpm; bottom: accumulated 
CO2 savings in NEDC

170

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.58: Quadrant ranking of the friction power loss results obtained (fired), where
Diagram I: 
Diagram II: 
Diagram III:  representative for commercial vehicle diesel engines;
Diagram IV:  representative for passenger car diesel engines.

relevant to the cycle;
representative for gasoline engines;

Figure 7.59: Quadrant ranking of the friction power loss results obtained (motored externally charged), 
where
Diagram I: 
Diagram II: 
Diagram III:  representative for commercial vehicle diesel engines;
Diagram IV:  representative for passenger car diesel engines.

relevant to the cycle;
representative for gasoline engines;

7.4  Wear testing of the piston group

171

to  the  valuation  of  the  individual  parameters.  The  installation  clearance  is  the  parameter 

with the biggest inﬂuence in all three display types. The parameters of skirt roughness, skirt 

stiffness,  and  pin  coating  are  particularly  notable,  and  have  distinct  frictional  advantages, 

particularly in the load spectrum of the NEDC.

Superposition  of  CO2  savings  in  the  NEDC  is  possible,  at  least  with  some  conditions, 
because each parameter under test was based on the same operating points. Any possible 

interactions between the individual design parameters must, however, be noted. It is there-
fore recommended that the set of measures derived accordingly then be tested as an engine 

concept variant. The results obtained show that, depending on the customer requirements, 

appropriate friction optimization can be performed.

In order to allow the measures for various engine concepts and load spectrums to be opti-

mally combined, the engine operating map is divided into four quadrants, each of which has 

typical operating conditions for various engine concepts. An internal ranking of the measures 
can be generated for each quadrant; Figure 7.58.

For low loads, the oil viscosity is also a dominant inﬂuence factor besides design parameters. 

In the high load range, the oil viscosity loses signiﬁcance, while piston installation clearance 

can be seen as the most important design optimization measure in this range. Measures on 

the top ring and the skirt surface also increase in signiﬁcance at higher loads. The conditions 

described apply only to ﬁred operation. The valuation of the parameters is very different for 

motored externally charged operation. This change in valuation is largely due to the different 

temperature distribution in the crank mechanism and the associated changes in operating 
clearance and distortion; Figure 7.59. 

The  test  bench  and  systematic  investigation  of  numerous  individual  design  parameters, 

as  shown,  allow  an  extensive  array  of  measures  for  minimizing  friction  to  be  developed. 

Together with an evaluation of the various operating ranges, they allow the targeted optimiza-
tion of friction losses.

7.4  Wear testing of the piston group

This article addresses wear in the context of the piston group. The affected components are

■  pistons;

■  piston rings;

■  piston pins;

■  circlips;

■  cylinder surfaces.

172

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.60: 
Piston with GRAFAL® coating, with 
recesses for measuring the skirt profile

7.4.1  Piston skirt

7.4.1.1  Skirt collapse and coating wear

In  order  to  be  able  to  detect  skirt  collapse  and  wear  of  a  piston  skirt  coating  (such  as 
GRAFAL®) that may occur during operation, the shape of the piston mantle curve is charted.

Figure 7.60 shows a passenger car diesel piston that has been run, with the surface of the 
skirt being coated with GRAFAL®.

Figure 7.61 shows the result of the measurement of the mantle curve of a piston as deliv-
ered, where the second ring land is set back so far that it does not appear in this view. The 

smaller diameter of the ﬁrst ring land in the pin axis is due to the speciﬁed ovality of the 

piston proﬁle.

At the level of the diameters DN and D1, the measured curve for the unused piston shows the 
recesses in the GRAFAL® coating on the skirt. The base piston material can be accessed at 
these locations in order to take the measurements. These windows can also be seen on the 
used piston in Figure 7.60. The thickness of the GRAFAL® coating is about 20 μm radially 
in the “as delivered” state.

Figure 7.62 shows the result of measuring the mantle curve of the used piston.

According to this example, the skirt collapse is approximately 10 μm diametrically at the level 
of the diameter D1. This cannot be attributed to wear at this location, because the measure-
ment  point  is  within  the  GRAFAL®  window  and  therefore  is  not  exposed  to  wear.  At  the 
same time, the GRAFAL® coating at this location has been ablated by 20 μm diametrically, 
or 10 μm radially.

7.4  Wear testing of the piston group

173

nominal piston diameter
largest diameter of the piston

Figure 7.61: Results of measuring a piston in the “as delivered” state. Measurement results apply dia-
metrically.
DN: 
D1: 
Green:  nominal form of the mantle curve in the thrust-antithrust direction
Red:  measured curve in the thrust-antithrust direction
Blue:  measured curve in the pin axis

nominal piston diameter
largest diameter of the piston

Figure 7.62: Results of measuring a used piston. Measurement results apply diametrically. 
DN: 
D1: 
Green:  nominal form of the mantle curve in the thrust-antithrust direction
Red:  measured curve in the thrust-antithrust direction
Blue:  measured curve in the pin axis

174

7.4.1.2  Ovality

7  Engine testing 

Another way to show and evaluate potential deformation of the piston skirt and potential 
coating wear is to record the ovality at prescribed heights on the skirt, according to Figures 
7.63 and 7.64. This allows the circumferential deviations of the real piston proﬁle from the 
nominal form to be evaluated (ovality and proﬁle distortion).

Figure 7.63:
Ovality record around 
the circumference of the 
piston as delivered

Figure 7.64: 
Ovality record around the 
circumference of the piston 
in used condition in order 
to determine deformation 
and wear of coating

7.4  Wear testing of the piston group

175

The values of diameters DN and D1 serve as reference dimensions for such ovality records, 
shown as a ﬂat projection.

Similar to the representation of the mantle curves, here again the skirt collapse can be mea-
sured as 10 μm diametrically at the level of diameter D1, and the thickness of the GRAFAL® 
coating as about 10 μm radially.

7.4.2  Piston ring and cylinder surface

7.4.2.1  Piston ring running surface

In  order  to  fulﬁll  its  function,  the  piston  ring  exerts  a  deﬁned  radial  force  on  the  cylinder 

surface, acting perpendicular to it. To deﬁne it, a band encompassing the piston ring is con-

tracted so far that the prescribed gap clearance is achieved. The necessary force to contract 

the  band—called  tangential  force—is  measured.  The  tangential  force  of  the  piston  rings  is 

directly related to friction and wear.

The  gas  pressure  also  acts  on  the  back  side  of  the  compression  rings  and  presses  them 

against the cylinder surface. Owing to the high gas force load under load conditions, the ﬁrst 

piston ring is most affected. This increase in radial force leads to severe loading of the running 

surface of the compression rings, particularly in the area of the TDC ﬁred. Another difﬁculty is 

that the piston brieﬂy stops moving at the dead center, causing the hydrodynamic pressure in 

the lubrication wedge between the two friction partners to drop and leading to metallic contact.

Figure 7.65 shows the proﬁle of the piston ring in its “as delivered” and used condition. Wear 
can be clearly detected in the area of the greatest barrel shape. This wear can also be veri-

Figure 7.65: Profile measurement of 1st piston ring with an asymmetrical, barrel-shaped running surface

176

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.66: 
Dimensions of a piston ring

ﬁed by measuring the radial wall thickness of the piston ring and is typically in the range of a 

few microns, depending on the running time. The layout of the major dimensions sketched 
in Figure 7.66 shows the direct association between the reduced radial wall thickness and 
increased gap clearance.

If the radial wall thickness (a1) of the piston ring is reduced, it will result in the ring gap (s1) 
being opened up. Because this causes the ring to relax, the tangential force also decreases. 

The type of wear described here can therefore also change the engine operating parameters, 

such as blow-by and oil consumption.

For compression rings that do not exhibit extensive barrel shape, chamfering, or other mea-

sures  that  deﬁne  a  contact  point  of  the  running  surface  on  the  cylinder,  this  can  lead  to 

so-called “double contact.” This results in two different running levels at different heights on 

the ring running surface, due in part to the twisting of the ring and in part to the ﬂat contact 

under  peak  cylinder  pressure.  In  the  interest  of  good  sealing  and  oil  control,  however,  a 

deﬁned running level is generally aimed at.

7.4.2.2  Coil springs

Coil  springs  are  used  to  support  so-called  two-piece  oil  control  rings.  After  long  running 
times, it is possible for the ends of the oil control ring to dig into the coil-spring; Figure 7.67.

7.4.2.3  Abnormal wear patterns

Figure 7.68 shows an example of a piston ring with extreme wear on the running surface, 
where the radial wall thickness has been partially severely reduced diametrically opposite the 
ring gap. The oil control rings shown in Figure 7.69 also exhibit extreme wear on the running 
surface. The uppermost ring has no scraping edge left at all.

7.4  Wear testing of the piston group

177

Figure 7.67: 
So-called burial in the coil 
spring, caused by the ends of 
the oil control ring

Figure 7.68: 
Example of extreme single-
sided wear of 1st piston ring

Figure 7.69: 
Example of extreme wear of 
two oil control rings

178

7  Engine testing 

Abnormal wear rates, as shown here, can typically be attributed to abrasive particles in the 

intake air, due to a missing air ﬁlter element, for example. The associated running surfaces 

of the cylinder liners have a matte gray appearance in such cases, typically with many ﬁne 

grooves in the direction of the stroke.

7.4.2.4  Cylinder surface and cylinder polishing

The greatest wear on the cylinder surface caused by the piston ring occurs in the running 
area around the top dead center (TDC). This wear pattern, which is evident from the cylinder 
measurement  as  a  locally  limited  area  with  an  above-average  increase  in  diameter  at  the 
dead center of the 1st piston ring, is known as top dead center wear. Figure 7.70 shows the 
shape record of the cylinder opposite the pin axis, clearly showing the top dead center wear.

Figure 7.70:  
Measurement record of vertical cylinder 
mantle curves in the pin axis. The shape 
of the cylinder surface is shown greatly 
exaggerated as a result of magnification.

Another type of wear arises from the occurrence of polished areas on the cylinder surface. 

This happens when hard and abrasive carbon builds up on the top land of the piston under 
unfavorable  operating  conditions.  Figure  7.71  shows  the  top  land  of  a  piston,  with  hard 
carbon in a locally limited area.

The inﬂuence of this  local carbon buildup  on  the  associated  cylinder  surface  is  shown  in 
Figure 7.72. The cylinder surface has already been damaged by the carbon in this case. In 
the area of the top dead center (TDC) of the top land, the honing has been partially worn off. 

7.4  Wear testing of the piston group

179

Figure 7.71: Carbon buildup on the top land of a commercial vehicle piston

Figure 7.72: Cylinder area polished by the buildup of carbon on the top land

Directly below that, within the running range of the piston rings, another so-called polish site 

can be detected.

The function of the honing, which is to retain lubricating oil and to ensure lubrication between 

the piston ring and cylinder surface, particularly at TDC, can no longer be ensured at these 

locations. The consequences are local disturbances in the tribological system of the piston 

ring and cylinder surface. This causes a risk of burning marks on the piston ring running 

surfaces, and therefore also a risk of piston ring seizure.

With suitable design measures, the buildup of carbon on the top land, and thus the occur-

rence of such cylinder polishing, can be speciﬁcally prevented.

180

7  Engine testing 

7.4.3  Piston ring side face and piston ring groove

Similar to the wear on the running surface, the relative motion between the piston ring and 

the piston can cause a loss of material, both at the side faces of the piston rings and at those 

of the top ring groove.

7.4.3.1  Side faces of the 1st piston ring

Wear occurs particularly at the lower ﬂank of the piston ring. Figure 7.73 shows the shape 
record of the upper and lower ﬂanks of the ﬁrst piston ring in the “as delivered” state.

Figure 7.74 shows the shape record of the ﬁrst piston ring shown above, after its use in an 
engine. A clear wear zone has formed on the lower ﬂank of the piston ring (right), on the 

side facing the running surface of the cylinder liner. The depth of this burial is typically in the 

range of a few microns.

7.4.3.2  Side faces of the top ring groove

The lower ﬂank of the top ring groove is particularly highly stressed. The results of a test on 

a piston with keystone ring are shown here as an example.

Figure 7.75 shows the result of a measurement of the side faces of the keystone groove in 
“as delivered” state. In order to capture the measurement record, the groove ﬂanks are tilted 

Figure 7.73: 
Shape record of the upper and 
lower flanks of 1st piston ring in 
“as delivered” state (not under 
tension). The vertical spacing of 
the two records is arbitrary and 
does not represent the actual ring 
width.

Figure 7.74: 
Wear on the lower flank of used 
1st piston ring (not under tension). 
The vertical spacing of the two 
records is arbitrary and does not 
represent the actual ring width.

7.4  Wear testing of the piston group

181

Figure 7.75: 
Measurement record of the side 
faces of a keystone groove in “as 
delivered” state. The nominal angle 
that is preset for measurement 
probing is noted on the measure-
ment sheet.

Figure 7.76: 
Measurement record of the side 
faces of a keystone groove in used 
condition. The nominal angle that is 
preset for measurement probing is 
noted on the measurement sheet.

182

7  Engine testing 

by the nominal angle, so that the shape record of the groove ﬂanks does not deviate from 

the horizontal on the measurement sheet if the inclination is correct.

Figure 7.76 shows the proﬁle of the groove ﬂanks in used condition. The deviations due to 
wear are once again in the range of a few microns.

7.4.4  Piston pin and piston pin boss

7.4.4.1  Piston pin

The piston pin transmits the force due to the combustion chamber pressure from the piston 

to the connecting rod, and thus enables the necessary relative motion between piston and 

small  end  bore  due  to  the  movement  of  the  connecting  rod.  According  to  the  effective 

forces, the piston pin is deformed within its elastic range by bending and ovalization. Wear 

also occurs at the affected contact surfaces as a result of relative motion, though this wear 

is typically low.

A corresponding measurement result for the piston pin is shown in Figure 7.77. The orienta-
tion of the degree scale is arbitrary. There is no reference to the installation orientation of the 

pin in the boss, because the pin typically rotates during operation.

Figure 7.77: 
Measurement results 
of roundness of piston 
pin in used condition

In the “as delivered” state, piston pins are nearly perfectly round and cylindrical. As is evident 

in the measurement record, the piston pin shows permanent ovalization in the used condi-
tion. Residual bending, in turn, is evident from the mantle curve measurements in Figure 7.78 
and Figure 7.79. Also evident in the area of the mantle curve at 180° is a signiﬁcantly different 
wear pattern than with the other measured mantle curves. This shows, without a doubt, that 

the pin was no longer turning for some time prior to being removed. The wear pattern would 

otherwise have the same structure at every point around the circumference.

7.4  Wear testing of the piston group

183

Figure 7.78: Measurement results of the mantle curve measurement of a piston pin in used condi-
tion, in the direction of 0°–180°
Top:  mantle curve at 180°
Below:  mantle curve at 0°

Figure 7.79: Measurement results of the generating line measurement of a piston pin in used condi-
tion, in the direction of 90°–270°
Top:  mantle curve at 270°
Below:  mantle curve at 90°

Figure 7.80: 
Photo of used piston pin

184

7  Engine testing 

The individual contact zones on the pin can be seen in Figure 7.80. The engagement area of 
the small end bore is located in the center. A narrow range with no contact can be seen to 

the right and left. The brownish circumferential stripes are due to oil varnish buildup. The two 

ends of the pin are located in the piston pin boss.

7.4.4.2  Piston pin boss

The dynamic deformation of the piston and the bending of the pin that occur at peak cylin-
der pressure change the shape and the alignment of the pin bore. For this reason, pin bores 
are often designed as so-called shaped pin bores. They deliberately deviate from a precise 

cylindrical shape and extend the diameter toward the ends of the bore (crowning). This can 

be done both internally and externally on the pin bore, in order to prevent an increase in 
local wear. Figure 7.81 shows the dimensioning of the support points of such a shaped pin 
bore.

The values B and C indicated in Figure 7.81 deﬁne the important node points for manufac-
turing and measuring the crown.

Figure 7.81: 
Dimensions of support points of a shaped pin bore 
with crowning
A:  nominal diameter of the crowned pin bore
B:  definition of the support dimension of the pin bore 
in the indicated area, important for machining
C:  definition of the support dimension of the pin bore 
at the inner extension of the pin bore, important for 
machining

Figure 7.82 shows the measurement of the shape of the pin bore of an unused piston. The 
inner and outer areas of the bores exhibit a deﬁned crown.

The measurement of a pin bore of a used piston in Figure 7.83 shows that the bore shape 
has not changed signiﬁcantly, even after a long running time.

7.4  Wear testing of the piston group

185

Figure 7.82: Measurement of the shaped pin bore of a piston pin boss in “as delivered” state

Figure 7.83: Measurement of the shaped pin bore of a piston pin boss in used condition

186

7  Engine testing 

7.4.5  Circlip and circlip groove

The task of the circlip is to limit the motion of the piston pin in the axial direction in the piston. 

Theoretically, there are no axial forces acting on the piston pin in a symmetrically designed 

crank mechanism. Any type of asymmetry, however, such as a tilt in the orientation of the 

piston bore or the conrod bore, or due to shifting of the connecting rod shank, can give rise 

to an axial force component. The associated motion behavior of the connecting rod in the 

longitudinal axis of the engine can lead to what is known as pin displacement. In some cases, 

wear and even damage can occur in the area of the circlip groove.

Figure 7.84 shows the dimensioning of a circlip groove in an excerpt from a piston drawing.

In the simplest case, the associated circlip consists of an annular, bent spring steel wire with 

a round cross section and a diameter that is slightly less than the groove width.

Figure 7.85 shows a cross section through the circlip groove according to Figure 7.84, which 
is widened signiﬁcantly as a result of the axial forces acting on the piston pin. The dashed-

line circle shows the original machining radius and location. The circlip groove is plastically 

deformed in the outward piston direction by the circlip, which is under load, to a width of 

over 2 mm. The deformation can also be seen in the material that is built up above the right 

side face.

Figure 7.84: Dimensioning of 
circlip groove

Figure 7.85: Cross section through circlip groove

7.5  Piston loading due to knocking combustion

187

7.5  Piston loading due to knocking combustion

In the context of more severe exhaust gas legislation, with simultaneous demand for improved 

fuel  consumption,  modern  gasoline  engines  increasingly  reach  the  limits  of  thermal  and 

mechanical load carrying capacity. Downsizing, greater compression, and optimized com-

bustion lead to higher loads. The components in the combustion chamber are particularly 

affected. The use of supercharging technologies such as turbocharging is indispensable in 

the development of downsizing engines. Improved cylinder charging with optimized com-

bustion leads to increased combustion pressures. There is also a trend toward increasing 

compression ratios and boost pressures in turbocharged engines. These efﬁciency optimiza-

tions are limited by the occurrence of knocking combustion in gasoline engines. In knock-

ing combustion, the residual mixture after regular combustion autoignites as a result of the 

increase in pressure and high local temperatures. This residual mixture combusts explosively 

in the local area, i.e., at a very high velocity. The resulting rapid local pressure increase causes 

pressure waves that can propagate through the combustion chamber at sound velocity. The 

gas force load overlapping regular combustion can cause mechanical damage to the com-

ponents that bound the combustion chamber.

High  compression  enables  optimized  consumption  values  in  the  partial-load  range,  but 

requires additional measures in the full-load range, such as dynamic retardation of the igni-

tion  angle  through  knock  control.  Modern  measurement  methods,  such  as  the  MAHLE 

KI meter [15, 16], can help with tuning.

Speciﬁc  power  output,  also  a  measure  of  engine  loading,  has  increased  signiﬁcantly  in 
recent years. Figure 7.86 shows trends in the development of gasoline engines over the last 
35 years. The signiﬁcant increases in cylinder pressure and speciﬁc power output are largely 

due to the increase in turbocharging of gasoline engines in conjunction with downsizing.

Figure  7.86:  Change  in  maximum  peak  cylinder  pressure  and  specific  power  output  for  gasoline 
engines (1980–2015)

188

7  Engine testing 

7.5.1  Knock damage and damage evaluation

Figure 7.87 shows knock damage on the top land and in the top ring groove. The erosion 
damage on the top land shows that knocking combustion has occurred here over a long 

period of time.

lower ﬂanks.

The shape measurement of the top ring groove, shown in ﬂat projection, shows signiﬁcant 

local wear on the upper and lower ﬂanks. This is known as “hammering out” the piston ring 

groove.  During  knocking  combustion,  the  ﬁrst  piston  ring  is  excited  by  the  high  pressure 

amplitudes  such  that  plastic  deformation  of  the  piston  material  occurs  at  the  upper  and 

The  greatest  widening  of  the  groove  often  exhibits  areas  of  outward  deformation  as  well, 

which can make contact with the cylinder wall. This hammering of the groove due to knock-

ing combustion is also sometimes seen without the erosion damage to the top land that is 

typical of knocking. It can occur over a relatively short running time because of singular high 

knock amplitudes. This damage is mechanical in nature. The component temperatures are in 

an uncritical range, according to measurements. The fact that this damage is of a mechanical 

nature is demonstrated by a test, in which the area of damage is bounded. A relief groove, 1 

mm deep, was made in a piston at the lower area of the top land.

Figure 7.87: Deformation and wear of the top ring groove due to knocking combustion

7.5  Piston loading due to knocking combustion

189

Figure 7.88: Knock damage on the top land, with and without relief groove

Figure 7.88 shows the piston after 105 h of long-term knocking under full load. Both pis-
tons were operated under continuous knocking, with maximum knock amplitudes of about 

25 bar.

The piston on the left exhibits knock damage that extends to the lower edge of the top land. 

The damage to the top land of the piston on the right extends only as far as the relief groove. 

No knock damage is detected below the relief groove. The pressure wave is dissipated in the 

relief groove, so that no damage can occur below the relief groove.

This measure for limiting the damage is restricted by the design of modern gasoline engine 

pistons with short top land width. The relief groove also loses effectiveness in normal opera-

tion if it is clogged by carbon deposit.

The damage shown thus far is relatively easy to identify as knock damage. It is more prob-

lematic to evaluate damage that occurs as a result of individual knocks of very high ampli-

tude, which does not leave the erosion damage that is typical of knocking.

Figure 7.89 shows four pistons from an engine with ring land fractures. In all four pistons, 
the fracture area is opposite the spark plug, in the direction of the exhaust valve. Appropriate 

measurements show that the very high knock amplitudes of over 100 bar are overlaid over 

the normal cylinder pressure. A single one of these high knock amplitudes can be sufﬁcient 

to cause such damage.

190

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.89: Ring land fractures due to knocking combustion

Figure 7.90: Ring land fracture at ring land 1 and ring land 2—caused by severe knocking combustion

Figure 7.90 shows two pistons with fractures at the ﬁrst and second ring land after only a 
brief engine running time. The support load on the second ring land was so high that it could 

not withstand the stress. The support for the third piston ring also broke off from one piston. 

This was caused by individual, extremely high knock amplitudes. Other typical signs of knock 

damage are therefore not evident on the piston.

7.5.2  Knock measurement and the MAHLE KI meter

Our objective was to develop a measurement method for the quantitative evaluation of the 

knock  strength.  Knocking  occurs  rather  stochastically.  The  measurement  method  must 

thus be able to capture a large number of operating cycles, evaluate them statistically, and 

make them available in real time. The maximum, positively superimposed knock amplitude 

7.5  Piston loading due to knocking combustion

191

Figure 7.91: Pressure transducer in the cylinder head—installation examples (Kistler 6001 or 601 pres-
sure transducer, installed flush with combustion chamber)

is derived as an indicator of damage; Figure 7.93. The KI meter (KI = Knock Intensity), devel-
oped by MAHLE, fulﬁlls these requirements.

Precise indexing signals are needed in order to determine the exact knock amplitude level. 

A prerequisite for precise indexing is the correct positioning of the pressure transducer in 
the combustion chamber; Figure 7.91. It is particularly critical that it is properly bonded to 
the combustion chamber, in order to prevent connection channels. They would corrupt the 

signal with whistling vibrations, so that high knock amplitudes, in particular, would not be 

recorded at the correct level.

The KI meter, Figure 7.92, is capable of displaying measured signals for each operating cycle 
for  up  to  eight  cylinders,  in  real  time.  The  measurement  system  can  capture  the  ignition 

angle for each cylinder separately for each operating cycle, without needing to access the 

standard controller. Further signals can be captured on two additional channels per cylinder 

(e.g., acceleration signals), which can be displayed precisely relative to the operating cycle.

Automatic  analysis  allows  this  information  to  be  used  to  determine  for  each  operating 

cycle whether a measured knock amplitude was detected by the knock control system and 
whether the ignition angle was reduced; Figure 7.93. After a measurement, it is thus possible 

192

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.92: The MAHLE KI meter [16] and the statistical analysis of the knocking operating cycles 
detected and not detected by the knock control system

Figure 7.93: Analysis of positively superimposed knock amplitudes and control process of the knock 
control system, in online mode

to capture the knock amplitudes that were and were not detected by the knock control (KC) 

system in tabular form.

purpose.

In  order  to  analyze  the  quantitative  knock  strength,  a  value  must  be  created  that  reﬂects 
the quantity and level of knock amplitudes. A knock intensity (KI) factor is deﬁned for this 

The calculation of the knock intensity factor KI uses the summation formula shown in Table 7.6 
for a predetermined number of four-stroke cycles to be measured. The example shows the 

knock amplitudes measured with increasing advanced ignition and the calculated KI factor.

7.5  Piston loading due to knocking combustion

193

Table 7.6: Calculation of the MAHLE knock intensity factor KI
Window position:  0 degrees 
Window width:  150 degrees 

Engine speed: 5,000 rpm, full load
Load cycles: 200

Class

Evaluation 
factor

Pressure 
range [bar]

Number of four-stroke cycles

199

199

190

10

145

48

Variation in ignition angle [ °CA ]

22°

23°

25°

27°

30°

35°

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

7

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

82

69

41

6

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

9

15

70

49

25

9

8

5

4

4

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

0–2

2–4

4–8

8–12

12–16

16–20

20–24

24–28

28–32

32–36

36–40

40–44

44–48

48–52

52–56

56–60

60–64

> 64

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

0.5

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Overrun

Knock intensity factor KI

0.05

0.05

0.5

3.1

9.35

43.85

m
∑ (
=
0
k

n

k

⋅

f
k

)

c

=
KI N

⋅

KI:  knock intensity factor

k:  class number

m:  maximum number of classes
nk:  number of cycles with pressure amplitudes in a class
fk:  weighting factor of a class
c:  number of four-stroke cycles measured

N:  Standardization constant

194

7  Engine testing 

Using the functions of the KI meter as described above, it is possible, for example, to run a 

performance check on the knock control. This can expose errors in the control strategy or 

show a level of detection sensitivity for each cylinder.

Using  an  automated  analysis  system,  the  antiknock  property  of  each  individual  operating 

cycle can be monitored during an endurance test and displayed graphically in real time. For 

example,  individual  severe  knocking  events  that  occur  very  rarely  (mega-knocks)  can  be 

detected. In addition, the system shown can perform systematic investigations of knocking 
behavior, such as the inﬂuence of knocking combustion on the piston temperature or the 

inﬂuence of the air-fuel mixture on the knock limit.

7.5.3  Examples of measurement results

Figure 7.94 shows an example of the result of an analysis using the measurement method 
described, together with a piston temperature measurement.

As is evident from the ﬁgure, the KI factors for cylinders 2 and 3 increase relative to the igni-

tion angle much earlier and more quickly than for cylinders 1 and 4. At this operating point, 

the test engine has a nonuniform mixture distribution between the inner (#2 & 3) and outer 

(#1 & 4) cylinders. Cylinders 2 and 3 are running a relatively lean mixture, so that knocking 

occurs more intensely under high loads.

From Figure 7.94, it can also be seen that the increase in piston temperatures rises linearly 
up to the knock limit, at about 2.5°C / ° CA. A disproportional increase in piston temperature 

is evident only after severe knocking has occurred.

In another series of tests, the inﬂuence of the air-fuel mixture (lambda) on the piston tem-

perature and knock limit was determined.

Figure 7.95 shows a shift in the knock limit for a rich mixture of about 3° CA in the direction 
of an advanced ignition angle. The piston temperature is lower for the rich mixture, but the 

temperature at the knock limit (now 3° CA earlier) is greater than for the lean mixture.

Both ﬁgures show that the ignition angle (IA) fundamentally has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on 

component temperatures, even without knocking. An additional increase in temperature due 

to knocking combustion, in contrast, is evident only at very high knocking intensities.

7.5  Piston loading due to knocking combustion

195

Figure 7.94: Piston temperatures and knocking intensity as a function of the ignition angle (compari-
son of all four cylinders) for a 2.0-liter, 4-valve, naturally aspirated engine

Operating conditions:
Full load, n = 4,500 rpm
TOil = 100°C
TWa = 90°C
Fuel: Reference fuel SUPER ROZ 96

Temperature descriptions:
TN2  Center of piston recess, piston 1,
TN4  Top ring groove, ATS, piston 2
TN5  Top ring groove, TS, piston 2
TN6  Center of piston crown, piston 3
TN7  Vent side boss, piston 3
TN9  Flywheel side boss, piston 4

196

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.95: Piston temperatures and knocking intensity as a function of the ignition angle,  
at (cid:79) = 0.90 (lean) and (cid:79) = 0.79 (rich)

Operating conditions:
Full load, n = 4,500 rpm
TOil = 100°C
T     = 90°C
Fuel: Reference fuel SUPER ROZ 96

Temperature descriptions:
TN6  Temperature at center of piston crown, piston 3 
TN7  Temperature at vent side boss, piston 1
TKG  Temperature at knock limit

7.5.4  Detection quality of knock control systems

Knock damage, such as axial deformation of the top ring groove, Figure 7.87, can be attrib-
uted  to  deﬁcient  knock-detecting  functionality  of  the  knock  control  system,  among  other 

factors.It  was  demonstrated  that  even  relatively  slight  increases  in  knock  amplitudes  can 

cause such damage.

7.5  Piston loading due to knocking combustion

197

Figure 7.96: Maximum knock amplitude and associated change in ignition angle for 10,000 operating 
cycles, full load, 5,600 rpm, with ROZ 95, 1.8-liter turbocharged engine

Such  knocking  behavior  is  shown  in  Figure  7.96.  For  each  operating  cycle,  these  are  the 
maximum knock amplitudes and the cylinder-speciﬁc retardation angle of the knock control 

system for cylinder 1. For the ROZ 95 fuel that was used, a so-called average control drop of 

about 3° CA was determined.

Knock  amplitudes  of  up  to  25  bar  were  measured  in  cylinder  1.  With  this  knock  control 

setting and ROZ 95 fuel quality, the knock damage indicated previously was caused in a 

full-load  endurance  test.  With  a  fuel  quality  of  ROZ  99,  in  contrast,  comparable  full-load 
endurance testing showed no knock damage whatsoever; Figure 7.97. The maximum knock 
amplitudes dropped to about 5 to 6 bar, and the average control drop is much lower.

The level and quantity of the maximum permissible knock amplitudes cannot be generalized, 

but  must  be  determined  by  endurance  testing  for  each  application.  Knock  amplitudes  of 

greater than 8 to 10 bar have already caused problems in a wide range of cases and should 

be avoided.

It is evident from Figure 7.98 that the previous example is a cylinder-speciﬁc problem. The 
measured maximum knock amplitudes for all engine cylinders are summarized in a table. 

198

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.97: Maximum knock amplitude and associated change in ignition angle for 10,000 operating 
cycles, full load, 5,600 rpm, with ROZ 99, 1.8-liter turbocharged engine

Knock amplitudes that were and were not detected by the knock control system are differ-

entiated. The left part of the ﬁgure (results with ROZ 95 fuel quality) shows that the problem 

indicated earlier affects only cylinder 1. The detection quality of the knock control system is 

not satisfactory for this cylinder. It failed to detect knock amplitudes of 8 to 9 bar. The poor 

detection quality for cylinder 1 was evident for ROZ 99 fuel quality as well.

Deﬁcient detection quality can have many causes. The causes often cannot be addressed by 

design changes, because the engine development has already progressed too far. Software 

applications can provide a remedy in this connection.

One method is to back off the ignition angle values in the operating map, thus moving away 

from the knock limit and reducing the control drop of the knock control system. Typically, 

this can only be implemented for all cylinders at once. The result, however, is a degradation 

in engine efﬁciency, even in operating ranges where the knock limit is not reached.

7.5  Piston loading due to knocking combustion

199

Figure  7.98:  Statistical  analysis  of  the  mea-
sured  knock  amplitudes,  comparing  ROZ  95 
with ROZ 99, 10,000 operating cycles, full load, 
5,600 rpm, 1.8-liter turbocharged engine

7.5.5  Mega-knocks and premature ignition

A mega-knock is an extremely high knock amplitude that can be up to 100 bar or greater, 

which occurs very rarely. As shown in Chapter 7.5, one single knock amplitude at this level 

can destroy the top land or the ring land.

Figure  7.99  shows  a  typical  mega-knock  detected  in  an  eight-cylinder  naturally  aspirated 
engine in full-load/partial-load operation. The maximum knock amplitude and ignition angle 

trace for cylinder 1 are shown for 10,000 operating cycles, as well as the engine load at a 

constant speed of n = 6,000 rpm. The knock control system works perfectly under these 

operating conditions. In operating cycle no. 4747, an extreme knocking combustion event 

took place, with a maximum knock amplitude of 60 bar.

This operating cycle was recorded online and is shown in Figure 7.100. At the start of the 
pressure  curve,  normal  combustion  is  evident,  which  then  leads  to  an  extreme  knocking 
event, without any apparent cause.

200

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.99: Mega-knock in cylinder 1, full-load/partial-load operation at n = 6,000 rpm, ROZ 95 fuel, 
8-cylinder naturally aspirated engine

Figure 7.100: Measurement of 10,000 operating cycles, with mega-knock in cylinder 1

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

201

The  table  with  the  data  from  all  eight  cylinders  shows  nothing  else  unusual.  The  mega-

knocks do not occur only in  cylinder  1  in  this  engine.  No  particular  cylinder  seems  to  be 

preferred. The running program—alternating load in this case—was likewise not a determining 

factor. It was established, however, that the mega-knocks occurred only at high speeds and 

under full load.

Potential defects in ignition can be ruled out by monitoring the ignition signal.

Mega-knocks are known not only in naturally aspirated engines, but also in turbocharged 

engines with indirect and direct injection. In most cases, the main initiator of such mega-

knocks  seems  to  be  nonhomogeneous  mixture  formation  in  the  combustion  chamber. 

Hotspots can form in which the air-fuel mixture leads to severely knocking combustion [17].

The mega-knock phenomenon should not be confused with that of premature ignition. Pre-

mature  ignition  occurs  occasionally  in  the  development  of  highly  stressed  turbocharged 

engines. In this case, the air-fuel mixture ignites prior to actual induced ignition by the spark 

plug [18]. Premature ignition is caused by an extreme increase in the peak cylinder pressure 

in the compression phase. This greatly increased pressure curve can also be superimposed 

with  additional  knock  amplitudes.  Cylinder  pressures  of  greater  than  300  bar  have  been 

measured.

These  phenomena,  mega-knocks  and  premature  ignition,  cannot  be  seen  in  conjunction 

with the function of the knock control system.

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

7.6.1  Procedure for systematically minimizing piston noise

In order to optimize the acoustics of a combustion engine, the individual sources of sound 

and their contribution to the overall engine noise must be identiﬁed as precisely as possible. 

This is the only way to demonstrate which combination of measures will have the best effect, 

with the minimum number of engine tests.

One of the noise-generating mechanisms in a reciprocating piston engine is the motion of 

the piston, owing to its clearance perpendicular to its normal running direction. Under the 

inﬂuence of the gas and inertial forces, referred to hereafter as inertia forces, the connecting 

rod angle and the necessary installation clearance inevitably cause transverse motion of the 

piston. When the piston contacts the cylinder wall, it causes impacts that excite structure-

borne noise in the engine structure. This is the cause of piston noise. 

Piston  noise  contributes  a  signiﬁcant  component  of  the  mechanically  caused  crankshaft 

drive noise. It is therefore important to optimize piston transverse motion in order to mini-

202

7  Engine testing 

mize engine noise in the summation of the sound level, but also in the degree of subjective 

unpleasantness. The tendency to use pistons with large installation clearances in conjunc-

tion with small piston pin offsets in order to reduce friction power loss in the engine and thus 

CO2 emissions will make acoustic optimization more difﬁcult in the future.

The  following  boundary  conditions  should  be  met  in  order  to  quickly  and  successfully 

achieve the optimization:
■  An occurring piston noise should be clearly identiﬁable and assessable as such, at least for 

gasoline engines.

  This  prevents  expensive  changes  to  components  or  clearances  without  any  detectable 

improvement in the auditory impression.

■  Each individual type of piston noise should be objectively quantiﬁable.

  This allows a quantitative analysis of the effects on noise excitation of changes made to the 

■  For each individual type of piston noise, the characteristic motion sequence of the piston 

  Visualization of the piston transverse motion measured on a loud piston shows the mecha-

nism of the motion that must be prevented for the particular piston noise.

■  The  inﬂuence  of  various  piston  design  measures  on  piston  transverse  motion  must  be 

piston.

must be known.

precisely identiﬁed.

  Systematic  parameter  studies  assist  in  acquiring  the  appropriate  expert  knowledge  in 

order to keep the number of engine tests to a minimum.

In  order  to  meet  these  requirements,  the  assessment  and  systematic  minimization  of 
piston noise follows four different principle approaches, as listed in Figure 7.101. These four 
approaches to the investigation of piston noise and its causes require completely different 

levels of time and resources. Depending on the problem, task deﬁnition, and objective, they 

are pursued at different intensity levels and combined as needed. Common to all procedures 
is the overall goal of systematically expanding knowledge and insight in order to be able to 

perform future optimization efforts more quickly and reliably.

Subjective assessment and evaluation of engine noise must be considered a necessary step 

at the start and ﬁnish of every optimization process. At the start of optimization, the auditory 

impression  provides  an  initial  diagnosis  and  helps  to  qualitatively  evaluate  the  initial  state 

as quickly as possible. A deﬁned airborne noise level recording allows subsequent auditory 

comparisons. After completing the optimization, subjective assessments and a direct com-

parison to the initial state serve as veriﬁcation that the improvements made have brought 

about a subjectively improved auditory impression. Such subjective assessment of engine 

noise can be performed either in the vehicle or on a test bench.

If subjective assessments and speciﬁcally prepared auditory comparisons are not sufﬁcient as 

diagnostic tools, which is frequently the case with diesel engines, then reproducible airborne 

and  structure-borne  sound  measurements  must  be  taken  on  the  test  bench.  The  analysis 

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

203

Figure 7.101: Procedure for systematically minimizing piston noise

of signals measured with different pistons, comparing them with one another, can provide 

an objective quantiﬁcation of the piston noise. Standardization and partial automation of the 

analysis process allows the necessary experimental variations to be performed quickly.

A  signiﬁcant  goal  of  systematic  test  planning  is  to  minimize  the  number  of  variations  of 

experiments, and therefore the number of engine test runs, while obtaining as much informa-

tion as possible. The existing wealth of experience and the ability to make predictive compu-

tations contribute greatly to this goal.

Using numerical simulations of piston transverse motion, not only can the acoustically objec-

tionable piston motions be recorded and analyzed, but the appropriate solution alternatives 

can also be qualitatively assessed, thereby reducing the time needed to implement them. 

This assumes that appropriate parameter studies have been completed.

In order to validate simulation programs and in support of basic development work, addi-

tional measurements of piston transverse motion are carried out. The effort needed to equip 

an  engine  is  considerable,  in  terms  of  both  time  and  resources.  It  is  more  economical  to 

prepare  a  few  typical  representatives  as  experimental  engines  for  such  experiments—e.g., 

a  conventional  gasoline  engine,  one  with  direct  injection,  IDI  and  DI  diesel  engines,  and 

commercial vehicle diesel engines. Using a measurement method with displacement sen-

sors  mounted  on  the  cylinder  [19],  a  number  of  critical  parameters  and  their  inﬂuence  on 

piston transverse motion can be investigated on these engines with little retooling effort. The 

analysis and visualization procedures are largely automated. The valuable results support the 

targeted selection of test variants and the preparation of action plans.

204

7  Engine testing 

7.6.2  Piston noise in gasoline engines

7.6.2.1  Subjective noise assessment

In gasoline engines, piston noise can be identiﬁed as such on the basis of the subjective 

auditory impression. Several different types of noise can even be distinguished this way. A 

practiced listener can determine the actual excitation mechanism in the engine on the basis 

of the sound pattern and the operating conditions.

The  individual  types  of  piston  noise  are  classiﬁed  by  cause,  location  of  excitation  on  the 

piston or cylinder, crank angle, and range of speed, load, and temperature. On the basis of 

the auditory impressions, “sound-rich” descriptions have been developed over time for these 
various types of excitation, a list of which is shown in Figure 7.102, without making a claim 
as to its completeness.

Several recordings of auditory examples for each type of piston noise are now available to 

experienced development engineers, which can be used as comparison samples for assess-

ing the acoustics of an engine. In many cases, the cause of a noise can be diagnosed right 

away in the ﬁrst subjective assessment. This means that the best possible test variants can 

be proposed early in the process for any subsequent engine testing. 

A  grading  scale  from  1  to  10  is  typically  used  in  the  automotive  industry  for  subjectively 
assessing engine noise, as documented in Figure 7.103.

If several piston variants are run in comparison during acoustic optimization, then this type 

of subjective assessment is often not sufﬁcient for precise quantiﬁcation. An objective noise 

analysis and quantiﬁcation of the noises must then be performed.

Figure 7.102: Piston noises in gasoline engines

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

205

Figure 7.103: Grading scale for subjective assessment of piston noise

7.6.2.2  Objective noise assessment and quantification

The most common piston noises in a gasoline engine are as follows:

■  So-called  “rattling”—impact  of  the  piston  crown  or,  depending  on  the  piston  geometry, 

the rigid upper part of the piston skirt against the antithrust side in the crank angle range 

immediately  prior  to  or  at  the  TDC  ﬁred  (TDC  in  the  expansion  stroke).  The  excitation 
mechanism is based on an inertia-induced traverse of the clearance, from the thrust side 

to the antithrust side, superimposed by a rotary motion component of the piston crown 

toward the antithrust side.

■  So-called “croaking”—the impact and deformation of the elastic piston skirt on the thrust 

side of the cylinder, in the crank angle range after TDC ﬁred. The excitation mechanism is 

based on a rotary motion, induced by the gas force, about a center of rotation in the lower 

skirt area.

The motion mechanisms described here are shown schematically in Figure 7.104. The most 
critical geometric parameters that can affect piston noise behavior with a reasonable amount 

of effort are piston pin offset, piston crown offset, cylinder distortion, piston shaping (con-

tour and ovality), and clearance. Note that the minimum permissible installation clearance is 

largely determined by the proﬁle of the piston skirt.

Both  noises  are  very  typical  of  gasoline  engines  and  occur  almost  exclusively  in  a  cold 

engine under low to medium load.

206

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.104: 
Relationship between piston 
design and piston noise in 
gasoline engines

Figure 7.105: Gasoline engine operating map with typical operating ranges for piston noises and rec-
ommended measurement program

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

207

“Croaking,” similar to the dark tone of a frog’s call, mostly occurs at low engine speeds of less 

than 2,000 rpm. The brighter, sharp “crown rattling,” on the other hand, is generally observed 

at speeds of greater than 3,000 rpm. If “skirt rattling” occurs because of the piston geometry, 

then it may be observed at lower speeds of around 2,500 rpm.

The gasoline engine operating map in Figure 7.105 shows the operating ranges in which the 
piston noises can occur in principle.

If an engine is to be checked for the piston noises of “croaking” and “rattling” using mea-

surement technology, then continuous measurement of the airborne and structure-borne 

noise should be applied during an increase in engine speed, under a constant, low load. 

The  standard  measurement  program  suggested  for  two  different  load  cases  in  a  cooled 

engine (coolant and oil temperature near –20°C) is indicated by the dashed-line arrows in 
Figure 7.105.

Figure  7.106  shows  an  example  of  the  spectral  distribution  of  the  airborne  noise  signal 
measured during a run-up. As would be expected from the subjective auditory impression, 

the “croaking” and “rattling” piston noises have very different frequency distributions. The 

“croaking” caused by the piston skirt shows up as a relatively narrow band in the frequency 

range between 1 and 2 kHz. “Rattling,” however, occurs as a more wide-band excitation 

because of the high stiffness of the impacting components. Depending on the impact inten-

sity and the engine structure, it can propagate in the range from 2 to well over 5 kHz.

Figure 7.106: Spectral distribution of the airborne noise measured during a run-up in engine speed, 
showing “croaking” and “rattling”

208

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.107: Partial airborne noise spectra (far field, thrust side) and structure-borne sound spectra 
(cylinder block, thrust side) for operation with and without “croaking”

In addition to engine speed, another important aspect for using measurement technology 

to differentiate the two types of noise has thus been identiﬁed. Both criteria together allow 

selective assessment of the signals, using deﬁned frequency-speed windows, as shown in 
Figure 7.106.

In order to ensure as part of such a procedure that the objectionable noises lie within the 

selected frequency-speed windows, a comparison of the measurement data with and with-

out the piston noise should be performed at all times. An estimate of the potential, com-

paring a piston version that has been deliberately designed to be acoustically problematic 

with one that has been acoustically optimized with very little installation clearance, can be 

helpful in this regard. Often, no optimized piston is available and the engine is not allowed to 

be reconﬁgured, so measurements from cold- and hot-engine operation can be compared 

instead. Because not all of the differences detected in the airborne noise spectrum can be 

attributed to piston noise, however, the ranges with the piston as the predominant cause of 

excitation must be veriﬁed using structure-borne sound signals.

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

209

Figure 7.108: Partial airborne noise spectra (far field, antithrust side) and structure-borne sound spec-
tra (cylinder block, antithrust side) for operation with and without “rattling”

This is done by analyzing simultaneous measurements of the accelerations on the cylinder 
block, which represent the piston noise to a large degree. Figure 7.107 shows a comparison 
of airborne and structure-borne sound spectra for a cold engine (with “croaking”) and a hot 

engine (no “croaking”).

The  airborne  and  structure-borne  sound  spectra  in  Figure  7.108  indicate  that  this  type  of 
representation also can visualize wide-band “rattling” and that the point of impact (crown or 

skirt) can also be differentiated in the frequency range. It is notable that the excitations that 

occur at a higher speed also affect a higher frequency range. This is due in part to the stiff-

ness of the components undergoing impact, and in part to the rising gas and inertia forces 

at higher speeds.

Depending  on  the  location  of  the  piston  noises  identiﬁed  within  the  frequency-speed  win-

dows, an individual ﬁlter band can be deﬁned as a function of the speed. This band covers the 

ranges of interest for piston analysis and masks the less informative ranges. A simple narrow 
band-pass ﬁlter, as is indicated in Figure 7.106, can often be used for this purpose as well. If 

210

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.109: Overall levels and order levels as functions of engine speed, calculated from identical 
airborne noise signals

the level of only that portion of the signal within the ﬁlter band is calculated, the piston noises 
present in the range are indicated by signiﬁcant peaks. Figure 7.109 shows the curves of these 
order levels in comparison to the calculated overall level of the airborne noise, as measured 

for cold- and hot-engine operation.

If different piston variants are run under essentially identical operating conditions during the 

optimization process, then the differences in sound levels can be used to quantitatively ana-

lyze the individual piston noises. An analogous procedure can also be used for the measured 

structure-borne sound signals, allowing additional cylinder-speciﬁc analysis, depending on 

the location and number of the measurement points.

7.6.2.3  Piston transverse motion and influence parameters in gasoline engines

The impact excitation caused by the piston can be minimized only by optimizing the piston 
transverse  motion.  The  overall  goal  should  therefore  be  to  “model”  the  piston  transverse 
motion for all operating points such that only a minimum amount of the impact energy is 

transmitted to the engine structure upon contact alteration.

In order to change the motion mechanism of the piston at the point in time that contact is 

made with the cylinder wall, the preceding phase of motion must be targeted. Precise knowl-

edge of the motion behavior of the piston, as a function of the speed, load, and temperature, 

is therefore just as critical as the knowledge of the inﬂuence of individual design parameters 

on piston transverse motion.

Measuring the piston transverse motion is therefore an indispensable means for obtaining 

basic knowledge, and also serves to validate simulation models and parameter identiﬁcation 

for computations.

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

211

Figure 7.110: Lubricant gap signals between the piston surface and cylinder wall

When applying a measurement method with displacement sensors [19] mounted in the cyl-

inder, a moving measurement linkage is not needed for data transmission. The advantage of 

this method is a quick and simple changeout of the test variants, without requiring setup of 

the measurement equipment on the piston. A disadvantage is the increased programming 

effort for the numerical analysis of the individual lubricant gap signals measured between 

the piston and the cylinder wall. The tilt angle curve for the piston axis and the translational 

displacement of the piston pin must be calculated from the usable individual segments of 
such lubricant gap curves as shown in Figure 7.110. Signals caused by the piston rings must 
be ignored. The signal range that can be interpreted may be limited to the crank angle range 
about the top dead center and depends on the piston skirt length and the application to the 

cylinder.

In order to reduce the effort for setup, in terms of both time and resources, a few typical 

engine variants have been prepared as test carrier. A number of critical parameters and their 

inﬂuence on piston transverse motion and structure-borne sound excitation can be investi-

gated using these setups.

Selected examples will clarify the motion mechanisms that are associated with the noises 

known as “croaking” and “rattling.” A few typical displacement signals for the motion curves 

are observed, along with the accelerations measured simultaneously at the cylinder.

Figure 7.111 (left side) shows the typical signal curves for operation with “croaking.”

At lower speeds, the gas force is predominant, even in the early compression phase, thereby 

inducing contact on the antithrust side as the piston is thrust upward. Not until the crank 
angle range of 30° to 10° before TDC ﬁred does the bottom end of the skirt change con-

212

7  Engine testing 

tact from the antithrust side to the thrust side. The associated impact of the skirt, which is 

very elastic at this height, generally does not lead to any signiﬁcant structure-borne sound 

excitation. The resulting diagonal orientation remains until after TDC ﬁred. Under the inﬂu-

ence of gas force, the piston then straightens up, and the more rigid upper skirt area strikes 

the thrust side of the cylinder. The piston skirt is deformed over a large area, so the bottom 

end of the skirt lifts only slightly off the cylinder wall. The thrust-side structure-borne sound 

excitation generally occurs in the crank angle range between 10° and 25° after TDC ﬁred.

Measures with a positive effect include
■  greater barrel shape of the piston contour;

■  greater tapering of the lower end of the skirt;

■  greater stiffness in the middle of the skirt;

■  greater piston pin offset toward the thrust side;

■  reduced installation clearance.

A  piston  transverse  motion  under  similar  operating  conditions,  but  without  measurable 

piston noise, can serve as a model for an optimized, “quiet” sequence of motion. Direct com-

parison of such data often reveals the cause for the structure-borne sound excitation. The 
diagrams on the right side in Figure 7.111 show that “croaking” does not occur for measure-
ments at lower gas force, and thus lower lateral force, despite similar behavior of the piston 

transverse motion. In the present case, this indicates insufﬁcient skirt stiffness as the cause 

of the “croaking.”

An optimized proﬁle and stiffness of the piston skirt reduces the severity of the skirt deforma-

tion under load. The improved shape stability promotes continuous rolling of the piston skirt 

on the thrust side, thus preventing the impacts that lead to “croaking,” as has already been 

determined for operation with lower lateral force loads. A characteristic of improved rolling 

motion is a more obvious lifting of the bottom end of the skirt at the point of the maximum 

tilt angle.

Figure 7.112 shows the typical signal curves for operation with “rattling.” At high speeds, the 
piston is located on the thrust side during the upward stroke, because of the inﬂuence of 

inertia force. The increasing inﬂuence of the gas force causes the piston crown to move from 

the thrust side to the antithrust side well before TDC ﬁred. If the top land or the ﬁrst ring land 

of the piston crown strikes the antithrust side, this is known as “crown rattling.” If the impact 

occurs at the rigid upper skirt area, then this is logically known as skirt rattling. The antithrust-

side structure-borne sound excitation takes place between 15° and 5° after TDC ﬁred.

Measures with a positive effect include

■  crown offset toward the thrust side;

■  greater tapering of the upper end of the skirt;

■  adapted top land and ring land clearances;

■  lesser piston pin offset toward the thrust side;

■  reduced installation clearance;

■  reduced cylinder distortion.

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

213

Figure 7.111: Relationship between measured lubricant gap, piston axis motion, and structure-borne 
sound excitation during operation with “croaking” (left, low speed, low load) and without “croaking” 
(right, low speed, no load)

Figure 7.112: 
Relationship between measured lubricant gap, 
piston axis motion, and structure-borne sound 
excitation during operation with “rattling” (high 
speed, low load)

214

7  Engine testing 

Because of the diagonal piston orientation arising in the region of the TDC ﬁred, the sequence 

of  motion  described  above  for  “croaking”  typically  follows  this  effect.  A  second  structure-
borne sound excitation on the opposite thrust side, as can be seen in Figure 7.112, is therefore 
often detected, but is not subjectively perceived as additional “croaking” at the higher speed.

As an adjunct to manual analysis and interpretation of the individual diagrams, the measured 

displacement signals can be used as input variables for computer animation of the piston 

transverse motion. Only a clear visualization and comparison of a number of suitable test 
variants can provide the insight that the engineer needs for quick and reliable development.

7.6.3  Piston noise in passenger car diesel engines

7.6.3.1  Subjective noise assessment

The acceptance of the diesel engine as a comfortable vehicle drive has increased greatly 

since  the  introduction  of  the  high-torque  direct-injection  passenger  car  engine.  For  this 

reason, the acoustic optimization of diesel engine combustion is considered by vehicle man-

ufacturers to be one of the most critical future tasks, besides the reduction of consumption 

and exhaust gas emissions.

Modern injection systems, which allow pre-injection based on the operating point, or mod-

eling of the injection sequence, contribute greatly to this end. This and the current pump 

concepts with reduced hydraulic noise lead to a reduction in noise level, which has caused 

mechanically induced noise to play a more prominent role again. Systematic minimization of 

piston noise is therefore more and more important in diesel engines as well.

New piston concepts such as the steel piston, which has friction power loss advantages over 

aluminum pistons under warm operating conditions due to its low thermal expansion, pres-
ent new challenges for acoustic optimization on account of their large running clearances 

and short skirt heights.

In contrast to the gasoline engine [20, 21], diesel engines [22] have no typical types of piston 

noise that can be identiﬁed by their sound alone. The physical boundary conditions that pre-

vail in diesel engines, however, do not support the conclusion that less piston noise should 

be  expected  than  in  gasoline  engines.  Higher  gas  forces,  more  rigid  pistons  with  greater 

mass, and greater installation clearances indicate that greater structure-borne sound excita-

tion is more likely.

Nevertheless, for many drivers, the degree of sensitivity to piston noise appears to be less 
and the general tolerance of mechanically induced noises to be greater. Both tendencies are 

certainly due to the dominant combustion noise that is common in diesel engines.

The acoustic similarity of the combustion noise and piston noise often makes a subjective 

assessment of piston noise difﬁcult. A direct comparison of recorded signals, however, allows 

the human ear to detect even slight differences very well. When variants are compared, how-

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

215

Figure 7.113:  Engine operating map of a DI passenger car diesel engine, with subjective assessment 
of the piston noise of two different pistons, assessed in direct listening comparison

ever, because these differences are attributed to the change in the running characteristic of 

the piston, scrupulous attention must be paid to the fact that in such a comparison the com-

bustion sequence remains unchanged and must not appear here as a second parameter. In 

order to ensure this, the combustion chamber pressure curve must be recorded and appro-

priately controlled, even in the case of signal recording for subjective noise assessment.

In  order  to  determine  the  subjective,  acoustically  relevant  operating  ranges  in  the  diesel 

engine,  an  estimate  of  potential  is  helpful.  The  engine  noises  are  compared  between  a 

selected loud piston (piston A: without piston pin offset, with acoustically unfavorable piston 

proﬁle, and large installation clearance) and a piston designed speciﬁcally to be quiet (piston 

B: with computationally optimized piston pin offset, acoustically favorable piston proﬁle, and 

very small installation clearance). The most important results of such a comparative, subjec-
tive noise assessment are shown in Figure 7.113.

Piston A is deﬁned as 100% for each operating point. The result for the piston noise detected 

from the quiet piston B is therefore a lower value.

216

7  Engine testing 

While the subjectively perceived difference is very low at high speeds—although this is pre-

cisely where a high proportion of mechanical noise is present—a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the 

overall noise by the piston excitation can be detected at low speeds. This applies particu-

larly to speeds of less than 2,000 rpm, at very low or high loads. In the lower partial-load 

range, where combustion causes high pressure rise values, however, the combustion noise 

is dominant, so that the piston noise that must surely also be present in this range plays a 

secondary role.

operating temperature.

The inﬂuence of piston design on the piston noise is fundamentally greater in a cold engine 

than in a hot engine. Nevertheless, an improvement can be perceived subjectively, even at 

Therefore, it is proposed that a measurement program be standardized that includes both 
the cooled engine (symbol (cid:85), water and oil temperature around –20°C) and the engine at 
operating temperature (symbol (cid:133)). Figure 7.114 again shows the operating map of a diesel 
engine, now with the measurement program resulting from the above conclusions, consist-

ing  of  run-up  curves  above  the  load  at  low  speed  and  for  different  engine  temperatures 

(symbolized by the vertical arrow), and a few selected stable measurement points from the 

ranges that are particularly relevant from an acoustical standpoint. Previous experience has 

shown that these operating conditions are not only representative of subjective assessments, 

but  are  also  very  well-suited  for  computational  optimization  processes  and  as  measuring 

points for objective noise assessment.

In the crank angle range around the TDC ﬁred, the contact side of the piston in the cylinder 

changes from the antithrust side to the thrust side. For pistons with no piston pin offset or 

with an offset toward the antithrust side, this is a largely translational motion sequence with 

small tilt angles about the piston axis. This can give rise to a free motion phase for the piston, 

which  causes  the  piston  to  accelerate  toward  the  thrust  side.  The  piston  then  strikes  the 

thrust-side cylinder wall, causing structure-borne sound excitation in the engine structure.

If the piston is offset toward the thrust side, however, then the contact alteration starts with 

the bottom end of the skirt, at an earlier crank angle, and the motion of the piston crown 

toward  the  thrust  side  is  slowed.  The  result  is  greater  tilt  angles  of  the  piston  axis  and  a 

temporary  diagonal  orientation  in  the  cylinder.  Owing  to  the  supporting  lateral  forces  and 

the  greater  deformations  of  the  piston  skirt,  the  structure-borne  sound  excitation  can  be 

reduced [23]. In current DI engines, the optimum piston pin offset is generally between 0.3 

and 0.6 mm toward the thrust side. Therefore, a starting value of 0.5 mm is suggested for the 

experimental development phase.

Seizure resistance must be considered in the optimization of the barrel-shaped, oval piston 

proﬁle.  Because  this  has  a  direct  interrelationship  with  the  installation  clearance,  only  an 

overall analysis makes sense. This circumstance can be clariﬁed with the help of two piston 
skirt proﬁles; Figure 7.115.

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

217

Figure 7.114: Noise operating map of a DI passenger car diesel engine and recommended measure-
ment program, based on subjective auditory impression, for subjective and objective noise assess-
ment

Figure 7.115: Interrelationship between the piston profile, installation clearance, and seizure resistance
D2: Piston diameter at a fixed piston height in the upper skirt area

218

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.116: Piston skirt geometries used for calculations, with different implementations of seizure 
resistance (height D1: piston height at which the piston has the greatest diameter D1)

If a piston has less deviation in the upper skirt area (piston proﬁle A)—indicated here as height 

D2, according to the piston drawings—then the guidance of the piston in the cylinder appears 

to  be  better,  and  less  structure-borne  sound  excitation  is  to  be  expected.  If,  however,  the 

reduction in seizure resistance is taken into consideration, then the piston must be installed 
with a nominal installation clearance that is greater by this amount; Figure 7.115, lower dia-
gram. In this case, piston B appears to provide better guidance in the cylinder, and therefore 

less structure-borne sound excitation. The two inﬂuence parameters, piston proﬁle and instal-

lation clearance, can be clariﬁed by a fast and rough projection to determine which design will 
tend to lead to a running characteristic that is more favorable from an acoustical standpoint.

The key parameters for ﬁve piston skirt proﬁles are sketched in Figure 7.116, differentiating 
the upper skirt taper at height D2 between 110 and 190 μm in steps of 20 μm. The lower skirt 
taper remains unchanged. The analysis of the piston transverse motion is made for different 
assumptions of installation clearance, such as the steps of 20 μm.

If the maximum contact force that occurs on the thrust side is again taken as an approxi-

mate  criterion  for  structure-borne  sound  excitation,  then  the  result  is  the  lines  drawn  in 
Figure 7.117 for the individual piston proﬁles, which indicate smaller installation clearances, 
as expected. Also, as assumed, pistons with increasingly large upper skirt taper cause a shift 

toward greater maximum forces.

If  points  with  identical  running  clearance  at  height  D2  (deviation  of  the  piston  geometry 

at  height  D2  plus  installation  clearance)  are  connected  to  one  another,  then  the  result  is 

the connection line, as a line of comparable seizure resistance. This is additionally shown 
in Figure 7.117, using the example  of 190 μm.  Its progression  shows  clearly that  for  such 

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

219

Figure 7.117: Maximum contact force as a function of piston profile and installation clearance, calcu-
lated for low speed and low load

engines  with  comparable  seizure  resistance,  the  least  possible  installation  clearance  with 

the correspondingly necessary large upper skirt taper provides the best acoustic solution.

This potential for improving the acoustics often justiﬁes the implementation of small instal-

lation clearances, using a graphite coating on the piston skirt to increase seizure resistance. 

The positive inﬂuence of reducing the installation clearance and the negative inﬂuence of the 

greater upper skirt taper cancel each other out only for large installation clearances greater 
than 60 μm.

Owing  to  the  high  stiffness  of  the  skirt  in  diesel  engine  pistons,  compared  with  gasoline 

engine pistons, the typical ovality values in series production diesel engine pistons are consid-

erably less dispersed. A computational pre-estimate is therefore not absolutely necessary for 

a ﬁrst test. The ﬁnal ovality values arise largely from the optimization of the wear pattern on a 

piston that has been run. Particularly for pistons with optimized proﬁles and small installation 

clearances, the acoustic inﬂuence of the ovality of the piston skirt is of secondary importance.

7.6.3.2  Objective noise assessment and quantification

Noise analyses and a subsequent objective noise assessment have the goal of identifying an 

existing piston noise as such and quantifying it, so that piston variants can be made objec-

tively comparable.

In order to determine the absolute value of the noise component caused by the piston, a 
systematic partial sound source analysis must be performed with the goal of quantitatively 
separating the noise excitation from combustion, the injection system, the valve train system, 

the crank mechanism, and various auxiliary systems [24]. Such extensive tests are primarily 

suited for basic research work, but not for the regular optimization work leading up to series 

7  Engine testing 

220

production.

A method is used, therefore, that allows piston variants to be objectively compared with one 

another  with  relatively  little  effort.  The  portion  identiﬁed  as  piston  noise,  however,  can  be 

quantiﬁed only relative to other piston variants. An initial basis for such an A/B comparison 

is  often  the  potential  estimate  suggested  previously,  with  selected  loud  and  quiet  piston 

designs. Every other test variant can be arranged between them. The improvement that has 
been achieved between the initial state and the optimized piston can then be documented, 

as shown in the following example.

If a noise excitation due to piston impact occurs in a diesel engine, then it can be assumed 

that this mechanical impact excitation will be found to be much stronger in a structure-borne 

noise signal measured in the upper area of the cylinder block, on account of the dominant 

external structure-borne noise transfer path, than in a signal measured at the main bearing 

cover of the associated cylinder [25]. The force excitation due to combustion and the impact 

excitation of the crankshaft in the bearing, on the other hand, are greater in the area of the 

main bearing than at the exterior of the crankcase. The internal structure-borne noise trans-

fer path is dominant.

If  such  structure-borne  sound  measurements  are  performed  with  piston  variants  that  are 

very different acoustically and the signal levels measured at the main bearing do not sig-

niﬁcantly deviate from one another, then the difference that can be measured in the upper 

crankcase area and in the airborne noise can only be attributed to excitation by the piston. 

A  prerequisite,  however,  is  that  each  measured  operating  point  has  been  checked  using 

the combustion chamber pressure curves captured at the same time, to determine whether 

operation with both piston variants and identical combustion has taken place.

Figure 7.118 shows such a measurement result, using overall levels (up to 10 kHz) over the 
load, derived for the sound pressure at a distance of 130 cm from the engine, for the struc-

ture-borne noise on the thrust side of the crankcase (centered on the selected cylinder), and 

for the structure-borne noise at an associated bolt for the main bearing cover.

The acoustically optimized piston B differs from the acoustically objectionable piston A by a 

piston pin offset optimized by computation and experimentation, by a modiﬁed skirt proﬁle 

having greater upper skirt taper, and by minimized installation clearance. The skirt ovality and 

the piston ring and top land clearances are adapted to the modiﬁed running characteristic 

with the help of visual inspection of the pistons that have been run. All prescribed seizure 

tests have been passed previously.

The  reduction  in  sound  level  achieved  by  these  measures  can  be  as  much  as  5  dB.  The 

signiﬁcant reduction in the structure-borne sound level on the thrust side is effective only at 
very low loads and high loads—as is sketched schematically in Figure 7.113. The accelera-
tions measured at the main bearing cover do not exhibit these blatant differences. It can be 
assumed, therefore, that the difference in noise excitation in this case can be attributed solely 

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

221

Figure 7.118: 
Sound pressure and accel-
eration level as a function of 
the load, measured for a DI 
passenger car diesel engine, 
engine speed 1,500 rpm, 
cooled engine (total level over 
0–10,000 Hz)

to the piston. In the lower partial-load range, in contrast (cf. load range from 50 to 100 Nm), 

the dominant excitation is due to very rapidly advancing combustion caused by the consid-

erable ignition delay, especially in the cooled engine. In this load range, the combustion noise 

determines the sound level. In the lower partial-load range, therefore, neither subjective nor 

objective assessment of the piston noise is recommended.

The airborne and structure-borne sound levels depicted in Figure 7.118 are analyzed more 
closely in order to quantify the noise components caused by the piston. The comparison of 
the two Campbell diagrams for airborne noise shown in Figure 7.119 demonstrates clearly 
that  the  frequency  range  around  1,850  Hz  is  emitted  more  strongly  with  the  acoustically 

objectionable piston over the entire load range.

The  spectral  representation  of  the  accelerations  measured  on  the  thrust  side,  shown  in 
Figure  7.120,  conﬁrms  that  the  piston  is  the  cause  of  this  partial  increase  in  sound  level. 
The accelerations measured at the main bearing, in contrast, would not show this increased 
excitation in the case of piston impact, which is also evident in Figure 7.121.

The frequency content of an impact excitation caused by the piston has been empirically 
found to have a broader band than is evident in the diagrams in Figure 7.119 and Figure 
7.120. The intense increase in just a narrow range is surely not attributable to the excitation 
characteristic;  rather,  it  is  due  to  the  operational  vibration  behavior  of  this  special  engine 
structure. In many diesel engines, however, this has been observed in a similar manner when 

222

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.119: Sound pressure spectra as a function of load, measured for a DI passenger car diesel 
engine, engine speed 1,500 rpm, cooled engine

Figure 7.120: Acceleration spectra (thrust side) as a function of load, measured for a DI passenger car 
diesel engine, engine speed 1,500 rpm, cooled engine

piston impact occurs. The band-pass levels measured in the narrow raised frequency range, 
as shown in Figure 7.122, can be used as a comparative criterion for objective analysis of the 
individual piston variants. The acceleration measured on the thrust side of the engine block 

represents the inﬂuence of the piston on the noise excitation much more speciﬁcally than 

the airborne noise signal measured at a distance from the engine and is therefore also more 

appropriate for such a quantitative analysis in most cases.

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

223

Figure 7.121: Acceleration spectra (main bearing cover bolt) as a function of load, measured for a DI 
passenger car diesel engine, engine speed 1,500 rpm, cooled engine

Figure  7.122:  Sound  pressure  and  acceleration  level  as  a  function  of  the  load,  measured  for  a  DI 
passenger  car  diesel  engine,  engine  speed  1,500  rpm,  cooled  engine  (band-pass  filter  frequency 
1,750–1,950 Hz)

224

7  Engine testing 

7.6.3.3  Piston transverse motion and influence parameters in passenger car diesel 

engines

Analogous  to  the  procedure  for  gasoline  engines,  a  characteristic  behavior  of  the  piston 
transverse motion is to be depicted for the diesel engine. Figure 7.123 shows an analysis of 
such  superimposed  signals  together  with  the  pressure  curve  measured  simultaneously  in 

the combustion chamber and the structure-borne noise measured at the cylinder.

Figure 7.123: Mechanisms for structure-borne sound excitation in diesel engines

The example shown is typical of the sequence of motion of a diesel engine piston with a 

slight offset toward the thrust side, immediately after cold start. Owing to the very large instal-

lation clearance selected for this measurement, ﬁve excitation mechanisms that may occur in 

the diesel engine can be depicted using a single operating point. Assigning the translational 

and rotational piston transverse motion to the corresponding structure-borne sound excita-

tion, in terms of both time and location, deﬁnes the mode of action of mechanisms I through 

V unambiguously.

7.6  Piston noise and transverse motion

225

If  a  piston  noise  is  identiﬁed  as  such  in  the  diesel  engine,  and  if  a  known  mechanism  of 

motion  can  be  determined  as  the  cause  on  the  basis  of  experience,  then  the  number  of 

engine tests needed for optimization depends only on the correct decision of how many test 

variants to run.

In order to increase the understanding of concrete motion sequences and of the measures 

to be taken, measured motion information is prepared so that the entire piston transverse 

motion, including the deformations of the piston skirt, can be visualized quickly and easily. 
This allows the engineer to ﬁnd a solution in a quick and precise manner.

Using the insight drawn from several DI passenger car diesel engines, a few helpful tips can 

be formulated for the design of an acoustically favorable diesel engine piston:
■  The distinct barrel shape of the upper area of the skirt, together with sufﬁcient stiffness in 

the middle area of the skirt, supports rolling of the piston against the cylinder wall, thus 

helping to reduce impact excitations.

■  The skirt end taper with a hydrodynamically optimized design should act over a circumfer-

ential angle of about 60 degrees, in order to ensure seizure resistance even at low instal-

lation clearances.

■  The installation clearance, to be deﬁned in the lower skirt area, should be as small as pos-

sible. In case of insufﬁcient seizure resistance in the area of the thrust-side or antithrust-

side mantle curve of the piston skirt, the upper skirt taper should without fail be increased 

before increasing the installation clearance. The use of a graphite coating on the piston 

skirt can provide a double enhancement in this case.

■  The ovality of the skirt can be used exclusively for optimizing the width of the wear pat-

tern and helps to ensure the necessary seizure resistance in the more rigid side areas of 

the piston skirt as well. The direct inﬂuence of skirt ovality on the acoustic behavior is of 

secondary importance in a piston design that has been optimized in all other aspects.

■  For diesel engine pistons, a small piston pin offset of 0.3 to 0.6 mm toward the thrust side 

is preferred over a design with no piston pin offset. A potential increase in carbon buildup, 

which can lead to “bore polishing” under certain circumstances and thus to increased oil 

consumption, can be counteracted with suitable measures, such as an offset of the piston 

crown or adaptation of the conicity and clearance at the top land or ring land.

226

7  Engine testing 

7.7  Piston pin noise

7.7.1  Causes of noise

As  has  been  described  in  Chapter  7.6,  the  subjectively  objectionable  noises  that  can  be 

attributed to the piston and its periphery in a gasoline engine have sound characteristics that 

are very different from one another. In addition to the piston noises that have already been 

analyzed, in some cases a harsh, metallic, impulse noise can occur erratically at idle-running 

speed or increased speed (up to about 2,000 rpm), only at zero load. It is subjectively per-

ceived to be very objectionable.

This noise, known as “pin ticking,” is induced as the pin impacts against the bore wall after 

passing through the clearance of the piston pin in the pin bore. Noise induced by the pin in 

the small end bore, which can also cause a comparable ticking noise, and is therefore also 

sometimes called pin ticking, is not the subject of this discussion. As has been shown by 

experience, however, the procedure described for measuring and analyzing the pin noise in 

the boss is also suitable for quantifying the excitation caused in the small end bore.

Complaints due to pin noises are unknown for the diesel engine, as these experience com-

pletely different pressure ratios in the compression phase. All further considerations, there-

fore, deal with gasoline engines exclusively.

In a gasoline engine, in the affected operating ranges, the cylinder is under vacuum in the 

early  compression  phase.  Combined  with  the  arising  inertia  forces,  this  forces  the  pin  to 

make contact in the lower boss area. As the compression pressure increases, the sign of 

the resultant vector for the gas and inertia forces changes in a crank angle range well before 

TDC ﬁred. At the point when this resultant force changes sign, the contact of the piston pin 
changes from the bottom to the zenith of the boss. If this change occurs along a more or less 

direct path to the opposite wall rather than as a rolling or sliding motion along the pin bore, 

then this can cause noise excitation after passing through the clearance [21].

While the piston noises of “croaking” and “rattling” are generally audible at low engine tem-

peratures, and decrease as the engine warms up, piston pin noises in the pin bore occur 

predominantly  during  the  warm-up  phase  or  in  a  warm  engine.  One  reason  for  this  phe-

nomenon is the difference in thermal expansion coefﬁcients between the aluminum piston 

and  the  steel  pin.  Particularly  during  the  warm-up  phase,  but  also  in  the  warm  operating 

condition, the thermally induced running clearance between the pin and piston can increase 

relative to the installation clearance, which is measured at 20°C. This promotes the genera-

tion of this noise.

7.7  Piston pin noise

227

7.7.2  Structure-borne noise transfer paths and  

measurement program

If a pin noise is to be objectively analyzed, then the best and simplest way to capture it with 
measuring equipment must ﬁrst be determined. Figure 7.124 shows the locations of struc-
ture-borne sound excitation for the piston noises of croaking and rattling, as well as for pin 

ticking. For the ﬁrst two noises, the cylinder wall is excited directly by the piston on the thrust 

side (TS) or antithrust side (ATS). Following the outer structure-borne noise transfer path, the 

acceleration measurement is applied directly to the surface of the block. For the pin noise, 

the structure-borne noise transfer primarily takes the inner transfer path, via the connecting 

rod, the crank pin, and the crankshaft, into the main crankshaft bearing. The main crankshaft 

bearing cover, or one of the two mounting screws for the cover, is thus ideal as a measure-

ment position for an accelerometer [26].

Figure  7.124:  Locations  of  structure-borne  sound  excitation  for  typical  piston  and  pin  noises  in  a 
gasoline engine

Figure 7.125 shows the time signal traces of various acceleration sensors and a microphone 
at  an  operating  point  with  a  clearly  audible  pin  noise.  Five  operating  cycles  are  shown.  A 

piston  with  an  oversized  boss  diameter  is  installed  only  in  the  test  cylinder,  resulting  in 

oversized pin clearance. All the other cylinders in the four-cylinder engine are equipped with 

pistons that allow pin clearance at the lower tolerance limit, and therefore veriﬁably do not 

produce pin noises.

228

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.125: Typical time signal traces for a given piston pin noise

The structure-borne sound excitation by the piston pin can also be detected in the signals 

from the sensors on the thrust and antithrust sides of the engine block surface, but signiﬁ-

cantly greater spacing between the useful signal and the background noise can be obtained 

at  the  screw  location  on  the  main  crankshaft  bearing  cover.  Therefore,  this  measurement 

position is ideal for a reﬁned analysis of the different variants that affect the pin noise. The 

microphone  position  is  selected  at  the  location  where  the  noise  of  interest  is  subjectively 

most clearly audible.

The pin noise behavior of different engines will normally vary greatly. Therefore, a standard-

ized measurement program has been developed, which allows any pin noises to be detected. 

It consists of various running programs at constant speed, and dynamic run-ups followed 

by a drop in speed. The water temperature is varied through the range from 30 to 100°C 

for each run. The temperature range with the most acoustic activity is then measured more 

precisely at a constant water temperature using dynamic variations in speed.

The measurements are taken continuously over the entire rise in temperature. A large amount 

of data is produced, because the measurement period lasts for several minutes. In order to 

extract the important information from the measurement signals, the method described in 

the next section is used. The structure-borne noise at a main bearing cover bolt, which cor-

responds very well to the airborne noise, is used exclusively for this analysis.

7.7  Piston pin noise

229

7.7.3  Method of analysis in the time domain

The amplitude of the excitation determines the intensity of the perceived pin noise. Therefore, 

only the maximum acceleration amplitude that is excited by the piston pin at the structure-

borne  sound  measurement  point  on  the  main  bearing  cover  bolt  is  used.  If  the  structure-
borne sound excitation is as dominant as in the example in Figure 7.125, the maxima can 
simply be sought out in the individual operating cycles. For less obvious pin noises, and if 

other noise sources are also present, as is often the case, then the results can easily be misin-

terpreted. Therefore, the maxima should be sought out only for the crank angle range in which 
pin noises might occur. In this example (see Figure 7.126), a crank angle range from 50° to 
20° prior to TDC ﬁred was selected for a maximum value search. All operating cycles occur-

ring during the measurement period are analyzed for maximum amplitude in the crank angle 

range indicated. These maximal amplitudes are then plotted against temperature and time.

In this example, no remarkable events can be seen during the temperature run-up at idle 

speed. The test engine used does not have any pin noise in this operating state, despite its 

large  pin  clearance.  Experience  shows,  however,  that  other  engines  can  generate  clearly 

audible pin noises at idle speed. At ﬁrst, when measured at a constant speed of 1,500 rpm, 

pin excitation still cannot be detected. Above a water temperature of approximately 83°C, 

however, a signiﬁcant increase in the amplitude becomes evident. The temperature run-up 

with  dynamic  increase  in  speed,  from  idle-running  speed  to  2,000  rpm,  shows  a  similar 

behavior. Here the ﬁrst signs of noise excitation by the piston pin can already be detected at 

a low temperature. The greatest amplitudes occur at a water temperature of about 95°C. For 

Figure  7.126:  Influence  of  various  operating  conditions  on  piston  pin  noise  using  the  standardized 
measurement program

230

7  Engine testing 

this reason, the measurement at constant water temperature with a dynamic speed increase 

will also be run at 95°C. This measurement shows the very characteristic behavior of the pin 

noise in the test engine, and, after further reﬁnement of the analysis method, helps to evalu-

ate various parameters that affect the pin noise.

The  speed,  the  maximum  acceleration  amplitudes  determined  for  a  crank  angle  window 

prior to TDC ﬁred, and the crank angle at which the individual amplitudes occur are all plot-
ted against the measurement time in Figure 7.127.

At both rising and falling speeds, the greatest amplitudes are observed in the range between 

1,600 and 1,800 rpm. The crank angle values at which the maximum amplitudes occur are 

between 35° and 20° crank angle before the TDC ﬁred.

In  order  to  reliably  evaluate  and  classify  the  results  in  a  parameter  study,  a  large  number 

of such dynamic acceleration and deceleration runs must be incorporated in the analysis. 

Using  a  special  type  of  averaging,  reproducible  and  meaningful  results  can  be  obtained. 

Examples are included in the following section, using concrete parameter studies. Including 

a sufﬁciently high number of run-ups provides sufﬁciently stable results.

Figure  7.127:  Maximum  amplitudes,  measured  at  the  main  bearing  cover  bolt  and  corresponding 
crank angle, at varying speed

7.7  Piston pin noise

231

7.7.4  Results of parameter studies

7.7.4.1 

Influence of piston pin clearance

One  parameter  that  has  a  great  inﬂuence  on  piston  pin  noise  is  the  piston  pin  clearance 

in the boss. In a ﬂoating piston pin bearing, the typical design clearance is between 2 and 
12 μm. These values refer to a cold engine. During the warm-up phase, and in the warm 
condition, the operating clearance is greater because of the thermal expansion coefﬁcient of 
the aluminum piston material, which is nearly double that of the steel used for the pin.

Figure  7.128  shows  the  inﬂuence  of  different  pin  installation  clearances  on  the  maximum 
structure-borne sound excitation, from 50° to 20° crank angle before TDC ﬁred, measured 
at the main bearing cover bolt. Pin clearances were varied over a range from 5 μm to 24 
μm.  As  expected,  increasing  pin  clearance  is  associated  with  a  continual  increase  in  the 
maximum accelerations. In order to evaluate the amplitude above which the structure-borne 

noise measured at the main bearing can be heard as airborne noise, and therefore perceived 

as objectionable, the results of a subjective auditory impression are used. The variations in 

clearances differ signiﬁcantly not only in the intensity of the pin noise, but also in the speed 
range at which a pin noise ﬁrst becomes audible. While no pin noise can be heard at 5 μm 
and 8 μm clearance, an audible noise occurs at 12 μm clearance between 1,600 and 1,800 
rpm. At 24 μm clearance, the speed range with audible pin ticking starts just above idle-
running speed, at about 900 rpm, and ends again at about 1,800 rpm.

Figure  7.128:  Influence  of  piston  pin  clearance  on  the  structure-borne  sound  excitation  in  a  round 
cylindrical pin bore

232

7  Engine testing 

On  the  basis  of  this  observation,  the  diagram  in  Figure  7.128  for  speed  increases  and 
decreases includes a curve showing the level at which the structure-borne noise becomes 

audible  as  objectionable  airborne  noise.  This  audible  limit  is  included  in  all  the  other  dia-

grams without further explanation.

7.7.4.2  Influence of pin boss geometry

There are many common versions of pin boss geometry designs. Deviations from the round 
cylindrical pin boss shape, however, are typically not related to the acoustic behavior of the 
engine;  rather,  they  are  intended  to  reduce  local  component  stresses,  thereby  increasing 

service life. Other measures have the goal of improving lubrication in the boss, thus reducing 

wear and the risk of seizing.

7.7.4.2.1  Oil pockets and circumferential oil groove

The oil pockets (slots) are continuous recesses running along the pin bore, which improve 
the oil supply (see sketch in Figure 7.129). Circumferential oil grooves running perpendicular 
to the pin bore serve the same purpose.

Figure 7.129: Design principle of a pin bore with oil pockets (slots, left) and circumferential oil grooves 
(right)

Both measures improve lubrication in the boss and reduce the structure-borne sound exci-
tation considerably below an acoustically critical level; Figure 7.130. For the variant with a 
round cylindrical boss combined with a circumferential oil groove, even pin clearances of up 
to 24 μm were implemented without any acoustic events.

7.7  Piston pin noise

233

Figure  7.130:  Influence  of  oil  pockets  and  circumferential  oil  groove  on  the  structure-borne  sound 
excitation

7.7.4.2.2  Transverse oval pin bore and pin bore relief

Both measures help to reduce stresses in the pin boss support for piston pins that deform 
into an oval shape under high gas forces. For designs, see sketches in Figure 7.131.

Figure 7.131: Design principle of a transverse oval pin bore (left) and a round pin bore with pin bore 
relief (side relief, right)

Figure 7.132 shows a comparison between round and transverse oval pin bore designs, as 
well as pin bores with pin bore relief (side reliefs), with 16 μm basic installation clearance 
for each pin. Both measures reduce the structure-borne sound excitation by the piston pin. 

The version with pin bore relief, however, is of limited value. The transverse oval pin bore 

achieves a signiﬁcant improvement over the round cylindrical pin bore. It has signiﬁcantly 

lower  acceleration  values,  which  do  not  cause  any  audible  pin  noise.  With  transverse  pin 

234

7  Engine testing 

Figure  7.132:  Influence  of  transverse  oval  pin  bore  and  pin  bore  relief  (side  relief)  on  the  structure-
borne sound excitation

boss geometry, even a very large basic installation clearance can be implemented without 

causing perceptible noise. The transverse oval design of the pin bore is thus a very effective 

measure to reduce pin noises.

7.7.4.2.3  Single-sided vertical oval pin bore

In very highly stressed gasoline engines, the high gas forces induce large bending moments 

in the piston about the longitudinal axis of the pin. This is often associated with high stresses 

on the surface of the piston, which bounds the combustion chamber in the transverse direc-

tion of the engine. The vertical oval design of the upper half of the pin bore helps to reduce 
these stresses signiﬁcantly; Figure 7.133. This measure, intended to increase service life, is 
also accompanied by an increased pin clearance in the vertical direction.

Figure 7.133: 
Design principle of a pin bore with 
single-sided vertical ovality

7.7  Piston pin noise

235

Figure 7.134: Influence of piston pin clearance on the structure-borne sound excitation in a single-
sided vertical oval pin bore, with and without circumferential oil groove

Figure 7.134 shows the inﬂuence of a single-sided vertical oval pin bore, with and without 
a circumferential oil groove, as a potential acoustic improvement action. In this case, with 
16 μm basic installation clearance, a signiﬁcant increase in structure-borne sound excitation 
is observed for the single-sided vertical oval boss relative to the round pin bore. Other clear-

ance variations show that only a very small basic clearance can provide acceptable acoustic 
behavior with regard to pin noise. Starting at a basic installation clearance of 8 μm, large 
accelerations are already evident at the structure-borne sound measurement point on the 

main bearing cover bolt, along with very clearly audible pin noise.

When the single-sided vertical oval boss is combined with a circumferential oil groove, the 
test engine used showed a signiﬁcant improvement in structure-borne sound excitation well 

below the threshold at which audible pin ticking occurs.

The vertical oval boss is a very effective means for achieving sufﬁcient service life under high 

loads and can be implemented with no acoustic disadvantages whatsoever, as long as it is 

combined with suitable design measures.

7.7.4.2.4  Shaped pin bore

A shaped pin bore is generally a trumpet-shaped expansion of the pin bore diameter, extend-
ing toward the inner or outer pin boss; Figure 7.135. This measure adapts the boss to the 
piston pin as it bends under the gas force. This reduces the maximum edge pressure in the 

boss area.

236

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.135: 
Design principle of a pin bore with 
inner and outer shaped pin bore

Figure 7.136: Influence of profiled pin bores on the structure-borne sound excitation

During noise testing, variants with such shaped pin bores were tested. The results for this 
variation are shown in Figure 7.136 for round pin bores with no ovality. The basic installation 
clearance is a uniform 16 μm.

The inner shaped pin bore already shows a reduction in structure-borne noise compared 

with the round cylindrical boss, and no pin noise can be heard. The combination of inner 

and outer shaped pin bores ultimately has the least noise excitation, comparable to that of a 
5 μm installation clearance in a round cylindrical pin bore.

This also explains why increased clearance due to wear does not necessarily have to lead to 

increased noise, because the ovality and form of the bore can also change, thus providing 

the positive effects described here.

7.8  Cavitation in wet cylinder liners of commercial vehicle diesel engines

237

7.8  Cavitation in wet cylinder liners of commercial 

vehicle diesel engines

In  the  physical  sense,  cavitation  means  the  formation,  growth,  and  sudden  implosion  of 

vapor bubbles in ﬂuids.

Strictly  speaking,  cavitation  refers  to  the  phenomenon  in  which  vapor  bubbles  form  as  a 

result  of  a  drop  in  pressure  below  the  vapor  pressure  curve  at  a  constant  temperature; 
Figure 7.137. In contrast, boiling refers to the phenomenon in which vapor bubbles form as 
a result of an increase in temperature at a constant pressure. This strict view applies only to 

chemically pure ﬂuids, which are never encountered in practice.

Cavitation is a complex phenomenon that is inﬂuenced by many factors. Its complexity is 

illustrated by the fact that physical processes from hydrodynamics, thermodynamics, chem-

istry, plasma physics, and optics are all involved in the cavitation phenomenon [27].

Precise knowledge of the causes and effects of cavitation is a basic prerequisite for under-

standing complex cavitation phenomena in wet cylinder liners of commercial vehicle diesel 

engines. The two main causes for cavitation on the outside of the cylinder liners, which are 

surrounded by coolant, are the potentially adverse local ﬂow conditions for the coolant and 

the vibrations of the cylinder wall caused by gas and inertia forces during a four-stroke cycle.

Figure 7.137: Definition of cavitation

238

7  Engine testing 

Adverse ﬂow conditions are found mainly around very narrow gaps in the coolant channels 

between the cylinder liner and engine block. Very high local ﬂow velocities occur here, and 

locally cause both high dynamic pressure and low static pressure in the coolant. This pro-

motes a tendency toward cavitation at the cylinder liner or the engine block.

During an operating cycle, the piston performs various secondary motion. In particular, these 

involve  multiple  contact  alterations  on  the  thrust  and  antithrust  side,  with  corresponding 

impacts on the cylinder liner. This excites undesired, high-frequency vibrations in the cylinder 
liner [28].

The coolant surrounding the cylinder liner cannot keep up with these vibrations. The local 

static coolant pressure drops below the coolant vapor pressure. When this occurs, cavitation 

vapor bubbles form. If the coolant pressure rises above the vapor pressure again, then the 

cavitation  vapor  bubbles  implode  suddenly.  Their  collapsing  causes  physical  and  chemi-

cal effects, such as high pressure impulses, pressure waves, temperatures, high local ﬂow 

velocities, and light effects (sonoluminescence). This results in the destruction of the material 

on the exterior of the cylinder liner where the coolant ﬂows around it. This phenomenon is 

known as cavitation or pitting.

Repeated occurrence of the cavitation process in each operating cycle leads to erosion of 

the cylinder liner. Depending on how long the engine is operated and the intensity of the 

cavitation  process,  it  is  possible  that  eroded  holes  can  completely  penetrate  the  cylinder 
liner;  Figure  7.142.  Coolant  can  then  ﬂow  into  the  combustion  chamber  or  the  crankcase 
through these holes and can cause severe engine damage. Depending on their intensity, vis-

ible damage to the cylinder liner can occur as a result of cavitation after only a few operating 

hours [29].

Cavitation can occur at any point on the cylinder liner that makes contact with the coolant if 

the local coolant pressure drops below the coolant vapor pressure.

Two typical forms of appearance are characteristic of cavitation on cylinder liners:
■  A typical pattern of damage occurs on the thrust side—or, in rare cases, on the antithrust 

side—in the area of piston contact alteration at the TDC ﬁred.

■  Cavitation damage occurs in the area of very narrow gaps in the coolant channels between 

the cylinder liner and the engine block [30].

7.8.1  Basic principles of cavitation

From a theoretical point of view, cavitation occurs when the static pressure in a ﬂuid drops 

below the vapor pressure associated with the ambient temperature. For ﬂowing media, the 

fundamental equation for cavitation is derived from the Bernoulli equation. Bernoulli’s law for 

ﬂowing media states that the static pressure is reduced in a constriction, while the dynamic 

pressure and the associated ﬂow velocity are increased. It follows that, for the dynamic pres-

sure of incident ﬂow at a constriction:

7.8  Cavitation in wet cylinder liners of commercial vehicle diesel engines

239

p

d

=

p

tot

−

p

st

=

⋅

⋅ρ

2

v

 

1
2

pd:  dynamic pressure

ptot:  total pressure

pst:  static pressure

(cid:85):  density of the ﬂuid

v: 

velocity of the ﬂuid

The characteristic factor for cavitation is the dimensionless cavitation number sigma, also 

known  as  the  cavitation  coefﬁcient.  It  is  calculated  as  the  difference  between  the  static 

pressure and the vapor pressure associated with the ambient temperature, divided by the 

dynamic pressure of the incident ﬂow. If the cavitation number is negative, then cavitation 

will occur in a ﬂow [31].

σ

=

−

p

v

st

⋅

ρ

⋅

2

v

p
1
2

 

cavitation number

(cid:86): 
pv:   vapor pressure as a function of the ambient temperature

7.8.2  The physical phenomenon of cavitation

As mentioned previously, the precise physical deﬁnition of the cavitation phenomenon—vapor 

bubble formation due to a pressure drop below the vapor pressure of the ﬂuid at a constant 

temperature—applies, strictly speaking, only to chemically pure ﬂuids. In practice, however, 

chemically pure ﬂuids are not available. Every ﬂuid, including engine coolant, contains weak 

points (known as nuclei), which are the source of all cavitation events. The formation of vapor 

bubbles due to a pressure drop thus occurs at such weak points, because the ﬂuid breaks 

down preferentially at these points [32].

They include:

■  gas bubbles in the ﬂuid;

■  gas dissolved in the ﬂuid;

■  hydrophobic solid particles, known as pore seeds;

■  gas formation when ﬂowing past ﬁne peaks of surface roughness (bubble eddies);

■  particles with gas inclusions, which often occur in recesses.

240

7  Engine testing 

7.8.3  Types of cavitation

Cavitation events depend on the behavior of the weak points. Therefore, in real ﬂuids, the 
following categories of cavitation are differentiated; Figure 7.138:
■  Gas cavitation

■  Pseudocavitation

■  Vapor cavitation

■  Cavitation in real ﬂows.

Figure 7.138: Types of cavitation

7.8.3.1  Gas cavitation

Gas cavitation is a phenomenon in which a gas dissolved in the ﬂuid undergoes a transition 
to an undissolved state as a result of a pressure drop; Figure 7.138. The bubbles that form 
contain the gas components, which were previously dissolved in the ﬂuid (typically air). If the 

pressure rises again, the bubbles collapse and the gas components dissolve back into the 

ﬂuid.

In comparison with pseudocavitation, Chapter 7.8.3.2, and vapor cavitation, Chapter 7.8.3.3, 

gas cavitation is a relatively slow process that actually dampens the implosion of cavitation 

bubbles occurring with vapor cavitation. In order to minimize this dampening effect when 

measuring cavitation, the engine coolant is degassed in a degassing run prior to measuring. 

Gas cavitation can occur above the vapor pressure curve as well.

7.8  Cavitation in wet cylinder liners of commercial vehicle diesel engines

241

7.8.3.2  Pseudocavitation

The expansion of gas bubbles present in the ﬂuid due to a pressure drop is called pseudo-
cavitation; Figure 7.138. Like gas cavitation, pseudocavitation can also occur above the vapor 
pressure curve.

7.8.3.3  Vapor cavitation

Vapor cavitation, unlike pseudocavitation or gas cavitation, occurs only if the pressure drops 
rapidly below the vapor pressure. The cavitation bubbles that form are ﬁlled with the vapor 
of the surrounding ﬂuid. If the pressure rises again, then these cavitation bubbles collapse 

again with an implosive reduction in volume. This phenomenon is called bubble implosion or 
bubble collapse; Figure 7.138. Very high local pressures, shock waves, ﬂow velocities, and, 
brieﬂy, very high temperatures can occur as a result of this bubble implosion. If the bubble 

implosion also occurs directly adjacent to a material surface, such as a cylinder liner, then 

ﬂuid jets (microjets) may also occur.

These effects cause material destruction in the vicinity of material surfaces. Vapor cavitation 

is  therefore  responsible  for  potential  material  damage  to  material  surfaces.  If  the  bubble 

implosion  is  severe  enough  that  the  bubbles  break  up  into  many  smaller  bubbles,  this  is 

known as transient cavitation [31].

7.8.3.4  Cavitation in real flows

In  practice,  cavitation  occurs  as  a  combination  of  gas,  pseudo-,  and  vapor  cavitation.  As 
shown in Figure 7.138, bubbles ﬁrst grow to a critical radius on the cavitation seeds as a 
result of gas cavitation and pseudocavitation, and when this radius is reached and the pres-

sure correspondingly drops below the vapor pressure curve, this initiates vapor cavitation 

[33].

7.8.4  Cavitation bubble dynamics and  
cavitation bubble collapse

Cavitation bubbles form at weak points, which are distributed unevenly in the ﬂuid, often in 

the form of an entire bubble cloud. The individual bubbles of the bubble cloud are of different 

sizes. After they form, the cavitation bubbles expand if the static pressure in the surrounding 

ﬂuid drops further. Substances dissolved in the surrounding ﬂuid can then diffuse into the 

cavitation bubbles. Many other factors, including thermal and inertia effects, mass distribu-

tion, and compression characteristics, as well as the roughness of material surfaces, affect 

the growth of the cavitation bubbles and bubble implosion [34]. If the static pressure of the 

surrounding ﬂuid increases again, or if the cavitation bubbles ﬂow into areas of higher pres-

sure, then they collapse suddenly with an implosive reduction in volume. This phenomenon 
is referred to as cavitation bubble collapse or cavitation bubble implosion.

242

7  Engine testing 

Depending on the distance between the cavitation bubbles and a solid material surface, cavi-

tation bubble implosion can be classiﬁed as either radial (or spherical) or aspherical. During 

bubble implosion, various effects occur, which cause material destruction in the vicinity of 

material surfaces.

7.8.4.1  Spherical cavitation bubble implosion

If a cavitation bubble is not near a solid material surface, then the bubble implosion is spheri-
cal; Figure 7.139. This also requires constant density, constant dynamic viscosity, and uniform 
temperature distribution in the surrounding ﬂuid. The temperature and pressure distribution 

in the bubble must also be constant. The cavitation bubble grows constantly from its initial 

radius. In this case, the pressure in the cavitation bubble is greater than that of the surround-
ing  ﬂuid.  The  cavitation  bubble  implosion  starts  when  the  maximum  bubble  radius  RM  is 
reached. For a very brief moment, equilibrium exists between the internal bubble pressure 

and the external ﬂuid pressure. If the external ﬂuid pressure then increases above the inter-

nal bubble pressure, then the bubble volume decreases suddenly. The cavitation bubbles 

implode, and very high pressures and temperatures occur in them. The pressure that builds 

up in the surrounding ﬂuid at the bubble boundary is emitted outward as a shock wave after 

passing through the minimum radius.

Figure 7.139: Spherical cavitation bubble implosion

7.8.4.2  Aspherical cavitation bubble implosion

If a cavitation bubble is near a solid material surface, or if there are inertia or thermal insta-
bilities, then the cavitation bubble implosion is aspherical; Figure 7.140 [34]. The cavitation 
bubble grows radially from an initial radius R0 to the maximum bubble radius RM. If the ﬂuid 
ﬂow in the area around the bubble is disturbed by a solid material surface, such as a wall, 

then the cavitation bubble becomes unstable. It implodes in a very speciﬁc manner, and cre-

ates a ﬂuid jet. At the beginning of the implosion or bubble collapse, the side of the bubble 

furthest from the wall folds inward on itself. A ﬂuid jet forms and shoots through the bubble, 

then impinges on the opposite bubble wall from the inside. The wall is deformed into a thin 

7.8  Cavitation in wet cylinder liners of commercial vehicle diesel engines

243

Figure 7.140: Aspherical cavitation bubble implosion

cone. After penetrating the opposite bubble wall, the ﬂuid jet impinges on the adjacent mate-

rial surface. The bubble, now deformed into a torus by the ﬂuid jet, implodes further, also 

emitting shock waves.

If a cavitation bubble implodes in such a manner that the initial volume is reduced by a large 

multiple,  or  if  the  implosion  is  particularly  severe,  then  the  bubble  can  disintegrate  into  a 

whole cloud of smaller bubbles [35]. The individual bubbles in the cloud can each form ﬂuid 

jets in the vicinity of the wall, and these jets can inﬂuence one another as well.

Fundamental knowledge of cavitation bubble dynamics in the vicinity of solid material sur-

faces is particularly crucial as they are the source of material damage [31]. For this reason, 

many investigations have been carried out in the ﬁeld of cavitation bubble dynamics in recent 

years [36]. Scientiﬁc studies have shown that material damage is sure to occur if the dimen-
sional distance parameter (cid:74) is less than two. It is deﬁned as follows:

γ = s
RM

 

distance parameter

(cid:74): 

s: 

RM: 

distance from center of cavitation bubble to material surface

maximum radius of cavitation bubble

The most severe damage occurs if the cavitation bubble makes direct contact with the mate-

rial surface. In this case, the ﬂuid jet reaches the material surface at full speed. The following 

factors are involved in material destruction by cavitation:
■  Fluid jets, which impinge on the material surface with a large impulse value. Very high local 

pressures can occur brieﬂy

■  The high internal temperature and pressures in an imploding bubble, particularly when it 

implodes directly on the material surface

■  Shock waves induced by the bubble implosion.

244

7  Engine testing 

It is still not entirely clear which factor is dominant. New investigations have shown, how-

ever, that it is mainly the mechanical effects, such as high pressures resulting from the ﬂuid 

jet, that are responsible for material damage [31]. In addition, the high temperature peaks—

though they likely play a subordinate role—can contribute to material damage, despite their 

extremely short duration [27].

7.8.5  Cavitation damage in wet cylinder liners

Fundamentally, cavitation on wet cylinder liners can occur at any point that is in contact with 

the coolant if the local coolant pressure drops below the coolant vapor pressure.

With  regard  to  the  pattern  of  cavitation  damage,  two  different  characteristics  have  been 

determined:
■  A more planar cavitation damage, often on the thrust side of the cylinder liner, but in rarer 

cases also on the antithrust side.

■  A more linear cavitation damage, also known as gap cavitation, which often occurs where 

narrow  cooling  gallery  cross  sections  are  found  between  the  cylinder  liner  and  engine 

block. The linear cavitation damage is often identiﬁed slightly above the seal between the 

cooling gallery and the crankcase. In a more advanced state, it can extend over almost the 

entire circumference of the cylinder liner.

Figure 7.141 shows a complete cylinder liner, left, with planar and linear cavitation damage. 
In the right part of the ﬁgure, the different types of cavitation damage are shown under mag-

niﬁcation. As can be seen, the holes resulting from planar cavitation damage have different 
diameters and are not uniformly distributed. The cavitation damage shown in Figure 7.141 
occurred after 900 engine operating hours.

The cross sectional view in Figure 7.142 shows a magniﬁed section through a 6 mm thick 
cylinder  liner  with  cavitation  damage.  As  is  evident,  the  “pitting  corrosion”  caused  by  the 

cavitation does not propagate in a single direction; rather, the distribution is more crooked, 

with locally broadened areas. Therefore, the cavitation damage observed on the surface of 

the cylinder liner is often of only limited informational value with regard to cavitation damage.

Fundamentally,  the  propagation  of  “pitting  corrosion”  due  to  cavitation  is  determined  by 

the stresses arising at the material surface, which are transferred to the components of the 

microstructure. The same applies to the residual stresses present in each material. Depend-

ing on the microstructure, grain size, and the hardness and toughness of the cylinder liner 

material, normal, shear, and residual stresses can arise with varying effects. For example, the 

microstructure of a cast iron liner contains brittle graphite and hard cementite components. 

The normal and shear stresses thus arising can then extend only as far as a boundary, such 

as a graphite layer. This results in a change in the course of the cavitation damage [37].

7.8  Cavitation in wet cylinder liners of commercial vehicle diesel engines

245

Figure 7.141: 
Types of cavitation damage

Figure 7.142: Cross section through a cylinder liner with cavitation damage

246

7  Engine testing 

7.8.6  Cavitation measurement equipment

Cavitation  is  a  complex  and  highly  dynamic  phenomenon,  regardless  of  any  other  inﬂu-

ences on engine operation. The entire cavitation process is therefore very difﬁcult to detect 

for  measurement  purposes  in  a  running  combustion  engine.  Currently,  only  the  effects  of 

imploding  cavitation  bubbles  in  the  coolant  can  be  captured.  The  measurement  method 

for  detecting  cavitation  events  in  a  running  combustion  engine  is  therefore  based  on  the 

measurement  of  local  changes  in  coolant  pressure.  Imploding  cavitation  bubbles  lead  to 

local high-frequency dynamic pressure peaks in the coolant. The intensity of these pressure 

amplitudes is correlated with the severity of the imploding cavitation bubbles. The associ-

ated pressure amplitudes can therefore be used as a measure of potential material damage 

resulting from cavitation.

Special pressure sensors are used for measuring high-frequency dynamic pressure peaks. 

Precisely determining the position of the potential cavitation damage is a prerequisite for the 

placement of the sensors. To this end, the engine is ﬁtted with cylinder liners that are painted 

on the outside. The locations of potential cavitation damage on the cylinder liners can be 

determined precisely, using a special engine running program and speciﬁc cooling system 

conditions. Placing the sensors typically requires a great deal of machining on the engine 

block. Care must also be taken to ensure that the coolant ﬂow is not signiﬁcantly impaired. 
Figure 7.143 shows a cross section through an installed pressure sensor with add-on parts.

Figure 7.144 shows two installed sensors from the interior of an engine (cooling gallery side), 
left, and from the exterior of the engine, right. The sensors are placed in the interior of an 

Figure 7.143: Schematic diagram of a section through an installed measurement point with sensor for 
measuring water pressure

7.8  Cavitation in wet cylinder liners of commercial vehicle diesel engines

247

Figure 7.144: Installed pressure sensors on the engine interior where the coolant flows (left), and on 
the engine exterior (right)

engine so as to avoid inﬂuencing the ﬂow of the coolant. The top sensor is used to measure 

gap cavitation here, and the bottom one is used to measure surface cavitation.

The measurement signals are recorded and numerically processed using a computer-aided 

data acquisition unit (KI meter) specially developed for solving cavitation problems. Further 
processing of the measurement data is done by special PC-based software. Figure 7.145 
shows the complete measurement chain. The data acquisition unit is able to process the 

Figure 7.145: Setup of the entire measurement chain for measuring cavitation

248

7  Engine testing 

data from eight cylinders at the same time. Up to 10,000 operating cycles can be captured 

for each cylinder.

7.8.7  Cavitation intensity factor and signal analysis

The data are validated on the basis of the analysis of the greatest positive high-frequency 

pressure amplitude, which is measured at a predetermined crank angle range in every oper-
ating cycle; Figure 7.146. 

The initial value of the crank angle and the length of the measurement range are determined 

individually for each engine—depending on the angular position of the crankshaft at which 

the  imploding  cavitation  bubbles  occur.  The  local  coolant  pressure  curve  measured  for  a 

measurement  window  is  ﬁrst  conditioned  by  a  high-pass  ﬁlter  so  that  only  the  pressure 

amplitudes that are induced by cavitation bubble implosions ultimately determine the signal 

curve.

Figure 7.146: Signal analysis of the relative local coolant pressure curve

7.8  Cavitation in wet cylinder liners of commercial vehicle diesel engines

249

The greatest positive pressure amplitude in the high-pass ﬁltered signal curve is captured 

and classiﬁed. The cavitation processes, and thus the severity of imploding cavitation bub-

bles,  can  be  very  different  from  operating  cycle  to  operating  cycle,  even  in  steady-state 

engine operation. Therefore, several successive operating cycles must be analyzed in order 

to calculate the cavitation intensity factor, KI. Every measured pressure amplitude is assigned 

to a pressure class based on its level. The number of events in each class is then assigned 

a weighting factor. The classes that represent greater pressure amplitudes are assigned a 

greater weighting factor. In order to compare transient and steady-state measurements with 

each  other,  the  cavitation  intensity  factor  is  uniformly  standardized  to  N  operating  cycles 

(standardization constant). It is calculated as follows:

m
∑ (
=
0
k

n

k

⋅

f
k

)

c

 

=
KI N

⋅

KI:  cavitation intensity factor

k:  class number

m:  maximum number of classes

nk:  number of events per class

fk:  weighting factor

c:  number of four-stroke cycles measured per KI factor

N:  standardization constant

7.8.8  Test bench setup for cavitation measurements

Figure 7.147 shows the test bench setup for cavitation measurements on a six-cylinder in-
line engine. Two pressure sensors are shown symbolically on cylinder 1 for measuring the 

local  changes  in  coolant  pressure.  The  cavitation  process  is  inﬂuenced  by  many  physical 

effects. Therefore, for a qualitative analysis of the results, it is necessary that other physical 

parameters be measured in addition to the local ﬂuctuations in coolant pressure resulting 
from imploding cavitation bubbles. As Figure 7.147 shows, the inlet and outlet temperatures 
of the coolant, the corresponding pressures, and the coolant pressure directly downstream 

of the coolant pump are captured, along with the coolant volume ﬂow rate.

In order to inﬂuence the cooling system’s system pressure and coolant volume ﬂow, regard-
less of the operating condition of the engine, the test bench is also equipped with external 

regulators for the pressure in the cooling system. The coolant pump can be driven externally 

by a controlled electric motor. A coolant pump operation independent of the engine speed 

is therefore a prerequisite for determining various parameters.

250

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.147: Test bench setup for cavitation measurements

The ﬂow conditions can vary greatly within an engine from cylinder to cylinder, and depend-

ing on the type and number of engine auxiliaries through which the coolant ﬂows.

7.8.9  Test run programs for cavitation measurements

Cavitation measurements are particularly helpful if the inﬂuence of individual parameters can 

be determined. The best results are obtained with:

■  steady-state engine operation programs, if the inﬂuence of an individual parameter is to be 

determined; and 

■  transient  cold-warm  programs,  if  the  goal  is  to  determine  the  greatest  cavitation  inten-

sity  under  the  least  favorable  operating  conditions.  Operating  conditions  are  generated 

7.8  Cavitation in wet cylinder liners of commercial vehicle diesel engines

251

Figure 7.148: Transient test run program for cavitation measurements

in which the various factors affecting cavitation intensity overlap. Figure 7.148 shows an 
example of such a program.

7.8.10  Relationship of cavitation intensity to the arrangement of 

the cylinder and the position on the cylinder

Depending on the design of the cooling gallery in the engine and the installed engine aux-
iliaries, Figure 7.147, which are partially integrated in the cooling circuit, the coolant’s ﬂow 
conditions can be very different from cylinder to cylinder. The cavitation intensities, and thus 

the cavitation damage, may therefore vary. Occasionally only one or two cylinder liners in an 

engine will show cavitation damage, whereas the others have only slight or no damage. The 
position of the cavitation damage can also vary from cylinder to cylinder. Figure 7.149 shows 
the cavitation intensities measured on various cylinders at various positions. It also shows 

the results from a steady-state point measurement. As can be seen, the cavitation intensi-

ties  determined  for  the  lower  thrust  side  measurement  positions  are  signiﬁcantly  greater 

than for the upper thrust side positions or those on the antithrust side.

252

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.149: Relationship of cavitation intensity to the arrangement of the cylinders and the measure-
ment position on the cylinder

7.8.11  Influencing parameters

Cavitation in wet cylinder liners can be affected by various parameters. The parameters can 

be fundamentally divided into two main groups:

■  The main group of engine operating parameters includes all the parameters that can be 
affected by the engine operating conditions. Engine operation parameters include, in par-

– maximum peak cylinder pressure and characteristic cylinder pressure curve;

ticular

– load;

– engine speed;

– coolant pressure;

– coolant temperature;

– coolant ﬂow velocity;

– chemical composition of the coolant.

■  The main group of design parameters includes all the design layout options for the piston, 

the  cylinder  liner,  and  the  engine  block,  which  minimize  the  excitation  of  the  cylinder 

liners and optimize the cooling gallery design with regard to cavitation. These parameters 

include, in particular

– various piston types;

– design of the piston skirt proﬁle and the ring belt;

7.8  Cavitation in wet cylinder liners of commercial vehicle diesel engines

253

– piston pin offset;

– installation clearance between the piston and the cylinder liner, and between the cylinder 

liner and the engine block;

– cylinder liner guidance (top stop, mid stop, bottom stop);

– shape of the outside surface of the cylinder liners;

– shape of the cooling gallery contour in the engine block.

7.8.11.1  Influence of engine operating parameters on cavitation

7.8.11.1.1  Influence of engine speed

Figure  7.150  shows  the  inﬂuence  of  engine  speed  on  cavitation  propensity.  Owing  to  the 
fact that the experimental engine is set up on the test bench under near-series production 

conditions, not all of the inﬂuencing factors related to the engine speed could be completely 

eliminated.

depends on the engine speed.

The inﬂuence of the coolant pump, for example, and therefore the coolant ﬂow behavior, also 

Another factor is that, depending on the dataset of the ECU (electronic control unit), various 

characteristic combustion chamber pressure curves and peak pressure values may be set at 

different engine speeds. The excitation of the cylinder liner, caused by the secondary piston 

motion and affecting the cavitation, can therefore be different at different speeds.

Figure 7.150: Influence of engine speed on the KI factor

254

7  Engine testing 

In the experimental engine under test, the changes in the inﬂuence variables presented were 
small  in  the  higher  speed  range,  and  therefore  played  a  secondary  role.  As  Figure  7.150 
shows, the engine speed therefore has almost no direct inﬂuence on the cavitation intensity. 

Only at low and medium engine speeds can a signiﬁcant reduction in cavitation intensity be 

observed. This, however, is mainly the result of the signiﬁcant changes in the indirect inﬂu-

ence variables, and thus does not represent a direct inﬂuence of the engine speed.

7.8.11.1.2  Influence of engine load

Figure 7.151 shows the inﬂuence of engine load on cavitation intensity at constant engine 
speed.  A  clear  correlation  between  load  and  cavitation  intensity  can  be  seen  here.  With 
increasing load, and otherwise identical operating conditions, the cavitation intensity clearly 
increases as well.

Figure 7.151: Influence of engine load on the KI factor at constant engine speed

7.8.11.1.3  Influence of cooling system pressure

On the basis of the Bernoulli equation and the cavitation number sigma derived from it, it 

is  clear  that  an  increase  in  static  cooling  system  pressure  would  theoretically  reduce  the 
cavitation intensity. This fact is also conﬁrmed in practice; Figure 7.152. With increasing static 
cooling  system  pressure,  a  signiﬁcant  decrease  in  cavitation  intensity  can  be  observed. 

Depending on the severity of the cavitation that does occur, the static pressure level neces-

sary to achieve a signiﬁcant reduction may vary greatly from engine to engine. A generally 

7.8  Cavitation in wet cylinder liners of commercial vehicle diesel engines

255

Figure 7.152: Influence of relative coolant pressure on the KI factor

applicable value from which cavitation propensity is signiﬁcantly reduced can therefore not 

be provided. It must be determined for each engine individually. In practice, a static cooling 

system  pressure  that  is  higher  than  the  pressure  resulting  from  thermal  expansion  of  the 

coolant can be achieved only with great technical effort, in the form of an additional pressur-

izing unit. In order to ensure operating safety of the gaskets connected to the cooling system 
and of the radiator, the maximum possible pressure is also limited. Figure 7.152 shows the 
cavitation intensities for steady-state point measurements for various relative coolant outlet 
pressures at a full-load operating point.

7.8.11.1.4  Influence of coolant volume flow rate

The inﬂuence of the coolant volume ﬂow rate, and that of the cooling system pressure, are 
directly related to each other. A greater coolant volume ﬂow leads to an increase in dynamic 

pressure,  and  thus  to  a  reduction  in  static  pressure.  This,  in  turn,  is  associated  with  an 

increase in cavitation propensity.

7.8.11.1.5  Influence of coolant temperature

If it were possible to consider coolant temperature in full isolation, then, theoretically, there 
would be no direct inﬂuence on cavitation. In practice, however, the coolant’s temperature 
cannot be considered in full isolation. Indirect inﬂuence variables bring about changes in the 

temperature.

256

7  Engine testing 

If  the  coolant  temperature  is  increased  to  close  to  the  boiling  point  in  an  open  system, 

then vapor bubbles can form. These generally have a damping effect on the occurrence of 

imploding cavitation bubbles, which decreases the cavitation intensity.

If the coolant temperature is increased in a closed cooling system, then the static pressure 

rises  in  the  system,  because  of  the  thermal  expansion  of  the  coolant,  thus  reducing  the 

cavitation propensity.

Also to be considered is the fact that higher coolant temperatures lead to higher component 

temperatures, and therefore to lower operating clearances. Lower operating clearances, in 

turn, have a positive effect in preventing cavitation. In this context, the critical operating clear-

ances are those between the piston and the cylinder liner, and between the engine block 

and the cylinder liner.

7.8.11.1.6  Influence of coolant composition

It has been empirically demonstrated that, under otherwise identical boundary conditions, 

visible cavitation damage is often very different depending on the coolant used. As measure-

ments have shown, there are no signiﬁcant differences in measured cavitation intensities in 

experiments with different coolants. It is, however, possible that different coolants with the 

same  measured  cavitation  intensity  cause  very  different  levels  of  cavitation  damage.  The 

reason is that a protective coating can form on the cylinder liner depending on the cool-

ant and coolant additives used. This protective coating can have a damping effect on the 

imploding cavitation bubbles. Depending on the composition of the coolant additives, the 

damping effect of the protective coating can be more or less effective.

7.8.11.1.7  Influence of combustion chamber pressure

There is a direct correlation between the peak combustion chamber pressure and the cavita-
tion intensity; Figure 7.153. The cavitation intensity increases with increasing pressure. The 
peak combustion chamber pressure from which a signiﬁcant increase in cavitation intensity 

occurs is different for every engine. Therefore, a general threshold value cannot be provided.

7.8.11.2  Influence of design parameters on cavitation

The main reason for the occurrence of cavitation is the vibrations of the cylinder liner induced 

by the piston and its secondary piston motion.

The group of design parameters that can be used to directly or indirectly affect cavitation 
includes all those engine component measures that can reduce vibrations of the cylinder 

liner  and  allow  optimization  of  the  coolant  circuit  with  regard  to  cavitation.  These  engine 

components include, in particular, the pistons, the cylinder liners, the coolant pump, and the 

engine block itself. Measures involving the guiding concept of the cylinder liners, the cooling 

7.8  Cavitation in wet cylinder liners of commercial vehicle diesel engines

257

Figure 7.153: Influence of combustion chamber pressure on the KI factor

gallery shape in the engine block, and the installation clearances between the piston and 

cylinder liner, and between the cylinder liner and engine block are also part of this group.

For comparisons of the inﬂuence of various design parameters on cavitation, the transient 

engine test program has proven to be effective.

In the transient engine test program, negative effects promoting cavitation are captured in an 

overlapping manner. This program allows the cavitation behavior to be analyzed very quickly 

at  various  engine  speeds,  loads,  and  coolant  temperatures.  Potential  dynamic  effects  are 

also included in the analysis. The highest cavitation intensities can be captured using the 
transient engine test program.

7.8.11.2.1  Influence of piston and cylinder liner installation clearance

There  is  a  clear  correlation  between  installation  clearance  and  cavitation  intensity;  Figure 
7.154. Accordingly, a reduction in the installation clearance leads to a lower cavitation intensity. 
In general, this also applies to the installation clearance between the cylinder liner and the 

engine block. The reduction in installation clearance is limited, however, by seizure resistance.

Initial stages of development serve to determine the minimum possible installation clearance 
and to reduce cavitation intensity with additional design measures on the component. Poten-

tial measures include changes to the piston proﬁle, piston skirt ovality, ovality of the piston 

ring land, piston pin offset, piston crown offset, and ring land clearance. Changes in material 

can also contribute to a reduction in cavitation intensity.

258

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.154:  Influence of piston installation clearance

7.8.11.2.2  Influence of piston type and piston profile

A typical cavitation behavior can often be determined on the basis of the piston type. Figure 
7.155 shows measurement results for an aluminum piston and an articulated piston (formerly 
widespread  type,  with  steel  crown  and  aluminum  skirt).  Compared  with  other  concepts, 

both piston types have a relatively large installation clearance in a cold engine on account of 

the thermal expansion behavior of their aluminum skirts. These two piston types in particu-

lar, therefore, have very high cavitation intensities in the ﬁrst stage change in the transient 

engine  test  program,  immediately  after  starting  the  engine.  This  unfavorable  set  of  condi-

tions is reduced as the engine load and engine coolant temperature increase, because the 

operating clearances become signiﬁcantly smaller. The conditions are no longer present in a 
warm engine. According to Figure 7.155, there is a fundamental difference in level between 
the aluminum piston and the articulated piston. It is evident in all heating stages and is not 

determined by the piston type here, but rather by a different level of optimization.

As Figure 7.156 indicates, there are no signiﬁcant increases in cavitation intensity for steel 
pistons during the ﬁrst stage change, immediately after starting the engine. Among the steel 
pistons  tested,  the  MONOTHERM®  piston  with  a  closed  skirt  had  the  lowest  cavitation 
intensities.  The  optimized  MONOTHERM®  piston  with  the  open  skirt,  however,  also  had 
measured cavitation intensities that were not in the critical range.

7.8  Cavitation in wet cylinder liners of commercial vehicle diesel engines

259

Figure 7.155: Influence of piston type on cavitation behavior

Figure 7.156: Influence of piston type and piston profile on cavitation behavior

260

7  Engine testing 

7.8.11.2.3  Influence of other piston design characteristics

The design of the piston allows a whole series of options for positively affecting cavitation 

■  reducing installation clearance (while ensuring seizure resistance);

■  altering the piston skirt (area, gating, proﬁle, ovality);

intensity. They include

■  piston pin offset;

■  piston crown offset;

■  ring land ovality;

■  ring land clearance;

■  material selection;

■  casting process.

characteristics.

Such changes, however, must not have any negative effects on the stiffness and deformation 

Generally applicable standard values for a cavitation-free design cannot be provided. Each 

change to a design parameter is a speciﬁc individual solution for the engine type being opti-

mized. Therefore, successful optimization measures can be applied directly to a different test 

engine only to a limited degree.

Promising  results  for  reducing  the  cavitation  intensity  can  be  obtained  by  adapting  the 
ovality (piston skirt and crown), introducing piston pin offset, Figure 7.157, and altering the 
ring land.

Figure 7.157:  Influence of piston pin offset on cavitation behavior

7.9  Lube oil consumption and blow-by in the combustion engine

261

7.8.11.2.4  Influence of design characteristics of the cylinder liner and cooling 

gallery shape

In addition to design changes to the piston, the cavitation intensity can also be inﬂuenced by 
changes to the cylinder liner and cooling gallery. Design parameters that have the potential 
to reduce cavitation intensity include

■  optimizing the cylinder liner guidance;

■  optimizing the cylinder liner installation clearance;

■  optimizing the cylinder liner geometry with regard to reducing vibration;

■  optimizing the cylinder liner geometry, in combination with changes to the engine block’s 

cooling gallery, under the aspect of optimizing coolant ﬂow conditions;

■  optimizing the coolant pump, under the aspect of optimizing coolant volume ﬂow rates 

and achieving the highest possible static pressure component.

7.9  Lube oil consumption and blow-by in the 

combustion engine

The important goals of mechanical development of a combustion engine include low blow-

by and minimal lube oil consumption, and thus minimizing raw exhaust gas emissions.

The oil components entering the combustion chamber increase the particle concentration 

when they are carried out in the exhaust gas, which makes exhaust gas aftertreatment more 

difﬁcult [38].

Further optimization of the current low levels of lube oil consumption in combustion engines 

absolutely  requires  precise  understanding  of  the  lube  oil  consumption  mechanisms  inside 
the engine. Such knowledge also helps to expand simulation approaches and their validation.

This article is intended to demonstrate, with examples, the mechanisms leading to lube oil 

consumption and effective actions that can be taken in the development stage.

7.9.1  Lube oil consumption mechanisms in the  

combustion engine

The term “lube oil consumption” generally refers to the amount of engine oil by which the 

amount  of  oil  in  the  engine  is  reduced  over  a  speciﬁed  period  of  time.  Oil  dilution  with 

fuel  and  combustion  products  and  residues  into  the  engine  oil  can  give  the  appearance 

of a positive lubricating oil balance, despite an actual consumption of oil. Particularly when 

using biodiesel, an increased fuel dilution of the engine oil should be expected. Less volatile 

components in biodiesel do not sufﬁciently vaporize in the combustion chamber, and can 

therefore enter the engine oil.

262

7  Engine testing

Figure 7.158: Lubricant balance in the combustion engine [39, 40]

Figure 7.158 shows schematically the various mechanisms as part of a lubricant balance. The 
exact levels of individual components cannot be provided across the board, because they 

vary from engine to engine, giving rise to a wide range of boundary conditions. The greatest, 

most deﬁnitive component of consumption, at 80 to 90%, results from the lubrication of the 

group of friction partners consisting of the piston, piston ring, and cylinder wall. It necessarily 

ends up in the exhaust gas in the form of unburned hydrocarbons (HC). Only a small portion 

of the lubricating oil is burned during combustion and contributes to particle formation with 

other combustion residues [38, 39].

The  proportion  of  hydrocarbons  (HC)  in  the  exhaust  gas  is  referred  to  as  “lube  oil  emis-

sions,” because they originate from the lubricating oil. The oil enters the combustion cham-

ber through various mechanisms, which are described in more detail in this chapter.

Figure  7.159  shows  paths  through  which  engine  oil  enters  the  combustion  chamber.  The 
largest  portion  comes  from  the  cylinder  wall  (1),  which  is  sealed  by  the  piston  and  piston 

rings.  Additional  oil  enters  the  combustion  chamber  through  the  crankcase  ventilation 

system (blow-by)(2), and through the compressor side seal between the center housing and 

the shaft of the turbocharger (2). Another potential path for oil into the combustion chamber 

is through the valve stem seal (3).

7.9  Lube oil consumption and blow-by in the combustion engine

263

Figure 7.159: 
Paths through which engine 
oil enters the combustion 
chamber [42]
1  Cylinder wall-piston rings
2  Crankcase ventilation
2  Turbocharger, compressor 

side

3  Valve stem seal

The  causes  and  mechanisms  of  lube  oil  consumption  and  blow-by  can  be  very  complex 

and  interconnected.  Individual  interactions  between  lube  oil  consumption  and  blow-by  in 
the area of the cylinder wall and piston rings, Figure 7.159, (1), are examined in the following:

■  Severe cylinder distortion can lead to the piston rings sealing insufﬁciently during engine 

operation if they can no longer track the contour of the cylinder because of insufﬁcient ring 

conformability. The results can be high lube oil consumption and/or blow-by.

■  The surface roughness and honing pattern of the cylinder surface permanently affect lube 

oil consumption via the functional behavior of the piston rings.

■  Piston  ring  geometries  that  are  optimized  for  low  lube  oil  consumption,  such  as  sharp 

scraping ﬁrst piston rings, or piston rings with very barrel-shaped running surfaces, can 

lead to increased blow-by—particularly under full load—if the gas force acting on the run-

ning surface forces the ring away from the cylinder wall.

■  Piston ring geometries that are optimally tuned for low blow-by values, such as a low axial 

width of the ﬁrst piston ring, have a positive effect on blow-by behavior at zero load, on 

account of their low ring mass, but can cause increased lube oil consumption under full 

load, because of their lower stiffness.

264

7  Engine testing 

■  The use of compression rings with a deliberate cross-sectional perturbance, in the form 

of  an  internal  bevel  or  an  interior  angle,  can  strongly  inﬂuence  the  twisting  behavior  of 

the piston rings. An additional inclined position in the ring grooves (disk-shaped or roof-

shaped) and optimization of the axial ring installation clearance can have a positive effect 

on blow-by behavior, in particular, as well as on lube oil consumption.

■  In order to optimize lube oil consumption and blow-by, particularly during dynamic engine 

operation, the targeted application of chamfers to the top land and ring lands can affect 

the pressure buildup behind the ﬁrst piston ring in a controlled manner.

■  Brief periods of excessively high pressure between the ﬁrst and second piston rings can 

cause the ﬁrst piston ring to be forced away from the lower ﬂank of the groove, and thereby 

increase the lube oil consumption due to “reverse blow-by,” Chapter 7.9.1.1. A  change in 

volume between these two rings, in the form of grooves, chamfers, or undercuts, and opti-

mization of the gap clearances can lead to faster and more uniform pressure equalization 

in the intermediate ring space.

7.9.1.1  Lube oil consumption in the frictional system of the piston, piston rings, and 

cylinder wall

As  previously  described,  the  tribological  system  of  the  piston,  piston  rings,  and  cylinder 

wall is mainly responsible for overall lube oil consumption in the engine, and therefore for 
a signiﬁcant portion of lube oil emissions. This portion is determined by the three lube oil 
consumption mechanisms depicted in Figure 7.160.

Figure 7.160: Schematic diagram of lube oil consumption mechanisms in the tribological system of 
the piston, piston rings, and cylinder wall [44]

At  operating  points  with  low  load,  the  oil  can  collect  on  the  top  land  and  above  the  ﬁrst 
piston ring. The high acceleration and deceleration forces “throw-off” these oil drops directly 

into the combustion chamber or increase the oil ﬁlm thickness on the cylinder wall. Carbon 

buildup on the top land can also lead to scrape-off of the oil from the cylinder wall during the 
upward stroke; Figure 7.160 a).

7.9  Lube oil consumption and blow-by in the combustion engine

265

The second way for lubricating oil to enter the combustion chamber is known as “reverse 
blow-by”; Figure 7.160 b). The oil enters the combustion chamber in the form of a liquid or 
a mist. The pressure in the area between the ﬁrst and second piston ring can sometimes 

be higher than the pressure in the top land gap or the combustion chamber. This pressure 

differential causes the gas to ﬂow back through the ring gap of the ﬁrst piston ring into the 

combustion chamber. This portion of oil can also increase the oil ﬁlm thickness on the cyl-

inder wall.

Another potential way for lubricating oil to enter the combustion chamber is “evaporation” of 
the lubricant from the hot cylinder wall; Figure 7.160 c). During combustion, expansion, and 
exhaust strokes, the high wall temperatures in the combustion chamber brieﬂy cause the oil 

ﬁlm to heat up. This causes partial evaporation of the oil. This behavior is highly dependent 

on the lubricating ﬁlm thickness and the condition of the oil on the cylinder wall. A higher fuel 

content in the oil ﬁlm causes oil to be evaporated to a greater degree. This effect contributes 

signiﬁcantly to lube oil emissions [41].

7.9.1.2  Lube oil consumption through valve stem seals

With the development of effective and wear-resistant valve stem guides and seals, the prob-
lem of lube oil consumption in this area is of secondary signiﬁcance in modern engines.

7.9.1.3  Lube oil consumption through crankcase ventilation (blow-by)

The  gas  entering  the  crankcase  from  the  combustion  chamber  through  the  piston  rings 

(blow-by) is partially charged with unburned fuel and oil from the cylinder wall. After the liquid 

components have largely been separated, the gas, with the remaining oil components, is fed 

back to the combustion cycle. This means that the engine’s lube oil consumption is directly 

affected by the blow-by quantity and the quality of the oil separation.

Typical lube oil consumption proportions through crankcase ventilation are currently in the 

range of 1 to 2 g/h. They are deﬁnitely interesting because the total lube oil consumption in a 

modern engine can be well below 10 g/h at individual operating points. Further optimization 

of the oil separator in the blow-by recirculation systems thus remains an unchanged goal.

7.9.1.4  Lube oil consumption and blow-by in the turbocharger

Blow-by  gases  enter  the  oil  return  of  the  turbocharger  because  of  the  pressure  gradient 

between the compressor or turbine and the crankcase, and thus collect with those from the 
combustion chamber; Figure 7.161. Lube oil consumption through the shaft seal takes place 
on the compressor side, where the oil enters the combustion chamber with the charge air, 

and on the turbine side, where it enters the exhaust gas. This sealing behavior is dependent 

on the pressure ratios at the shaft seal and the wear condition of the turbocharger.

266

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.161: Leakage paths for oil and blow-by of the turbocharger

Figure  7.162  shows  the  results  of  an  endurance  test  on  a  test  bench,  where  the  engine 
was  operated  with  an  external  lubrication  system  for  the  turbocharger  at  the  end  of  the 

endurance run. This allowed the lube oil consumption and blow-by in the turbocharger to 

be measured.

Figure  7.162:  Lube  oil  consumption  and  blow-by  in  engine  and  turbocharger  (2.0-liter,  4-cylinder 
diesel engine after a 500 h endurance run)

7.9  Lube oil consumption and blow-by in the combustion engine

267

7.9.2  Lube oil consumption measurement methods

A basic distinction is made between conventional (gravimetric and volumetric) and analytical 

measurement methods.

Figure 7.163 shows an overview of potential lube oil consumption measurement methods.

Figure 7.163: Overview and classification of lube oil consumption measurement methods

The conventional measurement methods include the following:

■  Gravimetric:

– Drain-and-weigh method over a speciﬁc time unit

– Continuous weighing

■  Volumetric:

– Static oil level measurement

– Continuous oil level measurement

The  analytical  measurement  methods  are  divided  into  those  with  tracers  (indicators)  and 

those without tracers. The tracer methods can be divided into radioactive and nonradioac-

tive:

■  Radioactive:

– Tritium method

– Bromine method

– …

7  Engine testing 

268

■  Nonradioactive:
– SO2 method
– Chlorine method

– Pyrene method

– ...

high costs.

In conventional measurement methods, the consumed oil is measured. Particularly at low 

levels of lube oil consumption, therefore, very long running times are needed, which means 

The analytical tracer methods, in which the concentration of a tracer (marker) from the engine 

oil is measured in the exhaust gas, can sometimes provide high accuracy in a relatively short 

running time. The creation of lube oil consumption maps is thus ideal here.

Such a system, with sulfur as the tracer, is shown schematically in Figure 7.164, using an 
engine oil with a deﬁned sulfur content. By detecting the SO2 concentration in the exhaust 
gas, the lube oil consumption in the engine can be derived.

Figure 7.164: System for lube oil consumption measurement with sulfur as a tracer

Direct,  fast  online  measurement,  however,  is  nearly  or  completely  impossible  for  transient 

engine operation when using tracer methods.

Experiments on modern engines show that highly dynamic operation of an engine is exactly 

what can lead to increased lube oil consumption, and that the most signiﬁcant potential for 

improvement is hidden right here. Lube oil consumption maps based on steady-state opera-

7.9  Lube oil consumption and blow-by in the combustion engine

269

tions do not reveal this potential. Only knowledge of the inﬂuence on lube oil consumption 

of rapid changes in load and speed can enable correct design measures to be derived and 

properly implemented for the piston or piston rings, for example.

With tracerless analytical measurement methods, the lube oil emissions in the exhaust gas 

can be determined directly. The underlying measurement principle is based on the condi-

tion that the hydrocarbons present in the exhaust gas, which can be associated with the 

fuel and the engine oil, have different molecular chain lengths. In order to measure lube oil 
emissions, a mass spectrometer optimized for this application is used, and the long-chain, 

low-volatility HC components associated with the engine oil are separated out [39, 40]. The 

HC molecules from the fuel and the engine oil are then measured separately using adjust-

able mass ﬁlters.

Figure 7.165 schematically shows a typical mass spectrum for exhaust gas with the usable 
measurement ranges for gasoline and diesel fuel [39, 40]. Because of the chemical similari-

ties between HC molecules from engine oil and diesel fuel, measurements on diesel engines 

are particularly challenging. Implementing suitable calibration of the measurement system 

using the oil present in the engine and a known exhaust gas mass ﬂow rate, the oil concen-

trations measured in the exhaust gas can be converted to a mass of lube oil emitted per 

unit of time.

Figure 7.165: Mass spectrum of exhaust gas and usable measurement ranges for gasoline and diesel 
fuel [40]

The derived lube oil emissions indicate the amount of oil that is carried off unburned in the 

exhaust gas. Fundamentally, however, the measured lube oil emission values should always 

be  viewed  in  relation  to  the  total  lube  oil  consumption.  This  also  includes  the  burned  oil 

270

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.166: Schematic diagram of the mass spectrometric measurement system for analyzing lube 
oil emissions in exhaust gas [43]

components that are not captured as well as any leakages. In the case of a lubricating oil 

quantity balance, the fuel and water components that enter the oil and the residues arising 

from combustion must also be taken into consideration.

Figure 7.166 sketches out the Lubrisense 1200 measurement system with heated direct inlet 
system [43], which is used at MAHLE.

Since  the  exhaust  gas  can  be  collected  immediately  downstream  of  the  exhaust  valve,  it 

is possible to determine lube oil emissions selectively for each cylinder, and thus to detect 
cylinder-speciﬁc lube oil consumption problems. This rapid, online measurement of lube oil 

emissions can capture the oil mass that is carried off in near real time, even for transient test 

cycles with rapid load and speed changes.

MAHLE  has  developed  special  transient  test  cycles  for  such  online  lube  oil  consumption 

measurements,  which  are  used  in  engine  development  to  reliably  identify  the  operating 

ranges that are critical for lube oil consumption.

7.9.3  Lube oil consumption map  

and dynamic lube oil consumption

Figure 7.167 shows an example of the lube oil consumption map of a 4-cylinder gasoline 
engine. Lube oil consumption was determined using the described rapid lube oil emission 

measurement system based at 42 quasi-steady-state measurement points (2 to 4 minutes 

per operating point).

7.9  Lube oil consumption and blow-by in the combustion engine

271

Figure 7.167: Lube oil consumption map for a 2.0-liter, 4-cylinder gasoline engine, using rapid lube oil 
consumption measurement; measurement points 1 and 2 measured conventionally

The long-term lube oil consumption was also determined during an endurance test using 

the  drain-and-weigh  and  weighing  methods  at  two  selected  operating  points.  In  order  to 

make deﬁnitive statements about the actual quantity of lube oil consumed, the engine was 

subjected to a steady-state endurance test for 3 times 5 hours at each operating point. This 

established  a  good  correlation  between  the  lube  oil  consumption  values  and  the  lube  oil 

consumption map.

engine oil.

Precise matching of these values cannot be achieved in principle, because the drain-and-

weigh method collects not only the oil emitted with the exhaust gas but also all the compo-

nents from the entire lubricating oil balance, including all the fuel components that enter the 

This relationship between lube oil emissions and actual lube oil consumption can be inﬂu-

enced by a number of external boundary conditions. This includes, for example, fuel quality. 

Admixing biocomponents to fuels affects the evaporation behavior and therefore the mecha-

nisms that are most critical for lube oil consumption. Combustion methods with associated 

mixture formation can also play a decisive role in evaporation behavior because of a different 

fuel amount in the cylinder wall oil ﬁlm. A correlation between the air-fuel mixture and the 

measured lube oil emissions has already been demonstrated [41].

Figure  7.168  shows  the  lube  oil  emissions  of  individual  cylinders  over  time  during  a  tran-
sient test cycle. Here again, the lube oil consumption as measured by the drain-and-weigh 

method matches the cylinder-speciﬁc lube oil emissions very well, and no concrete lube oil 

consumption problem can be detected.

272

7  Engine testing 

Figure 7.168: Lube oil emissions of individual cylinders over time during a transient test cycle

Figure 7.169: Cylinder-specific lube oil emission maps for a turbocharged (top) and naturally aspirated 
(bottom)  gasoline  engine  (lube  oil  emission  levels  relative  to  the  exhaust  gas  mass  of  the  complete 
engine)

7.9  Lube oil consumption and blow-by in the combustion engine

273

Figure 7.169 shows additional typical lube oil emission maps, as they can be measured for 
gasoline  engines  with  and  without  turbocharging.  Cylinder-selective  measurements  were 

performed on engines of similar types and with similar displacements.

Turbocharged engines typically reach their maximum lube oil emissions at medium speeds 

in the range of maximum torque. Naturally aspirated engines, on the other hand, generally 

reach their maximum lube oil emissions at full load in the range of maximum engine speed. 

These phenomena can be observed with measurements of various turbocharged and natu-
rally aspirated engines with different displacements, and are presumably best explained by 

the location of the maximum combustion chamber pressures in the operating map.

Another maximum point for lube oil emissions is often found during overrun at higher speeds 

and,  as  a  rule,  is  signiﬁcantly  more  distinct  for  naturally  aspirated  engines  than  for  turbo-

charged engines because of the different pressure ratios in the intake section.

For engines with concrete lube oil consumption problems, experience often shows that it is 

difﬁcult to identify an operating range that is most responsible for the average lube oil con-

sumption. Indications from actual vehicle operation can typically be helpful here.

Critical operating ranges can be clearly identiﬁed in a transient lube oil consumption measure-

ment run using the online lube oil emission measurement system presented here.

Figure 7.170 shows the results of measurements from such a transient lube oil consump-
tion measurement run on a naturally aspirated gasoline engine, which was performed with 

different piston ring packs. The measurement in the initial state (piston ring pack 1) shows 
extremely high lube oil emissions in overrun mode and at low speeds; Figure 7.170 (see oper-
ating range B). In this case, this knowledge allowed targeted changes to be made to the ring 

pack. A direct comparison of the results of both test variants, running the same measure-

ment program, shows that the optimized piston ring pack 2 no longer shows any signiﬁcant 

lube oil emissions in operating range B.

The increased lube oil emissions that occurred in overrun mode and at high speeds, Figure 
7.170 (operating range A), is present at the same level in the measurements for both piston 
ring packs. The changes made to the piston rings, therefore, did not lead to any signiﬁcant 

reduction in lube oil emissions for the indicated operating range A, and these must therefore 

be addressed with other measures.

The average total lube oil consumption calculated from the lube oil emission curves does, 

however, show a signiﬁcant drop in lube oil consumption for piston ring pack 2. This result 

was conﬁrmed in actual vehicle operation.

Beyond  such  quasi-steady-state  phenomena,  there  is  a  further  potential  for  improvement 

by analyzing dynamic lube oil emission processes. Spikes in lube oil emissions can often be 

found under highly dynamic changes in load and speed, and their amplitudes and damping 

times also affect the average lube oil emissions.

274

7  Engine testing

Figure 7.170: 
Lube oil emission curve in cyl-
inder 1 of a naturally aspirated 
gasoline engine in a transient 
program using different piston 
ring packs

The online lube oil emission measurement system presented here allows extensive param-

eter studies to be performed systematically. Suitable measures can be derived from these 

results, allowing the lube oil consumption to be minimized through targeted changes to the 

piston and piston rings, optimizing them as a system.

7.9.4  Influence of intake manifold vacuum  

on lube oil consumption in the gasoline engine

In the past, the inﬂuence of intake manifold vacuum on lube oil consumption was typically 

marked  by  visible  blue  smoke  in  vehicles  without  exhaust  gas  aftertreatment  systems.  In 

overrun  phases  at  high  speed,  the  intake  manifold  vacuum  extends  into  the  combustion 

chamber during the valve overlap phase, which increases “reverse blow-by” and thus the 

quantity of oil drawn into the combustion chamber.

Figure 7.171 shows the result of a series of tests in which the lube oil consumption behavior 
of a naturally aspirated V8 engine was measured as a function of the intake manifold vacuum 

occurring  in  the  overrun  phase  of  a  dynamic  running  program  with  engine  braking.  The 

intake manifold vacuum is varied by the throttle valve position in the overrun phase.

7.9  Lube oil consumption and blow-by in the combustion engine

275

Figure 7.171: Influence of intake manifold vacuum on lube oil consumption and lube oil emissions for 
a dynamic running program with engine braking on a naturally aspirated V8 gasoline engine

The lube oil consumptions shown here were determined using two different measurement 

methods. In order to measure the lube oil consumption using the conventional drain-and-

weigh method, the engine ran the dynamic running program with engine braking for a long 

period of time. In parallel, the lube oil emissions in the exhaust gas were captured online 

using mass spectrometry.

In this case, a strong increase in lube oil consumption occurred at very low absolute intake 

manifold pressure levels. This relationship was conﬁrmed by further measurements on other 

naturally aspirated engines.

The advantage of the online lube oil emission measurement system is the online support for 

the application engineer responsible for the operating map, who can thus make appropri-

ate changes with regard to lube oil emission levels, such as the throttle valve control in this 

example. The necessary boundary conditions can thereby be established for further reduc-

tions in lube oil consumption in order to meet future requirements.

7.9.5  Trade-off between friction power loss and  
lube oil consumption using the example of  
tangential force reduction on the oil control ring  
of a passenger car diesel engine

The combined application of the new measurement methods described here for measuring 

lube  oil  consumption  and  friction  power  loss  is  a  valuable  development  tool  for  optimally 

resolving  conﬂicting  objectives  when  selecting  design  parameters.  This  is  demonstrated 

276

7  Engine testing

below  using  the  example  of  tangential  force  Ft  on  the  oil  control  ring  of  a  passenger  car 
diesel engine [45].

The inﬂuence of tangential force changes in the piston rings on friction power loss is derived 

from the results presented in Chapter 7.3. The relatively high tangential force on the oil con-

trol ring provides the greatest potential for reducing friction here.

The  results  show  an  almost  linear  inﬂuence  of  changes  to  the  tangential  force  on  friction 

mean effective pressure, which makes it possible to calculate additional support points (see 

Chapter 7.3.3.5).

7.9.5.1  Influence of tangential force on the oil control ring on lube oil emissions 

In order to investigate the inﬂuence of a change in tangential force on the oil control ring 
on lube oil consumption, cylinder-speciﬁc lube oil emission measurements were performed 

on a passenger car diesel engine with mixed equipment. The test engine is identical to the 

engine used in the friction power loss measurements described in Chapter 7.3.

Starting with a base tangential force on the oil control ring of 28.0 N, variants of the two-

piece coil spring loaded beveled ring with identical geometry and reduced tangential forces 

of 17.7 N, 13.5 N, and 9.1 N were installed. All other components of the piston group, such 

as  the  piston,  piston  rings  in  the  ﬁrst  and  second  groove,  and  the  cylinder  bore  remain 

unchanged in comparison with the base experiments. 

Figure 7.172 shows the results of the measurements as difference maps for the oil control 
ring variants with reduced tangential forces, wherein the values shown represent the change 

in lube oil emissions for the complete engine in comparison with the base ring variant.

Figure  7.172:  Difference  maps  for  lube  oil  emissions  for  the  tested  oil  control  ring  variants  with 
reduced tangential force in comparison with the base variant (lube oil emissions values are represen-
tative of the complete engine)

7.9  Lube oil consumption and blow-by in the combustion engine

277

A reduction in tangential force to 17.7 N leads to a maximum increase in lube oil emissions 

of 18 g/h at maximum speed and 75% relative load. This represents nearly double the oil 

mass emitted in this operating range, while the lube oil emission behavior in large areas of 

the operating map exhibits much smaller or negligible changes. With a further reduction of 

the tangential force to 13.5 N, an increase in lube oil emissions can be seen over nearly the 

entire operating map. In the low speed range, however, the increase is very slight. The maxi-

mum increase in lube oil emissions in comparison with the base occurs under full load in the 

high speed range. The lube oil emission difference map for the oil control ring variant with 

the smallest tested tangential force of 9.1 N shows the greatest increase in lube oil emissions 

in comparison with the base variant. Particularly in the area of high loads and speeds, above 

around 3,000 rpm, there is a disproportionately large increase in lube oil emissions relative to 

the other variants tested. This variant also shows the highest lube oil emissions values in the 

other areas of the operating map. The degradation is much more moderate here, however.

7.9.5.2  Comparison of the influence of tangential force on the oil control ring on 

lube oil emissions and frictional behavior

A reduction in tangential force of the oil control ring has varying effects on lube oil consump-

tion and friction, depending on the operating range.

Figure 7.173 shows the changes in friction mean effective pressure and lube oil emissions 
in comparison with the base variant as a function of the reduction in tangential force on the 

Figure 7.173: Changes in friction mean effective pressure and lube oil emissions as a function of the 
reduction  in  tangential  force  on  the  oil  control  ring  (values  averaged  within  the  six  operating  map 
areas)

278

7  Engine testing

Figure  7.174:  Correlation  of  changes  in  lube  oil  emissions  and  friction  mean  effective  pressure  for 
reductions  in  tangential  force  on  the  oil  control  ring  (values  averaged  within  the  six  operating  map 
areas)

oil control ring. The operating map is divided into six adjacent load and speed ranges. The 

curves shown are the average of changes within each area.

A comparison of the curves for changes in friction mean effective pressure in the deﬁned 

areas shows a signiﬁcant inﬂuence due to speed and a slight inﬂuence due to load. A reduc-

tion in tangential force on the oil control ring leads to a reduction in friction mean effective 

pressure across the entire operating map. The curves for changes in lube oil emissions, in 
contrast, show the opposite behavior. Lowering the tangential force leads to increased lube 

oil emissions over the entire operating map. The curves for changes in lube oil emissions in 

the deﬁned areas demonstrate a strong inﬂuence due to load and speed on the observed 

amount of change in lube oil emissions. The increased lube oil emissions at lower speeds, 

up to about 2,000 rpm, rise almost linearly as a function of the tangential force, and are rela-

tively moderate at 2–4 g/h. In the area of medium and high speeds, the change in lube oil 

emissions shows exponential behavior as a function of the tangential force, which is further 

ampliﬁed as the load and speed increase.

The curves shown in Figure 7.174 describe the degradation of lube oil emissions for each 
change in friction mean effective pressure that results for each of the tested variants. This 

makes the conﬂict of objectives between the two target parameters evident in the various 

load and speed ranges.

 

7.9  Lube oil consumption and blow-by in the combustion engine

279

Figure 7.175: Influence of reduction of tangential force on the oil control ring on the specific contribu-
tions of fuel consumption and lube oil emissions to CO2 savings in the NEDC

7.9.5.3  Influence of tangential force of the oil control ring on fuel consumption,  

lube oil emissions, and the CO2 balance in the NEDC

A crucial question is the inﬂuence of the results shown on fuel consumption and CO2 emis-
sions  in  the  relevant  statutory  test  cycles.  In  addition  to  fuel,  lube  oil  emissions  also  con-
tribute to the CO2 balance because of the oxidation of unburned hydrocarbon compounds 
in the exhaust gas system, particularly in the exhaust gas aftertreatment system. Using the 

results of friction power loss and lube oil emission measurements, the simulation processes 

described in Chapter 7.3.4 and [12] were used to calculate the effects of changes in tangen-
tial force on fuel consumption, lube oil emissions, and the CO2 balance in the NEDC. Under 
the  theoretical  assumption  of  complete  conversion  of  the  emitted  oil  mass  into  CO2,  the 
increases in lube oil emissions in the NEDC and the associated changes in CO2 emissions 
were computed.

Figure 7.175 shows the speciﬁc contributions of both fuel consumption and lube oil emis-
sions to the reduction in CO2, as well as the total CO2 savings as the sum of the two. A 
change in the contribution to CO2 emissions caused by burned lubricating oil components 
is not considered here. The fuel consumption savings for the maximum tested reduction in 
tangential force of 18.9 N ( (cid:166) engine (cid:39) Ft = 75.6 N ) result in CO2 savings of about 1.1 g/km 
in the NEDC. This is accompanied by increased CO2 emissions of about 0.4 g/km due to 
the simultaneous increase in lube oil emissions. In the present case, a signiﬁcant proportion, 
about 30%, of the CO2 savings resulting from the reduction in fuel consumption achieved 
are canceled out.

280

7  Engine testing

As the present case demonstrates for the example of the tangential force on the oil control 

ring, design measures for reducing friction losses in the piston group can make a crucial 
contribution to reducing CO2 emissions in combustion engines. For all measures taken to 
reduce friction in the piston group, however, the effects on lube oil consumption behavior 

must  always  be  considered  as  well.  The  disadvantageous  lube  oil  consumption  resulting 

from the reduced tangential force on the oil control ring can be minimized—for example, by 

adjusting the ring running surfaces to improve scraping performance, or by optimizing the 

ring  cross  section  to  increase  ring  conformability.  Such  measures  are  always  considered 

for a systematic optimization of the piston ring pack during series production development.
Dictionary/Glossary

Piston designations and dimensions

01  Piston diameter 

02  Piston crown

03  Combustion bowl 

04  Bowl rim

05  Crown thickness

06  Elongation length

07  Ring belt 

08  Top land

09  Ring land 

11  Oil ring groove 

12  Ring carrier

13  Oil return notch 

14  Compression height

15  Total height

16  Skirt length

17  Lower height

18  Cooling gallery

19  Piston pin boss

10  Compression ring groove

20  Pin bore

21  Piston pin circlip groove
Pin boss spacing

23  Upper pin boss spacing 
(upper distance between 
bosses)

24  Piston skirt

25  Window

26  Cast undercut 

27  Skirt bottom recess 

28  Fuel injector recess

29  Register

30  Inner height

Dictionary/Glossary

285

Shapes of piston crowns

01  Flat crown with valve  

04  Bowl for direct gasoline 

05  Direct diesel injection 

injection piston with strati-
ﬁed charge

piston with deep, undercut 
bowl

pockets

02  Cap

03  Flat bowl

06  Direct diesel injection 
piston with ﬂat bowl

Top land, ring belt

01  Scuff band of top land

04  Ring land

02  Groove ﬂank

03  Groove root

05  Single ring insert

06  Double ring insert

286

Pin boss support

Dictionary/Glossary

01  Supporting ribs

02  Piston pin boss

03  Pin bore

08  Connecting rod shank

14  Pin bore side reliefs

09  Connecting rod bushing

15  Oil pockets/slots (gener-

10  Tapered support

ally deeper than side relief, 
made with a smaller tool 
and larger tolerances), only 
for improved lubrication

04  Pin lubricating holes

11  Stepped support

05  Parallel bin boss support

12  Oval pin bore

06  Solid bin boss support

13  Shaped pin bore, barrel-

07  Connecting rod small end 

(small end bore)

shaped expansion at one 
or both sides 

Dictionary/Glossary

287

Piston pins, piston pin circlips

01  Outer surface

02  Inner surface

03  End surface

04  Taper 

05  Outer diameter

06  Inner diameter

07  Length

08  Wall thickness

09  Taper diameter

10  Taper length

11  Taper angle

12  Circlip made of round wire, 
no hook, wire snap ring 
with no hook

13  Circlip made of ﬂat wire, 

with hook, square wire 
snap ring with hook

14  Radial wall thickness

15  Hook length

16  Pin bore diameter,  
nominal diameter

17  Wire diameter

18  Circlip diameter,  
unassembled

19  Circlip groove diameter

20  Circlip groove width

21  Circlip height

22  Gap width when assem-

bled to nominal diameter 
(16)

23  Hook radius

24  Axial wall thickness

288

Piston types

Dictionary/Glossary

01  Solid-skirt piston 

The single-piece piston 
has no interruptions in its 
supporting cross sections 
between the piston crown, 
ring belt, and skirt, except 
for any oil return notches.

08  Composite piston (St/Al) 
A multipiece piston; the 
piston crown (made of 
forged steel) is connected 
to the piston skirt (made 
of aluminum alloy) using 
high-strength bolts.

02  Full-skirt piston 

09  Steel crown

The skirt has a continuous 
rotational surface.

03  Window-type piston 

The skirt has a recess near 
the pin bores.

04  Box-type piston 

Skirt recess outside of the 
pin bores, all the way to the 
end of the skirt.

05  FERROTHERM® piston 
Articulated piston, multi-
piece piston; piston crown/
ring belt and skirt are con-
nected by the piston pin.
06  MONOTHERM® piston 
Single-piece steel piston

10  Outer cooling cavity

11  Inner cooling cavity

12  Aluminum skirt

13  Antifatigue bolt 

Multiple screw joint

14  Composite piston (St/St) 
A multipiece piston; the 
piston crown (made of 
forged steel) is connected 
to the piston skirt (here 
also made of forged steel) 
using high-strength bolts.

15  Thrust piece

16  Antifatigue bolt 

Central screw joint

07  MonoWeld® piston 

17  Oil groove 

Friction-welded steel piston

Provides the oil supply

18  Steel skirt 

19  Composite piston (St/NCI) 
A multipiece piston; the 
bore-cooled piston crown 
(made of forged steel) is 
connected to the piston 
skirt (here made of nodular 
cast iron) using high-
strength bolts.

20  Nodular cast iron skirt

21  Pin bore bushing

22  Slide shoe 

Provides the cooling oil 
supply

23  Locator pin 

Locates crown with respect 
to the skirt 

24  Crossﬂow holes 

Oil passage between outer 
and inner cooling cavities

Dictionary/Glossary

Piston cooling

289

01  Spray jet cooling 

Oil is fed via nozzle from 
the crankcase, or via 
conrod and bore in the 
small end

02  Diesel piston with salt 
core cooling gallery 
Infeed through cast funnel; 
oil is fed via nozzle from 
the crankcase

03  Salt core cooling gallery

04  Funnel (cast)

05  Gasoline piston with salt 
core cooling gallery

06  Piston with cooled ring 

carrier 
Drilled infeed bore; oil is 
fed via nozzle from the 
crankcase

07  Cooled ring carrier

08  Drilled oil infeed
09  MONOTHERM® piston 

With closed cooling gallery

10  FERROTHERM® piston 

With shaker pockets in the 
skirt

11  Composite piston 

Oil is fed via nozzle from 
the crankcase

12  Outer cooling cavity

13  Inner cooling cavity

14  Bore-cooled cooling 

cavity piston  
(composite piston) 
Cooling oil is fed via 
conrod and slide shoe to 
the inner piston cooling 
cavity

15  Cooling oil bore

16  Slide shoe

17  Pressure oil bore

18  Cover plate

290

Dictionary/Glossary

Piston pin offset (schematic)

Offset of the pin axis from the longitudinal piston axis

01  Crankshaft rotation, as seen from the control 

side

02  Thrust side

03  Piston pin offset toward the thrust side; typi-
cally noise offset and/or to prevent wet liner 
cavitation

04  Antithrust side

thermal offset

05  Offset toward the antithrust side; typically 

06  Longitudinal piston axis (cylinder axis)

07  Offset piston pin axis

08  Connecting rod

Technical terminology

Blow-by 

see Blow-by gas

Blow-by gas 

Burning mark 

Catching efﬁciency 

Gas that passes from the combustion chamber, past the piston rings, into 
the crankcase

Piston ring face marks indicative of local overheating between the piston 
ring and the cylinder running surface due to lack of oil

For evaluating piston cooling, indicates the percentage of the oil delivered 
by the cooling oil nozzle that ﬂows back into the crankcase from the 
drain hole(s) on the piston

Cavitation 

Local material loss on the water side of a wet cylinder liner due to the 
interaction of several physical processes

Dictionary/Glossary

Cold-start scufﬁng 

Local wear between the piston and the cylinder liner, due to lack of clear-
ance or lubricating oil when the engine is started

291

Compression height 

Distance between the centerline of the piston pin and the edge of the 
piston crown (top edge of the top land)

Compression ring 

see 1st piston ring and 2nd piston ring

Cooling gallery 

Cooling oil cavity(ies) in the piston crown / ring belt area for thermally 
relieving the piston

Crankcase ventilation 

Gas passage for the combustion gases that enter the crankcase

Cylinder liner 

Liner inserted in the engine block

Cylinder surface 

Inner surface of the cylinder bore

Gap clearance 

Spacing of the piston ring ends in the installed condition

Honing 

Machining process to produce a deﬁned topographical structure of the 
cylinder surface

Installation clearance 

Difference between the inner diameter of the cylinder liner and the largest 
piston diameter at room temperature

Keystone ring 

Piston ring with tapered side faces on one or both sides

KI factor 

KI meter 

Knock intensity factor

Device for quantitatively evaluating extreme variations in pressure, such 
as knock strength or knocking intensity in the combustion chamber or 
during a cavitation attack

Knock control 

Dynamic control of the ignition point to prevent knocking combustion

Knocking 

Irregular combustion of the fuel-air mixture, with some high pressure 
peaks

Knocking damage 

Damage, particularly to the piston top land, due to knocking combustion

Lateral force 

Part of the combustion force exerted on the piston that acts perpendicu-
larly on the cylinder via the piston skirt

Normal force 

see Lateral force

Oil control ring 

see 3rd piston ring

Ovality 

Pin bore 

Piston 

Shape of the relaxed piston ring, such that the contact pressure on the 
cylinder surface is uniform in the installed state

Bore for supporting the piston pin in the piston

Movable part of the combustion chamber

Piston coating 

Protective coating on the piston skirt, tribologically matched to the cylin-
der bore

Piston cooling 

Heat dissipation and temperature reduction of the piston using engine oil

Piston crown 

The part of the piston that bounds the combustion chamber

292

Dictionary/Glossary

Piston pin 

Connecting member between the piston and the connecting rod

Piston pin offset 

Offset of the piston pin axis relative to the longitudinal piston axis

Piston ring 

Slotted, self-tensioning ring

1st piston ring 

First piston ring toward the combustion chamber side, also called top 
ring. Compression of combustion air or gas mixture, and support of gas 
pressure in the operating cycle, conduction of generated heat to the 
cylinder surface, and, to a slight degree, scraping of the residual oil from 
the cylinder surface

2nd piston ring 

Middle ring, support of the remaining gas pressure due to blow-by past 
the ﬁrst piston ring, control of pressure ratios in the ring belt, scraping of 
oil from and conduction of generated heat to the cylinder surface

3rd piston ring 

Homogeneous distribution of the oil for lubrication of the piston group/
cylinder bore tribological system and scraping of excess oil

Rectangular ring 

Basic shape of a piston ring with a rectangular cross section

Ring carrier 

Cast-in part made of Ni-resist in the area of the top ring groove in diesel 
pistons in order to improve the ring groove wear resistance

Ring conformability 

Ability of a piston ring to adapt to the noncircularity of the cylinder surface

Ring gap 

Open ends of the piston ring

Running surface 

see Cylinder surface

Scraper ring 

see Oil control ring

Secondary piston motion  Motion of the piston transverse to its longitudinal axis during an expan-

sion stroke 
see also Skirt ovality

Shaped pin bore 

Pin bore with deﬁned convex end(s)

Shrink-ﬁt connecting rod  Also called ﬁxed-pin connecting rod; connecting rod with a piston pin 
that is ﬁrmly seated in the small end of the connecting rod thanks to a 
controlled interference ﬁt

Side faces 

Axial surfaces of the piston ring or piston ring grooves

Skirt collapse 

Permanent deformation of the piston skirt

Skirt ovality 

Noncircular shape of the piston skirt, so that a deﬁned contact behavior 
is achieved in the cylinder

Top dead center wear 

Wear on the cylinder surface at the top dead center (combustion cham-
ber side) of the ﬁrst piston ring 

Top land 

Twist 

Area between the edge of the piston crown and the upper ﬂank of the 
top ring groove

Torsional deformation of a piston ring cross section due to a groove or 
chamfer on one ring side of the inner diameter