The main advantage of automobiles over the railway is that the driver determines
the trajectory of the vehicle. In other words, motor vehicles can be steered and are
not tied to any deﬁned track. The steering assembly is part of the chassis. With the
exception of aerodynamic forces, all the forces acting between the vehicle body
and the road are transmitted via the chassis. The tasks of the chassis are typically
divided into vertical, longitudinal and lateral dynamics. The lateral momentum is
largely a function of the steering system in conjunction with the suspension and the
tires.

The components of the steering system are the steering wheel, steering column,
steering gear and tie rod (steering linkage) (Fig. 1.1). The driver gives his steering
commands through the steering wheel. These are transferred via the steering
column to the steering gear. Nowadays, the steering gear is usually implemented as
a rack-and-pinion drive. It translates the rotary motion into a linear motion. The
linear motion is transmitted to the wheel carrier via the tie rod with its ball joints.
As the wheel carrier is not directly linked to the steering axle, the wheel is forced
to perform a rotary motion around the steering axle. The lateral forces caused by
the inclination of the wheel cause the desired yawing moment of the vehicle and
thus the movement around the curve. To reduce the forces the driver has to apply
when turning, the steering gear usually provides a support for the force of the
driver. Steering systems with such a support are called power- or servo-assisted
steering systems. The steering system has to allow for predictable and comfortable
driving without suppressing useful feedback to the driver. At the same time dis-
ruptive interferences coming from the road surface and the wheels should be kept
away from the driver.

This steering handbook is aimed at experts working on the design and con-
struction of vehicle chassis professionally, as well as students and lecturers at
universities. It covers the scientiﬁc fundamentals of steering systems in motor
vehicles. In addition, it documents the present state of the art and identiﬁes current
trends. Here, we make use of the expertise of many renowned experts from
industry and academia.

The ﬁrst few chapters deal with the history, the basic principles, and the dif-
ferent types of steering systems as well as the requirements they have to meet. We
shall focus on steering kinematics, the requirements of driving dynamics, occur-
ring vibrations, the steering experience of the driver, and the basic functional
design (Chaps. 1–8). Chapters 9–15 deal with the different components of the
steering system, from the steering wheel to the tie rod. We shall discuss the
different types of steering gears such as hydraulic power steering (HPS) or electric
power steering (EPS). Special types of steering systems such as the superimposed
steering system (Chap. 16), four-wheel steering (Chap. 17) and steer by wire
steering (Chap. 18) provide a signiﬁcant number of additional functions. Chapters
19 and 20 deal with electronic stability control, driver assistance in steering sys-
tems and test systems for steering systems and offer an outlook on future trends.

1 Introduction and History

3

1.1 Deﬁnition and Delimitation

The purpose of the steering system is to provide the driver with the possibility of
lateral vehicle guidance, i.e. to inﬂuence the lateral dynamics of the vehicle. It is a
system that connects the driver with the steered wheels of the vehicle. In most
cases, turning the steering wheel causes a rotational movement of the steered
wheels around the steering axles. This pitching of the (steered) wheels creates
lateral forces which turn the vehicle around the vertical axis while driving. This
manual covers the dynamics of this steering process in connection with the vehicle
and the necessary components. These are the steering wheel, the steering column,
the steering gear, the tie rods, the steering assistance and the components necessary
for their control and power supply. As for the components of the axle we refer to
the specialist literature (cf. Heißing and Ersoy 2007 or Reimpell and Betzler
2005). In addition we shall discuss special designs such as superimposed steering,
rear-wheel steering, steer by wire, and active suspension, as well as driver assis-
tance systems, which are closely related to the steering system. This book is
limited to the steering systems of passenger cars (also referred to as vehicles in this
book). The steering systems of racing cars, commercial vehicles, motorcycles,
airplanes and trains will not be discussed in detail.

1.2 Task and Signiﬁcance of the Steering System

Road vehicles are controlled by the driver almost entirely via the steering system.
For trafﬁc safety, it is crucial that the vehicle precisely follows the course set by
the driver on the basis of the course of the road and the trafﬁc situation and largely
retains it (Braess and Seiffert 2007, p 580). The driver must always have the
reassuring feeling that the vehicle responds predictably and reliably to his steering
input. To ensure a high quality directional stability, it is crucial that the steering
input is promptly translated by the steering system and the vehicle in the expected
way, so that the driver can recognise changes of the course and, in turn react to
them.

Developers of steering systems therefore have to consider numerous demands

and tasks to achieve a customer-friendly design:

• Sufﬁciently low steering wheel torques and a narrow steering wheel angle

required for parking

• Ease of movement, sensitivity, accuracy, a high degree of directional stability,

sufﬁcient immediacy and spontaneous responsiveness

• Pronounced road contact, responsiveness of tire-road adhesion
• Automatic return to the central position, good centering, stabilising behaviour in

any driving situation

• Compensation of disturbance variables stemming from road surface irregulari-

ties, drive, braking, and irregularities of the tires

4

P. Pfeffer and H. Ulrich

• Adequate absorption to suppress self-induced vibrations of the vehicle
• Compliance with the crash safety requirements and passenger safety regulations
• Low energy consumption
• Sufﬁciently low noise level
• Vibrational stability (no self-induced vibrations)
• Low wear and low maintenance over the entire vehicle life cycle.

1.2.1 Basic Types

The steering of two- or multi-axle road vehicles is generally affected by changing
the angle between the vehicle’s longitudinal axis and the centre planes of some, or
all, of the vehicle wheels (Matschinsky 2007). The oldest type is the turntable
steering, a design in which a rigid axle is turned around its centre (Fig. 1.2a). This
turntable steering is commonly used in coaches and trailers. The same effect can be
achieved by turning the front section of the vehicle towards the rear. This type of
steering system is called articulated steering (Fig. 1.2b) and is primarily employed
in machines and special purpose vehicles. A disadvantage for the turntable and
articulated steerings may arise when disturbing forces occur, stemming from their
reduced footprint and their long lever arm. This so-called kingpin offset at hub
equals half the track width.

Modern road vehicles are almost exclusively steered at the front wheels with a
so-called Ackermann steering. In the case of rigid axles this is designed with a
continuous tie rod (Fig. 1.2c), in the case of independent suspension a split design
of the tie rod is used, as shown in Fig. 1.2d in diagram form (cf. Chap. 4).

Fig. 1.2 Basic types of vehicle steering systems (Matschinsky 2007)

1 Introduction and History

1.2.2 Designs

5

The two standard designs of mechanical steering systems, as shown in Fig. 1.3, are
recirculating ball steering and rack-and-pinion steering. Because of its reduced
steering force recirculating ball steering is used mainly in the commercial vehicle
sector and to some extent in SUVs, while rack-and-pinion steering is the most
common approach in the passenger car segment. With the increase in car weight,
purely mechanical steering has been gradually replaced by hydraulically assisted
steering systems. Rack-and-pinion hydraulic power steering (HPS) has prevailed
over recirculating ball hydraulic power steering, as it has proved to be a cheaper
option.

The supporting power of HPS is provided by a volume ﬂow, which is usually
generated by a vane pump. This pump is driven by the internal combustion engine.
A pump operating independently of the internal combustion engine is used for
electro hydraulic power steering (EHPS). The ﬂow rate can be controlled in some
HPS systems and in all EHPS systems. This leads to very smooth and easy steering
when parking. With increasing travel speed this ﬂow rate is lowered to achieve a
higher steering wheel torque to increase the stability of the vehicle. In addition to
the hydraulically assisted steering systems, electrically assisted steering systems
(electric power steering—EPS) are becoming more common. In these systems, the
supporting power is generated by an electric motor, which is powered by the
electrical system on board. Depending on the location of the electric motor in the
steering system, the EPS can be subdivided into different designs (cf. Chap. 15).
In the superimposed steering system a synthetically generated steering angle is
added to or subtracted from the steering angle given by the driver. Here, an
ordinary hydraulic or electric steering system is ampliﬁed by a steering angle
actuator.

Fig. 1.3 Breakdown of the standard designs of mechanical steering systems

6

P. Pfeffer and H. Ulrich

1.3 History of Lateral Dynamics

In the early days of mankind single-axle carts were often drawn by animals or
humans. Behind a long drawbar the cart followed. It was only when the driver
himself was sitting on the cart that he could feel the forces acting on the steering
axle. These are caused by different rolling resistance and irregularities on the road
surface. For that reason the ﬁrst and often very heavy steam vehicles were
designed as tricycles with only one steered wheel (Fiala 2006). The single steered
front wheel causes much smaller interference torques that need to be compensated
by the driver. This explains why the ﬁrst steering systems were partially
self-locking.

The early motor vehicles in their present form were shaped by Gottlieb Daimler
and Carl Benz. While Gottlieb Daimler devoted himself to the motorisation of
existing vehicles such as carriages or velocipedes, Carl focused his attention on the
problem of steering right from the beginning. In his Patent-Motorwagen of 1886
(Fig. 1.9) he eliminated the disturbances by means of fork steering with a zero
offset radius, i.e. axial force ﬂuctuations generated by irregularities of the road
surface could not impact the actuating force. In contrast, axle pivot steering with
its offset radius of half a track width is impeded very strongly. For this reason, this
steering technique is nowadays only used for trailers, carriages, and special pur-
pose vehicles. The steering systems of modern motor vehicles are derived from the
axle pivot steering of Carl Benz’s Patent of 1893 (cf. Sect. 1.3).

The inﬂuence of the steering system on vehicle behaviour was recognized quite
early. In the annual issues of the periodical “Der Motorwagen” VII–X (from 1904
onwards) various theories of the sideway skid were published (Zomotor 1991).
The engineers were particularly concerned with the question of how many and
which of the wheels of the vehicle should be driven or steered. In 1907, in a lecture
to the Berlin Automotive Engineering Society, Dr. Fritz Huth aptly summed up the
following guiding principles:
1. “Any means to increase the friction on the ground is advantageous not only for

the drive, but also improves steering and reduces skidding.

2. It is advisable to steer all four wheels of the car.
3. It is always advisable and sometimes even necessary to drive each of the four

wheels.

of the car.

4. In cars with a two-wheel drive, the superiority of a front-wheel drive compared
to a the rear-wheel drive is so marginal, that the additional complications
resulting from combining steering and locomotion are not worth the effort.
5. The centre of gravity of the vehicle should be as close as possible to the middle

6. It is desirable that the relationship between friction and load is further inves-

tigated for different tires and road conditions.”

Thus the potential of four-wheel steering to improve driving behaviour was
recognised even in the early phase of the automobile. Interestingly, in the same

1 Introduction and History

7

Fig. 1.4 Schematic view of the standard steering system from 1930 (from Becker et al. 1931)

year a study was published by Lanchester of the “Institution of Automobile
Engineers” (IAE), in which for the ﬁrst time the term ‘oversteering’ was men-
tioned in connection with the phenomenon of sideways skidding (Fig. 1.4).

A further important step towards understanding the fast turning was the reali-
sation that a tire needs a slip angle to transfer the lateral forces. This insight is
attributed to Georges Broulhiet. In 1925 he published a report to the French
Institution of Civil Engineers entitled ‘The Suspension and the Automobile
Steering Mechanism’. These studies were certainly furthered by the ﬁrst intro-
duction of low-pressure tires by the Michelin Company for Citroën. But these tires
produced the new safety-affecting phenomenon of shimmy to the steered wheels.
Shortly afterwards Becker et al. (1931) published an in-depth analysis with

8

P. Pfeffer and H. Ulrich

proposals to solve the ‘shimmy in automobile steering systems’ which became the
most common steering design of the time (Fig. 1.11). In the context of these
studies the ﬁrst tire measurements were performed on a roller drum test rig. At
around the same time, Sensaud de Lavaud worked on the mathematical theory of
the relation between shimmy and rolling motion in Paris. He showed that the
wheels must be uncoupled at the axles to prevent the vehicle from rolling. It was
he who patented the swing axle in 1928. This design for driven rear axles domi-
nated our streets until the sixties of the last century. Well-known examples of this
design were the VW Beetle or the Tatra 87. De Lavaud was also the creator of the
principle of the descending roll axle, i.e. the roll center is very low at the front of
the vehicle, while it is located at the level of the suspension at the rear axle. One
disadvantage was the resulting self-steering behaviour characterized by over-
steering, which was, however, considered to be desirable at the time. In the
Mercedes Benz Type 380 of 1933 a combination of decoupled front wheels and a
descending roll axle was implemented. For the ﬁrst time front wheels were linked
to elastically mounted wishbones and mounted on unguided coil springs. This
compliance enabled the wheel to move to the back when encountering obstacles,
thus marking the beginning of elastokinematics.

Vehicle dynamics and self-steering behaviour were ﬁrst systematically studied
in the nineteen-thirties. The term understeering, which had been introduced by
Lanchester, was complemented with the terms oversteering and neutral behaviour.
These terms were ﬁrst published by Maurice Olley in 1938 (Fig. 1.5), although he
had already investigated vehicle dynamics at General Motors for many years
before. As early as 1931 he had studied the importance of roll steer and the
inﬂuence of tire pressure on vehicle stability. Later he established the deﬁnition of
under- and oversteering, depending on the slip angles occurring at the front and
rear axles. If these slip angles were greater at the front axle than at the rear axle,
this was described as understeering, while the opposite was deﬁned as over-
steering. When these angles were similar at both axles, the vehicle behaviour was
described as neutral. Nowadays, this deﬁnition is no longer used and has been
replaced by a deﬁnition based on the occurring steering wheel angle gradient in
relation to the lateral acceleration (see Chap. 5).

The above terms over- and under-steering are related to the stationary circular
movement of a vehicle. At the same time the ﬁrst transient driving tests were
conducted (Stonex 1941). Stonex introduced the so-called checkerboard test, a
drivability test similar to the step steering input.

By the end of the nineteen-thirties the theoretical treatment of stationary driving
conditions had already been established. Our understanding of the transient vehicle
behaviour was signiﬁcantly enhanced by Riekert and Schunck (1940) in their
ground-breaking study on the driving mechanics of rubber-tired motor vehicles.
For the ﬁrst time, they analytically solved the motion equations of a simpliﬁed
vehicle model, which today is referred to as the single-track model. The two
degrees of freedom used for the equation were the yaw and the sideslip angle, and
even the aerodynamics were taken into account. Interestingly,
their analysis
concluded that all the vehicles of that time were unstable, even at low speeds.

1 Introduction and History

9

Fig. 1.5 First studies on vehicle dynamics by Olley (1934) (from Dixon 1996)

But these instabilities occurred only at high lateral acceleration and were produced
by the saturation of the lateral traction of the tires. This paradox was only solved
with the introduction of steering elasticity into the theoretical examination of
vehicle behaviour by Fiala (1960). The reduction of lateral tire stiffness by the
steering elasticity had already been recognised by Fujii (1956). Based on the
ﬁndings of Riekert and Schunck, many other practical and theoretical studies
followed in the nineteen-forties. The ﬁrst basic theory of the pneumatic tire was
formulated by Von Schlippe and Dietrich (1942). This theory describes the rela-
tionship between cornering stiffness, lateral tire stiffness, and the chronological
sequence of the lateral forces subject to the slip angle.

Inspired by aircraft stability analysis, Milliken, Whitcombe, and Segel pub-
lished a series of fundamental studies on vehicle behaviour at the IMechE in 1956
(Segel 1956). They extended Riekert’s and Schunck’s vehicle model to include the

10

P. Pfeffer and H. Ulrich

additional degree of freedom of rolling and conducted thorough stability tests.
Böhm (1961), Schmid (1964), and Mitschke (1968) pointed out that driving sta-
bility is not the same as directional stability. From then the studies on the steering
feel of vehicles began. At the time the vehicles differed a lot in the steering
characteristics and the required steering wheel torque. The driver, as a ‘controller’,
was also taken into account. Segel (1964) presented the ﬁrst reference values for
optimally perceived steering wheel torque gradients as well as damping and
friction in the steering system. Reference should be made here to the very com-
prehensive summary of the historical development of vehicle dynamics by Mil-
liken and Whitcomb (1956) with an extensive bibliography. Other historical
contributions can be found in Dixon (1996) or in Zomotor (1991). The theoretical
foundations of vehicle dynamics were ﬁrst summarised by Mitschke in his
“Dynamik der Kraftfahrzeuge” (Dynamics of Motor Vehicles) ﬁrst published in
1972. The current fourth edition remains the most comprehensive work on this
subject.

In 1966 Ralph Nader (1996) published his “Unsafe at any Speed”. In this book he
highlighted how critically unsafe the cars marketed at the time were. Among other
things, he denounced the extreme oversteering driving behaviour of the Chevrolet
Corvair, which led to many fatal accidents. Because of the strong political pressure
afterward, the automotive industry started to improve the safety of their products
and push the research into vehicle dynamics. Another consequence of the criticism
was the launching of the Experimental Safety Vehicle (ESV) program by the
NHTSA (National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration), a sub-agency of the
U.S. Department of Transportation. Its aim was to identify objective parameters for
a safe vehicle. These efforts resulted in a series of standardized drivability tests and
test methods, though they did not succeed in ﬁnding any comprehensive limits for
the safety of the vehicle or the design of the steering system.

Due to unsatisfactory driving behaviour of the vehicles, better axle suspensions
und safer vehicle designs were developed. Cars with swing axles disappeared from
the market and were replaced by inherently understeering vehicles. This was
realized by equipping front-heavy vehicles with a front-wheel drive. The most
well-known example of this design is the Volkswagen Golf which was launched in
1974. Regarding the axle suspensions, the trend was towards independent sus-
pensions, as they allowed an easier resolution of the conﬂicting goals. To improve
steering and braking behaviour a negative offset radius and the Weissach axle were
introduced in the nineteen-seventies. Increased attention was paid to the kinematic
effects such as the roll steer and elastokinematics.

Other milestones included the introduction of the anti-lock braking system
(ABS) in the nineteen-seventies and the large-scale production of four-wheel
steering systems in the nineteen-eighties (see Chap. 17). With the introduction of a
(electronic stability program—ESP) an even greater
yaw-moment control
improvement of the stability of the vehicle was obtained compared to four-wheel
steering, so that the latter system was forced out of the market again. But in recent
years, four-wheel steering is once more in the ascendant. The superimposed
steering system (Chap. 16) has been reserved to the optional equipment of

1 Introduction and History

11

premium vehicles up to now. The same applies to systems which inﬂuence the
yawing moment via drive torques, the so-called torque vectoring. In recent years,
the introduction of driver assistance systems has come to the fore. Many of those
systems are based on the steering or use the steering as an actuator (Chap. 19).
Here we shall only mention steering torque overlay systems and the parking
assistant. Chapter 20 presents an outlook on future systems.

1.4 The History of Vehicle Steering Systems

With the development from towed vehicles to powered vehicles, from a chassis
with rigid axles to a single-wheel chassis and the constant increase of vehicle
speeds and trafﬁc requirements, demands on the steering equipment of vehicles
have become more and more complex.

For motorised vehicles, the hitherto proven turntable steering for carriages was
replaced by the Ackermann steering. To reduce the steering forces various types of
mechanical steering gears were developed over the decades, until ﬁnally in the
nineteen-ﬁfties hydraulic power steering systems were introduced for commer-
cially available cars. These were complemented by electric power steering systems
in the nineteen-nineties. Advances in mechatronics ﬁnally enabled the serial
production of active steering systems.

1.4.1 Turntable Steering

Transom and turntable steering were invented in the Celtic and Roman era. In the
Roman chariot (Fig. 1.6) the front axle could swing around the linchpin through
which it was connected to the drawbar and its shafts. The front of the chariot was
supported by the transom under the perch and thus maintained in a horizontal
position.

Turntable steering allowed wide steering angles and hence a good steerability
of the vehicle. There was however the danger of tilting the chariot, when the axle
was turned strongly in curves. For towed vehicles, the turntable steering proved to
be satisfactory. The steering was affected only slightly by bumps in the track, since
the tensile forces acting in the steering direction counteracted the resistances of the
track surface.

Because of the limitations of available materials and the slow speeds which
could be attained by horse-drawn vehicles, the steering systems made only slow
progress in the following centuries. The basic principle of turntable steering was
retained, although the transom and the linchpin were gradually replaced by ball
rows and ball joints.

12

P. Pfeffer and H. Ulrich

Front Axle

Friction Piece

Longitudinal Bar

Drawbar
Shaft Arms

Linchpin

Fig. 1.6 Roman chariot with turntable steering, Eckermann (1984)

1.4.2 The Ackermann Steering

Increasing passenger transport and higher demands on the comfort and speed of
the vehicles promoted the evolution of the coach chassis, until, in 1816, the car-
riage builder Georg Lankensperger received the royal privilege from the Bavarian
Court of producing a type of axle pivot steering which made use of steering arms
and tie rods.

The characteristic feature of this steering architecture is that the wheels of an axle
are mounted on steering knuckles, which are pivotable about almost vertical steering
axles. In a curve the inside wheel has to be turned to a narrower angle than the outside
wheel. In addition, the extensions of the axles of the left and right front wheels have
to intersect at a point which is on the extension of the rear axle (Fig. 1.7).

In 1818 Georg Lankensperger had his invention patented by his friend Rudolf
Ackermann under the number 3212 in England, which is the reason for its des-
ignation as Ackermann steering.

1.4.3 The Steering of the First Motor Vehicles

The matter of steering gained additional relevance with the development of
lightweight, high-speed petrol engines and the ﬁrst motor vehicles by Gottlieb
Daimler and Karl Benz.

1 Introduction and History

13

Steering Level
Tie Rods

Steering Axles

Fig. 1.7 Lankensperger’s axle pivot steering with a continuous tie rod, Eckermann (1998)

Daimler’s ﬁrst automobile in 1886 emerged from a carriage (Fig. 1.8), the rear
wheels of which were driven via a belt drive. The steering system was a turntable
steering, which was operated by the driver via a steering tiller. The tiller was used
to rotate the steering column, which—via a pinion and a turntable—turned the
front axle around a central stud. In spite of the low travel speed of the carriage car
—about 10 km/h—the steering system was suitable to only a limited extent. Due to
the large lever arm between the wheel and the swiveling axis, obstacles which
were passed by one of the wheels produced steering forces which were difﬁcult to
master by the driver at the tiller.

Benz solved this problem when he developed his Patent-Motorwagen in 1886
(Fig. 1.9) by using only one front wheel which, like a bicycle, was steered by fork
steering.

The rotation of the steering column, which was effected by turning the tiller,
produced, via the pinion and the rack, a displacement of the steering rod. This in
turn rotated, via the steering arm as the lever arm, the steering fork with the front
wheel.

A disadvantage of the vehicle was its low tipping stability, which led Wilhelm
Maybach in 1889 to develop his “Stahlradwagen” (Fig. 1.10), a chassis which was
entirely independent of the principles of carriage construction. Like Benz, he was
inspired by the principles of bicycle construction.

Maybach transferred the movement of the steering tiller via a V-shaped pitman
arm and two tie rods to the front wheel forks. As Maybach had no knowledge of

14

P. Pfeffer and H. Ulrich

Tiller

Fig. 1.8 Daimler motor carriage with turntable steering, Walz (1983)

Turntable

Steering Column

Tiller

Pinion
Rack

Lever Arm

Steering
Fork

Fig. 1.9 Benz Patent-Motorwagen with fork steering

1 Introduction and History

15

Steering Tiller

Tie Rod

Steering Arm

Fig. 1.10 Maybach Stahlradwagen with fork steering, Walz (1983)

the Ackermann steering architecture, which had already been patented in England
in 1818, the steel-spoked wheels with solid rubber tyres of the Stahlradwagen
remained parallel to each other even in curves.

After Ackermann, Bollée received a second patent for axle pivot steering in
France, and Benz received the third patent for the same solution in 1893. He
employed it for the ﬁrst time on his Victoria automobile. Despite its signiﬁcantly
improved steerability the steering forces affecting the vehicle were still very
strong. In the following years better steering gears were developed, with which
virtually every new automobile was equipped by around 1900 (Fig. 1.11).

Fig. 1.11 Steering system in
a vehicle with a rigid axle

Steering Wheel

Steering Column

Steering Gear

Steering Knuckel Arm

Tie Rod

Drop Arm

Steering Link

Steering Arm

16

P. Pfeffer and H. Ulrich

1.4.4 Mechanical Steering Gears

Steering gears transmit the movement of the steering wheel to the steering linkage
and thus to the front wheels. In addition, the forces acting on the wheels are
transmitted via the steering gear to the steering wheel as manual force and steering
torque. The steering gear essentially determines the steerability and manoeuvra-
bility of the vehicle. The transmission ratio of the steering gear has to be designed
in such a way that, on the one hand, the driver can apply the required steering
torques in any situation, while on the other hand the number of turns of the steering
wheel should not get too high when cornering.

Mechanical steering gears have gone through various stages of development.
Development was mainly pushed in the United States, where ﬁrst the Electric
Motive Power Co. and then the development departments of the automotive
manufacturers expanded their efforts into the evolution of the steering gear. After
spur gears and screw-and-nut type steering gears, worm gears with wheel sectors,
ﬁngers, rollers, and recirculating balls (Fig. 1.12) were introduced onto the market.
P. W. Northey invented the worm-and-wheel steering gear. If the worm is set in
motion by a turn of the steering wheel, the wheel sector which touches the worm is
turned and drives the pitman arm.

This system was revised by Henry Marles, who introduced his design of a
“drive shaft steering” in 1913. A steering ﬁnger which is stationary or mounted on
roller bearings engages into the thread of the steering worm and transmits the
rotational movement of the worm into a pivoting movement of the pitman arm.
Ten years later Robert Bishop received a patent for his simpler cam-and-roller

steering gear with a conical roller.

Finally, the recirculating ball gear was developed. The worm has a round thread
with recirculating balls, which drive the steering nut. The teeth on the nut then
transmit the movement onto the steering linkage.

Together with the issues of wear and adjustability, the aspects of friction and

efﬁciency have been a main driving force for the evolution of steering gears.

The one-ﬁnger steering system is commonly known as Ross steering
(Fig. 1.13). Since the nineteen-thirties this type of steering system has been

Worm Gear 
with Gear Segment

Worm Gear
with Finger
(partly with
ball bearing)

Worm Gear 
with Single or 
Double Roller

Worm Gear
with Recirculating 
Balls

Rack&Pinion
Gear

Fig. 1.12 Basic designs of steering gears

1 Introduction and History

Fig. 1.13 ZF Ross steering

17

produced by the company ZF Zahnradfabrik Friedrichshafen for passenger cars
and commercial vehicles.

Rack-and-pinion steering gears (Fig. 1.12) represent another step in the evo-
lution of steering drives. Rack-and-pinion steering systems proved to be inex-
pensive and—due to the direct transmission of the steering forces to the tie rods—
to have a high degree of rigidity, which is advantageous in particular for the
steering precision, though it increases the bumpiness of the steering. By bearing
the steering housing in rubber and using elastic clutches in the steering column the
bumpiness and transmission of vibrations to the driver could be reduced, though
this negatively affected the steering precision.

With the reduction of friction in the steering gears an additional damper had to
be introduced to reduce the steering vibrations and the bumpiness. In rotary
steering gears it was often attached to the idler arm or the drag link. In
rack-and-pinion steering systems, with tie rods at the end of the rack, the vibration
damper could be arranged parallel to the rack or integrated into the steering unit.

1.4.5 Power Steering Drives

Despite all the advances of the mechanical steering gears a need for an auxiliary
power arose, which would improve the steerability of the vehicles without com-
promising their manoeuvrability. Vehicles were getting heavier and heavier and
with the introduction of pneumatic tires with low pressure, the steering forces

18

P. Pfeffer and H. Ulrich

steadily increased. By the mid-nineteen-forties the steering torques for heavy
passenger cars in the USA reached values of up to 80 Nm on dry concrete,
although very indirect total steering ratios of 24:1 were applied, Davis (1945).

Chrysler was the ﬁrst automotive manufacturer to introduce a power-assisted
steering system for their models New Yorker and Imperial in 1951. This steering
system was based on the patents of Francis W. Davis. Davis, however, had
developed his power steering almost 30 years earlier. He can be regarded as the
inventor of power steering.

Davis studied engineering at Harvard University from 1906 to 1910 and began
his professional career at Pierce-Arrow in Buffalo, where he worked in manu-
facturing at ﬁrst, then in test drives for trucks and ﬁnally in the sales department.
His ﬁrst invention in the ﬁeld of steering systems was a rubber block for the
steering column which could absorb the shocks coming from the road into the
steering wheel. But he believed that the real solution to all the steering problems
was the development of a power-assisted steering system. Although the ﬁrst
patents had already been granted for power steering systems for ships and
vacuum-powered steering systems for wheeled vehicles, there was no principle
which had prevailed for the application in motor vehicles.

Davis left Pierce-Arrow in 1922 and started to freelance as an engineer. Due to
his experience with hydraulic presses acquired during his time at Pierce-Arrow he
opted for hydraulics as the assisting power when he developed power steering. He
tried to apply the classic principle of the hydraulic drive to the motor vehicle. This
consisted of a pressure supply with a pump, a reservoir, and valves which would be
opened only when hydraulic pressure was required in the drive. But in this he
failed because of the many sealing and leakage problems which occurred under
high pressure.

Davis asked himself whether he could not reverse the steering system and let
the oil ﬂow without pressure as long as power assistance was not required, so that
the valves would only close to build up pressure when steering was used.

He then developed the principle of the open-center valve. Based on a steering
gear with a shaft and a nut he designed and built the ﬁrst power steering gear,
together with his mechanic and toolmaker George W. Jessup. The ﬁrst power
steering gear. As there were no suitable hydraulic pumps available on the market,
he developed an additional 3-piston pump which was driven by the combustion
engine.

In 1925 he equipped his own 1921 Pierce-Arrows Roadster with power steering
and optimized the system. In 1926 he applied for the patent on the principle of
power-assisted steering in the U.S. (Fig. 1.14).

The rotation of the steering shaft is converted via a pinion-and-nut connection
into a linear movement of the inner valve sleeve of the open-center valve (29). Due
to the variation of the opening cross sections (control edges) of the open-center
valve, a pressure difference builds up in the cylinder chambers (27, 28) and the
piston and the outer part of the valve (26) move until the initially introduced shift
is compensated.

1 Introduction and History

19

Left Chamber

Pinion/Nut

Right
Chamber

Steering
Post

Piston

Steering Edges

Valve 
Sleeves

Open-Center
Valve

Fig. 1.14 Patent drawing (US 1,790,620) for the hydraulic steering gear of F. W. Davis

Davis’s steering gear, strictly speaking, is a hydro-mechanical position feed-
back control. With this principle, however, the driver needs to apply barely any
force. This means that in a power steering system, the driver receives hardly any
feedback concerning the forces acting on the wheels as steering torque.

Davis recognised this disadvantage. The steering could be easily operated by
the touch of a ﬁnger on the steering wheel and was therefore hard to sense. He
therefore developed a preloaded spring mechanism that was integrated into the
steering valve. To actuate the valve a force had to build up against the spring
assembly. In connection with the design of the control edges of the valve and the
stiffness and preload of the spring assembly, Davis had invented a mechanism with
which the steering feeling could be accurately set.

With this kind of power steering Davis wanted to conquer the American
automotive market. In October 1926, he presented his vehicle with power steering
to the automobile manufacturers General Motors,
to the professional world,
Packard, and Chrysler, as well as the suppliers Gemmer, Saginaw and Timken.
Everybody was excited about the car with its very direct steering ratio of 8:1,
which could be steered easily without showing any steering wobble or shimmy.
General Motors made sure to get the cooperation of Davis, and within the
following four years the power steering system was optimised for use in com-
mercial vehicles and large cars. The number and quality of the ideas Davis had
developed and patented for his hydraulic power steering, such as the rotary valve
with C spring (Fig. 1.15), is truly remarkable. In this example the control or spline
valve is rotated together with the steering post. The differential angle between the
two rotary valve sleeves causes the control edges to open and close. At the same
time the differential angle is fed back to the driver as a steering torque via the

20

P. Pfeffer and H. Ulrich

Fig. 1.15 Steering gear with rotary valve and C spring, Davis (1945)

preloaded rotating C spring (valve centering spring). The principle of the rotary
valve is still to be found in modern hydraulic steering gears (see Chap. 11).

In 1933 power steering was sufﬁciently advanced to be ready for serial pro-
duction. It had been planned to install it into Cadillac vehicles, but due to the Great
Depression Cadillac had to reduce its production to a mere 15,000 vehicles a year.
As the additional costs of tools and the manufacturing of power steering would
have been too high for such a small number of vehicles, General Motors halted the
project. This delayed the introduction of power steering for almost two decades.
Davis terminated his cooperation with General Motors and searched for new
clients. In 1936 he entered into cooperation with Bendix. Bendix equipped a
number of different test vehicles with hydraulic power steering and, interestingly,
Buick, a division of General Motors, wanted to introduce the system. But the
Second World War abruptly stopped all activities in the ﬁeld of civilian auto-
mobile production.

On the other hand, a different door was opened for Davis’s power steering. The
American and British armies equipped their military vehicles with the
Bendix-Davis steering system. More than 10,000 steering systems had to prove
themselves under the conditions of an army at war. After the war this experience
opened the market for earth-moving equipment, tractors, busses and trucks.

Davis was still trying to win over the passenger car industry for his steering

system, but to no avail. The time for that had not yet come.

1 Introduction and History

21

Fig. 1.16 Principle of the Hydraguide power steering by Gemmer

In 1951 Chrysler was the ﬁrst automotive manufacturer to introduce power
steering onto the market. The steering system was produced by Gemmer and was
based on an expired patent of Davis’s (Fig. 1.16).

In this steering system, the steering column consists of two parts, which are
connected to each other by a ﬂexible clutch. The lower part is mounted in a
self-aligning ball bearing and in a bearing of the valve housing in such a way that a
small angular deﬂection around the self-aligning bearing is possible. At the lower
end of the steering column a drive pinion is mounted, it engages with a toothed
wheel at the upper end of the worm shaft.

When a steering torque is applied, the lower part of the steering column is
deﬂected and actuates the four seat valves in the valve block by a few tenths of a
millimeter. The change in the ﬂow passages produces a supporting pressure dif-
ference at the pistons.

Although Davis did not draw any ﬁnancial beneﬁt from the introduction of the
steering system by Chrysler, he was neither angered nor worried. As he had
expected, he soon got a call from General Motors asking for his support with the
immediate introduction of power steering systems. From now on the only question
that mattered was how fast and how many power steering systems could be built.
This was the breakthrough of power steering. Within two years, the production
soared to a million steering systems per year. In 1956 one in four new vehicles
delivered in the United States was equipped with hydraulic power steering. For the
German market, the Gemmer steering system had been produced under license by
the ZF Zahnradfabrik Friedrichshafen since 1953, Fig. 1.17.

From the beginning, hydraulic power steering gears were supplied almost
exclusively by pumps which were driven by the combustion engine via a belt.

22

P. Pfeffer and H. Ulrich

Fig. 1.17 ZF-Gemmer hydro
steering

For reasons of space there were a few applications in which the pump was driven
by an electric motor. To save energy, such electric pump units were seri-
ally introduced in passenger cars by the end of the nineteen-nineties. The devel-
opment of electric motors and pumps with high individual efﬁciency and a
demand-dependent control of the pump speed led to signiﬁcant energy saving of
these electro-hydraulic steering systems in comparison with conventional systems
using a belt-driven pump (cf. Chap. 14).

In the course of the history of the steering system there had been numerous
ideas and patents for purely electrically supported power steering systems and
even for electric steer by wire systems,
long before the hydraulic and
electro-hydraulic systems were launched onto the market. But it was only much
later that developments such as the patent of the Gemmer company from 1972
(Fig. 1.18) were proposed, and they could be implemented and marketed.

The manual torque of the driver is detected by the torque sensor. The calcu-
lation unit then calculates the required power assistance and actuates the electric
motor, which transmits the torque either directly or via another drive to the
mechanical steering gear. A remarkable feature of the patent is that the vehicle
speed is already taken into account as an input variable of the calculation unit, so
that it is possible to adapt the steering feel to the driving situation.

A ﬁrst application of such an electro-mechanical steering system can be found
in the Japanese compact car Suzuki Servo of 1988 (Stoll 1992), Fig. 1.19. Due to
the low front axle load of the vehicle, it was possible to design the power steering
on a purely electrical basis, although the electric motor had a capacity of only
240 W.

The basic structure of modern electro-mechanical steering systems with a
torque sensor, a geared electric motor, a controller and a mechanical steering gear

1 Introduction and History

23

Speedometer

Calculation Unit

Differential Angle-/
Torque -Transducer

Electric
Motor

Rack&pinion
Steering Gear

Torsion Bar

Differential Angle
    Transducer

Fig. 1.18 Patent drawing (DE 2 237 166) of an electro-mechanical power steering system,
Gemmer 1972

Electric 
Motor

Gear

Control
Unit

Troque
Sensor

Steering Gear

Fig. 1.19 Electro-mechanical steering column unit (from Stoll 1992)

has remained unchanged to this day (cf. Chap. 15). The spatial arrangement varies,
depending on application. The engine performance and, of course, the computa-
tional ability of the control units have increased dramatically, so that nowadays,

24

P. Pfeffer and H. Ulrich

electro-mechanical steering can be considered to be the standard steering system
for passenger cars, both for energetic and functional reasons.

Lankensperger’s invention of the axle pivot steering only gained acceptance
with the development of the motor vehicle. Hydraulic power steering was mar-
keted for passenger cars only after the Great Depression and World War II. The
triumph of electrically assisted and electromechanical steering systems was driven
by the increasing demand for energy efﬁciency and emission reduction. Inventions
take time. Technical, economic and political conditions must be met before even
brilliant ideas can be implemented in the serial production of the automotive
industry.

When we drive a car we do not really think about the steering process and the
lateral control of the vehicle. Driving has become a natural and familiar action. In
our childhood we learn and internalize this complex process on a tricycle or in a
bobby-car. Without any conscious thought, our reﬂexes control all the actions we
perform to drive the vehicle. But modern axle kinematics and power steering
systems are the result of over a century of continuous optimization. And yet, the
automotive press frequently criticizes the steering characteristics of motor
vehicles.

2.1 Steering: Lateral Control of Vehicles

The process of driving a car can be split into two sub-tasks. With the accelerator
and the brake pedals, the driver controls the speed and thus the longitudinal
movement of the vehicle. The steering wheel is the lateral actuator that inﬂuences
the vehicle’s lateral movement. This corresponds to two degrees of freedom of
movement, yaw (rotation around the vertical axis) and thrust (translation into the
lateral direction) (For a detailed deﬁnition cf. DIN 70000 or ISO 8855). The
occurring lateral forces also affect other degrees of freedom, in particular swaying

Disturbances

Vehicle

(control path)

Track

Driver
(controller)

optically
haptically
acoustically
kinaesthetically

Open loop

Steering wheel
(actuator)

Closed loop

Fig. 2.1 Closed loop driver—vehicle

(rotation around the longitudinal axis of the vehicle). These lateral forces are
transmitted by the steering system from the steered axle to the driver.

Driving can be considered a control task. The driver is the controller and the
vehicle is the control path. Figure 2.1 illustrates the lateral guidance of a vehicle. In
a closed loop, the driver visually and kinesthetically takes in the course of the
vehicle and uses the steering wheel as an actuator to follow the course of the road.
The resulting actuating force provides him with an immediate feedback on the
condition of the road and possible sudden changes of the friction coefﬁcient.
Through the input of the steering wheel angle the direction of the course is changed,
this change is perceived by the driver, and thus the loop closes. There are additional
interferences acting on the closed loop, such as side winds, uneven road surfaces
and inﬂuences of the drive train. These have to be compensated by the driver, too.
For the vehicle developer, the control path, i.e. the vehicle and the steering
system, are at the center of his interest. Therefore, a lot of vehicle dynamics tests
that take no account of the driver have been developed (Chap. 7). In these, a
predeﬁned steering angle or steering wheel torque input is applied to measure or
simulate the response of the vehicle as lateral acceleration, roll frequency, yaw
frequency, and steering wheel torque. According to DIN 70000 the following
control modes are to be distinguished:

• Position control: A predeﬁned motion is applied to any point of the steering

system (steering wheel, steering column, rack, …)

• Fixed control: An arbitrary point in the steering system is locked. Usually it is

the steering wheel which is ﬁxated.

• Force control: An actuating force is applied to an arbitrary point and continues to

act on this point independently of its displacement.

• Free control: In this special case of power-dependent steering no actuating

forces are applied to the steering system.

2 Basic Principles of the Steering Process

29

With the help of powerful GPS-based gyroscopic platforms and automated
steering machines, which have become available in the last few years, it is now
possible to follow road courses with a high degree of precision. Strictly speaking
though, these tests are closed-loop tests, in which the driver is simply replaced by a
physical control unit.

2.2 Cornering

When cornering, the vehicle itself, and thus the control path, is analyzed. In
general, a distinction is made between slow and fast cornering. In the process of
slow cornering the vehicle is moved slowly, so that no considerable lateral
acceleration occurs. The tire rolls towards its center plane. During the process of
fast cornering, in contrast, lateral acceleration takes place, which causes a cen-
trifugal force towards the outside of the curve. This centrifugal force has to be
absorbed by the tires.

2.2.1 Slow Cornering

When a curve is negotiated slowly, the wheels try to roll towards their center
planes without any occurrence of a slip angle. For this to happen, the normals to
the center planes of the wheels have to intersect at a point, the so-called instant
center (Fig. 2.2). These conditions are met by the so-called Ackermann steering
angles at the front wheels (cf. Chap. 4). The Ackermann law states, that the front
wheel on the inside of the curve has to be steered to a steeper angle than the wheel
on the outside. This condition has to be met at least approximately by steering
kinematics (cf. Chap. 4).

2.2.2 Fast Cornering

During the fast cornering process the vehicle turns around its instant center, too
(see Fig. 2.3). Now a signiﬁcant rotational or lateral acceleration of the vehicle
takes place, this produces tire forces, and these tire forces in turn produce accel-
eration. For the cornering process, mainly the lateral forces are important. These
forces occur, when the direction of movement of the wheel center is not in the
center plane of the wheel. The angle contained between the movement direction
and the center plane of the wheel is referred to as the slip angle α. The lateral
forces have to occur at the rear wheels as well. In vehicles with a steered front axle
this leads to a shift of the instant center to the front (see Fig. 2.3).

30

P. Pfeffer et al.

Fig. 2.2 Slow cornering

Fig. 2.3 Fast cornering of a vehicle

At the outset of the steering process the slip angle, and thus the lateral force,
ﬁrst occurs at the front wheels. This initiates the yaw motion (rotation) of the
vehicle. Only after that, the lateral acceleration of the vehicle is built up, as the slip
angles build up at the rear axle through the shift of the instant center to the front. If
the angle of the steering wheel remains unchanged, the movement of the vehicle
lateral
turns into a stationary circular movement. The resultant constant

2 Basic Principles of the Steering Process

31

acceleration is the product of the yaw ratio and the radius of the circle. The radius
of curvature coincides with the instant center of the vehicle.

As the centrifugal forces do not—in contrast to the tire forces—act on the road
plane, but at the center of gravity, they produce a rolling moment that tilts the
vehicle towards the outside of the curve. This compression movement on the
outside of the curve or rebound movement on the inside is used for the so-called
roll steer, a kinematic effect in which the wheel suspensions produce a steering
angle, too. As the front axle steers towards the outside of the curve and the rear
axle towards the inside, the understeering self-steering behaviour is supported. The
change of the wheel camber (inclination of the wheel in relation to the vertical
angle) provides an additional increase of the lateral force. But the wheel alignment
is also changed by so-called elastokinematic effects. The wheel suspensions are
deliberately designed with a certain resilience which enables the acting forces to
positively inﬂuence the wheel alignment. For example, to compensate for the
naturally occurring inward turn when the brakes are applied in a curve, the
dominant outer front wheel is supposed to steer outwards (Matschinsky 2007). The
driving behaviour of modern vehicles can only be achieved by a differentiated
harmonisation of tire, suspension and steering system.

2.3 Lateral Properties of the Tire

Most relevant for the steering behaviour of the vehicle are the properties of the
build-up of the forces acting laterally on the tire. But the forces acting longitu-
dinally and vertically on the tire, caused by irregularities of the tire, the wheel or
the brake system, as well as uneven road surfaces, can create disturbing forces.
This can impact the steering process by producing signiﬁcant steering wheel
torque ﬂuctuations and vibrations at the steering wheel. These phenomena are
caused by the interaction of the wheels, the axle suspension and the steering
system, and will be discussed in Chap. 6.

2.3.1 Vertical Force Transmission: Inﬂuence on the Length

of the Contact Patch

The mechanism of force transfer in the vertical direction has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on the lateral properties of the tire. Broadly speaking, modern radial tires for
passenger cars consist of six key items which provide a transfer of forces:

• two bead cores which are circumferentially positioned on the two ﬂanges,
• the carcass which connects and contains the two bead cores with its cords made

of textile fabrics or sometimes steel which run radially across the tire,

• the ply with its steel wire cords running circumferentially in the area of the tread

over the carcass cords,

32

P. Pfeffer et al.

• the rubber tread above the belt, which makes contact with the road surface,
• and the pressurized gas in the tire.

The other tire components, like the inner liner for sealing, the apex, the side
bandages for optimized properties, the sidewalls protecting the carcass and the
ﬂange, as well as additional cushion gums above the ply for an improvement of the
strength and the shape of the tire, and, in the case of run-ﬂat tires a self-sealing
lining, can be considered as “simply complementary” features to warrant the
general functionality of the tire.

Internal pressure acts from the inside of the tire over its entire circumference.
Any wheel load that acts on the tire from the outside produces a compression at the
contact patch (latch). The carcass cords connected to the ply cannot absorb any
pressure forces, and the rubber surrounding them can do so only to a small extent.
The wheel load is thus transferred via the ﬁlling pressure, which pulls the tire
upwards at the carcass cords in the area opposite the contact patch. These carcass
cords, in turn, transfer the tensile forces to the bead cores at the ﬂanges. If the tire
load is increased, the size of the contact patch must increase, too (Fig. 2.4).

The ﬁlling pressure of the tire is therefore crucial for the size of the contact
patch. If the effects of the stiffness of the tire components are disregarded, the size
of the contact patch is dependent on the wheel load and the ﬁlling pressure only.
We can therefore state the following about the length of the latch, which—as
described below—has a considerable inﬂuence on the lateral dynamic properties of
the tire:

• The length of the contact patch increases with an increased wheel load.
• The length of the contact patch increases with a reduced ﬁlling pressure.
• The length of the contact patch decreases with an increased tire width.

Fig. 2.4 The tire carries the
wheel load via the ﬁlling
pressure, schematic

The filling pressure in the area 
opposite to the contact patch acts 
upwards and pulls via the carcass 
cords at the bead cores, thus trans-
ferring the load to the rim. 

Filling pressure and ground pres-
sure offset each other at the con-
tact patch. 

2 Basic Principles of the Steering Process

33

The dependence of the length of the contact patch on these parameters is, to a
limited extent, inﬂuenced by the stiffness of the tire components. This is one of the
parameters which can be functionally adjusted by the tire producers.

2.3.2 Lateral Force of the Tire, Pneumatic Trail

and Self-Aligning Torque

2.3.2.1 Range of Minor Lateral Accelerations (Linear Tire Properties)

The lateral forces of the tire are produced by a lateral deformation of the rubber
enclosed in the tread between the road surface and the ply. These lateral defor-
mations depend on the relative movement between the ply and the road surface. It
is caused by the slip angle, which is deﬁned as the angle between the direction of
the wheel circumference and the direction of the movement of the wheel (Fig. 2.5).
The tread bars (tread bar here indicates a rubber block in the tread, which may
indeed be a single tread block, but which may also be part of a circumferential
tread rib) are increasingly deformed from the entry point of the contact patch to its
exit point by the constant relative lateral movement between the road surface and
the ply, as long as the traction between tread bars and road surface remains
sufﬁcient. On a dry surface the traction is largely upheld up to an acceleration of
about 3–4 m/s2. Looking at the deformations, a triangular deﬂection proﬁle can be
observed if the ply has been initially regarded as rigid (cf. Fig. 2.6). The deﬂection
of the tread bars between the road surface and the ply is transformed by the shear
modulus of the rubber, the height of the rubber, and the surface of the tread bar to a
force acting on the tread bar.

The total force at the contact latch is the sum of the individual forces of the
tread bars in the longitudinal and lateral directions of the contact patch. When this

Fig. 2.5 Slip angle deﬁned
by the directions of the wheel
circumference and the wheel
movement

Slip angle α 

Direction of the 
wheel move-
ment

Direction of the 
wheel circum-
ference

34

P. Pfeffer et al.

Ply

Tread bar with rubber 
shear modulus G and 
surface A
Road surface

Kinematic 
deflection Δs

Yaw 
angle γ

Tread bar hight h

Force of the tread bar is  
F = A·G·γ= A·G·Δs / h

Fig. 2.6 The deﬂection of the tread bars at the contact patch produces forces, schematic

force is related to the slip angle, the cornering stiffness Cα of the tire can be
calculated. The cornering stiffness is an important parameter for the characteri-
zation of a tire regarding the driving and steering properties of the vehicle. In the
so-called linear operating range of the tire, which—as mentioned above—corre-
sponds to the range of pure traction on a dry surface at accelerations up to
3–4 m/s2, the side force of the tire FY under a constant wheel load can be cal-
culated by multiplying the cornering stiffness Cα with the slip angle a:

FY ¼ Ca (cid:2) a

This simpliﬁed approach draws our attention to three parameters of the tire,

which signiﬁcantly affect its cornering stiffness:

• the rubber shear modulus of the tread, which is highly temperature-dependent,
• the rubber height/tread depth, which is dependent on the wear conditions of the

tire,

• the tread bar surface/tread pattern percentage, which is dependent on the design

of the tread and also affected by wear.

Both the temperature dependency of the rubber shear modulus and the
dependency of the stiffness on the height of the tread can cause variations of the
cornering stiffness of 20 % and more between different operating conditions. This
shows how important it is that the operating condition of the tire regarding tem-
perature and wear is taken into account during the dynamic adjustment of the
vehicle (Fig. 2.7).

As mentioned above, the deﬂection of the tread bars over the length of the
entire contact patch ideally has a triangular shape. The point of action of the total
force—which is the sum of the individual forces of the tread bars—is not in the
center of the contact patch, but somewhat to the rear of it in the centre of mass of
the idealized triangle (cf. Fig. 2.8). This offset between the centre of the contact
patch and the effective acting point of the lateral forces is called pneumatic trail.
The self-aligning torque is the product of lateral force and pneumatic trail. During
the cornering process this torque makes up a signiﬁcant share of the total torque
which has to be transferred and supported by the steering system.

It has been mentioned above that the length of the contact patch increases with
an increase in the wheel load or a reduction of the ﬁlling pressure. For the triangle

]
°
/

N

[

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s
 
g
n
i
r
e
n
r
o
C

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

]

m
m

[
 
p
r
 
l
i
a
r
t
 
c
i
t
a
m
u
e
n
P

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

2 Basic Principles of the Steering Process

35

Dimension 205/55 R16

2.4 bar

2.9 bar

Increased filling pressure reduces the size of the 
contact patch and thus the cornering stiffness. 
At the same time the stiffness of the tire structure is 
increased by higher filling pressures. This leads to a 
higher cornering stiffness at higher wheel loads, as 
the resistance to the disproportionally increasing 
self-aligning and bending torques can increase as 
well.

0

1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000

Wheel load [N]

Fig. 2.7 Cornering stiffness as a function of the wheel load for two different ﬁlling pressures

Dimension 205/55 R16

2.4 bar

2.9 bar

Increased wheel loads or reduced filling pressures 
produce a longer contact patch. This increases the 
pneumatic trail. 

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

8000

9000

Wheel load [N]

Fig. 2.8 The pneumatic trail as a function of the wheel load in the case of two different ﬁlling
pressures

described in Fig. 2.9 this means that its surface increases to the same degree, and
that the lateral force, and thus the cornering stiffness, also increases. The pneu-
matic trail gets longer since the centre of mass of the approximate triangle moves
away from the centre of the contact patch (Fig. 2.8). The self-aligning torque as the
product of lateral force and pneumatic trail increases therefore disproportionally
with an increase of the wheel load or a reduction of the ﬁlling pressure. This
relationship, which is based on idealized assumptions, generally applies to modern
high-performance tires with ﬁlling pressures within the normal range, as they are
used in today’s sports vehicles. Only for narrower tires with higher aspect ratios is
this rule affected by other effects in a signiﬁcant way.

36

P. Pfeffer et al.

α

α 

Kinematic deflection of the tread bars by 
slip and position of the lateral force around 
the pneumatic trail r
τ
the contact patch

behind the center of 

Local friction coefficient limits: Static 
friction (upper curve) and sliding friction
(lower curve) 

The limited local friction coefficients 
cause the tread bars to slide in the range of 
large kinematic deflections. The effective 
point of application of the lateral force 
therefore moves to the front and the pneu-
matic trail decreases. 

rτ

rτ

Fig. 2.9 Kinematic deﬂection of the tread bars at the contact patch and limitation by local
friction coefﬁcient, without consideration of ply deﬂection, schematic

The above assumption of a ply with ideal stiffness obviously does not fully
apply. The ply is bent at the contact patch by the forces of the tread bars acting on
it. The self-aligning torque provides for an additional twist of the ply in relation to
the rim. These two factors lead to a reduction of the effective deformation of the
tread bars and thus to a reduction of the effective lateral force. As the self-aligning
torque at the contact patch increases disproportionally with an increased length of
the patch, the twist of the ply in relation to the rim increases, too. The restoring
effects thus increase with a heavier load or a reduction of the ﬁlling pressure. The
cornering stiffness regarded as a function of the wheel load therefore is not linear,
but characterized by a degressive curve which reaches its maximum at increased
wheel load. The position of this maximum depends on the type of tire. It partic-
ularly depends on the bending stiffness of the ply in relation to the vertical axis. By
changing the design of the ply the degressive properties can be inﬂuenced, but the
decisive factor to determine the position of the maximum is the width of the ply
(area moment of inertia), and thus the width of the tire.

Two different factors are thus effective in wider tires. First, the length of the
contact patch,—and with it the effective lever arms and the self-aligning torque—
are reduced, and second the stiffness of the ply increases. The two factors both
provide for reduced bending and twisting of the ply. Therefore the cornering
stiffness of a wide tire is usually higher and characterised by a reduced degressivity
as a function of the wheel load than that of a narrower tire of the same design and
with the same ﬁlling pressure.

2 Basic Principles of the Steering Process

37

As the ply with an increasing width approaches the idealised ply described
above, the increase of the cornering stiffness with wider plies is limited. The
standard cornering stiffnesses for passenger car tires at a static axle load and the
usual ﬁlling pressures are in the range of 1,250–2,500 N/˚, depending on the type
of vehicle and the tire. The pneumatic trail usually is in the range of 20–40 mm.

2.3.2.2 Range of Higher Lateral Acceleration (Non-linear Tire

Characteristics)

The triangle model applied above is commonly referred to as brush-type model, in
which the tread bars are depicted by bristles; it can be applied to the range of
higher lateral accelerations too, in which the tread bars start to slip in the contact
patch.

The forces that are caused by the lateral deformation of each of the tread bars
have to be transmitted by the frictional forces between the road surface and those
tread bars. When the slip angle increases and the deformation increases accord-
ingly, the tread bars are torn off in the rear area of the contact patch at ﬁrst and start
to slip on the road surface. As the level of sliding friction of the rubber on the road
surface usually is lower than the maximum of the previously present static friction,
the deformation of the tread bars is slightly reversed. While the lateral force
continues to increase in line with the slip angle in the linear operating range of the
tire, it decreases degressively at an additional increase of the slip angle until a
more or less pronounced maximum of force is built up. If the slip angle is very
large, the tire starts to slide very close to the entry point of the contact patch. In
that case any additional increase of the slip angle does not lead to an increase of
the lateral force. What happens is rather the reverse, as the increased slip angle
leads to an increase of the sliding speed of the tread on the road surface and an
increase of the local temperature of the rubber, which further reduces the coefﬁ-
cient of sliding friction.

The pneumatic trail is almost constant in the linear trail of the tire. When the
ﬁrst sections of the tire at the rear of the contact patch start to slide, the center of
the tread bar forces moves towards the front. The pneumatic trail is thus reduced
with increased slip angles (cf. Fig. 2.10). As the lateral force ceases to increase as
strongly as before, the self-aligning torque on top of the slip angle decreases
degressively. An additional increase of the slip angle moves the point of appli-
cation of the force towards the center of the contact patch so that somewhere in the
range in which the lateral force reaches its maximum, the self-aligning torque of
the tire decreases suddenly (cf. Fig. 2.10). If the steering assistance is designed
appropriately, the driver will clearly feel when he approaches the range of the
limits of the vehicle through the feedback of the steering wheel torque. At even
larger slip angles the effective point of application of the lateral force can even
move to a point in front of the centre of the contact patch, so that the pneumatic
trail turns negative. If the slip angle increases even more, the forces acting on the
front and the rear of the contact patch neutralize each other and the pneumatic trail

38

P. Pfeffer et al.

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

0

-1000

-2000

-3000

-4000

-5000

]

N
[
Y 
F
 
e
c
r
o
f
 
l
a
r
e
t
a
L

Dimension 205/55 R16

Wheel load 4000 N 

Filling pressure 2.4 bar 

100

80

60

40

20

0

-20

-40

-60

-80

]

m
N

[
 
e
u
q
r
o
t
 
g
n
i
n
g
i
l
a
-
f
l
e
S

Self-aligning torque

Lateral force

-15
-15

-10
-10

-5
-5

0
0
Slip angle α [°]

5
5

10
10

-100

15
15

Fig. 2.10 Lateral force and self-aligning torque as functions of the slip angle

approaches zero. This behaviour of the contact patch is especially relevant for the
kinematic adjustment of the steering behaviour when parking, when the front
wheels have to turn approximately in parallel to each other to reduce the turning
circle, thus producing increased slip angles by straining the axle, which, in con-
junction with the changing kinematic trail, can cause a self-reinforcing steering
behaviour in the worst case scenario.

The upper limits of the transferable lateral forces on solid surfaces strongly
depend on the properties of the frictional factors, road surface and tread rubber. On
dry asphalt roads the local static friction coefﬁcients at the tread bar can exceed
two (transferred horizontal force in relation to the vertical force). But as explained
above, there is always a mixture of traction and sliding sectors at the contact patch,
so that the adhesion potential of the complete tire always stays signiﬁcantly below
this value. On a good asphalt surface currently produced high-performance tires
can attain friction coefﬁcients of about 1.3, while those of ordinary tires are in the
range of 1.1 and can drop just below one, under certain circumstances.

The maximum traction of the tire is determined by its structural stiffness, too. If
the wheel loads and the lateral forces are high, the contact patch is strongly
deﬂected in relation to the rim. In extreme cases it can even lift off the road surface
on one of the sides. This leads to an increase of the local contact pressure of those
tread bars at the contact patch, which remain on the road surface. But an increased
local pressure does not produce a corresponding increase of the friction coefﬁcient.
This reduces the adhesion potential of the tire. As this “buckling” of the tire
structure increases under higher loads, the deposable adhesion potential decreases
when the wheel load is increased. Thus the maximum transferable horizontal force
decreases degressively with any increase of the wheel load. This applies to the
lateral force in particular. In the direction of the wheel circumference the structure

2 Basic Principles of the Steering Process

39

Fig. 2.11 Camber angle and
direction of the resulting
camber thrust (road surface
on wheel)

Camber angle

Direction of the
camber thrust 

of the tire is much stiffer, so that it shows less of a deformation under longitudinal
forces.

The structural stiffness is increased either by choosing a stiffer or wider design,
reinforcing the sidewalls, reducing the aspect ratio of the tire, extending the rim
width or increasing the ﬁlling pressure. As these methods to increase the stiffness
reduce the size of the contact patch, they can also result in an uneven distribution
of the pressure or an increase of the average pressure at the contact patch. For an
optimal solution the tire thus has to be adapted to the individual vehicle.

2.3.2.3 Inﬂuence of the Camber Angle

If the tire runs straight or if its slip angle in the linear operating range is small, the
camber angle produces deformations of the tread bars, which in turn generate
lateral forces. These lateral forces amount to only 1/10 of the cornering stiffness in
relation to the slip angle (camber thrust stiffness) and are not directly related to the
cornering stiffness. They act in the direction of the wheel camber (Fig. 2.11).

Camber angles generate a torque around the vertical axis of the tire, too. It
results from the torsion of the tread bars at the contact patch and the asymmetric
shape of the contact patch in the lateral direction under camber. While the
self-aligning torque acts in the opposite direction of the camber thrust, and thus
reduces the slip angle; the camber torque turns the tire in the direction of the lateral
force that acts from the road surface on the wheel.

When driving at high lateral accelerations in the non-linear range of the tire, the
position of the tire in relation to the road surface can be partly optimized by
compensating the deﬂection of the contact patch in relation to the rim under the
inﬂuence of high lateral forces by a “countertilt” of the wheel, thus enabling the
achievement of higher lateral force potentials.

40

P. Pfeffer et al.

Camber angles are caused not only by tilting the wheels, but also by driving on
a transversely inclined road surface. Even when driving in a straight line, road
surface irregularities can thus produce lateral forces and torques around the ver-
tical axis, which are independent of toe-in effects and which have to be com-
pensated by the steering wheel.

2.3.3 Transient Behaviour of Tire Lateral Forces

The tire generates lateral and longitudinal forces due to local deformation of the
rubber in the tread, which is supported by the ply.

The deformations of the tread are generated very quickly (if the ply is rigid),
that is after an individual tread bar has passed the contact patch one and a half
times after a change of the slip angle. At a driving speed of 20 m/s and a length of
the contact patch of 15 cm this takes only a little more than 1/100 s, a time span
which is irrelevant from the perspective of vehicle dynamics. Only at very low
speeds, such as while parking, when portions of drilling torques have to be con-
sidered, the chronological mechanisms at the contact patch acquire a relevance for
the calculation of the steering torque.

The ply has to transfer the forces generated at the contact patch via the carcass
to the rim. To do so, the ply has to be deﬂected in relation to the rim in the range of
the contact patch. The value of the deﬂection is dependent on the stiffness of the
bearing of the contact patch in relation to the rim. In the presence of lateral forces
the deﬂection of the contact patch in relation to the rim can occur at the maximum
relative speed of vyL = α · vx. For a tire with a lateral spring stiffness of
cLy = 200 N/mm and a cornering stiffness of Cα = 2,000 N/˚ and a driving speed of
vx = 20 m/s the delay approach of the ﬁrst order of Böhm (1966) results in a cutoff
frequency of about fe = 5 Hz. This is a frequency which can be relevant for vehicle
dynamics. But due to speed proportionality this effect loses its relevance with
increasing speed.

1
2p (cid:2) fe

¼ Te ¼

Ca
cyL (cid:2) vx

ð2:1Þ

The lateral tire stiffness relevant in this context is mainly inﬂuenced by the tire
width/rim width, tire sidewall height, ﬁlling pressure and sidewall stiffness. In this
context the nature of the ﬁlling gas supplied to the tire is of major importance.

2.3.4 Summary of Tire Properties

The decisive properties of a tire for its steering behaviour are cornering stiffness
and pneumatic trail. In the range of low lateral accelerations of up to 3–4 m/s2, the
cornering stiffness can be used to calculate the lateral force as a function of the slip

2 Basic Principles of the Steering Process

41

angle, if the wheel load is considered as constant. As a function of the wheel load,
the cornering stiffness behaves degressively, while the pneumatic trail, which also
remains almost constant in the range of low lateral accelerations, is approximately
proportional to the wheel load.

At higher lateral accelerations, the lateral force as a function of the slip angle
reaches a maximum and then generally decreases slightly. In this range, the
pneumatic trail strongly decreases and in some cases can even turn negative, i.e. at
a large slip angle the self-aligning torque of the tire can change its direction.

The behaviour of any given tire can be altered by a change of the ﬁlling
pressure. In general an increase of the ﬁlling pressure has the following effects:

• Lower cornering stiffness at a static wheel load (if the tires are very narrow or
the initial ﬁlling pressures are very low an increase of the ﬁlling pressure can
also result in an increase of the cornering stiffness).

• Lower degressivity of the cornering stiffness as a function of the wheel load (this
leads to an increase of the cornering stiffness at very high wheel loads in
comparison to the lower ﬁlling pressure).

• Lower degressivity of the adhesion maximum in the lateral direction as a

function of the wheel load.

• Shorter pneumatic trail and thus a reduced self-aligning torque.
• Faster transient build-up of the lateral force of the tire.

Other factors, which have a signiﬁcant impact on the properties of the tire in its

linear operating range in particular, are tire temperature and wear.

2.4 Steering Wheel Torque

Apart from the vehicle reaction, the steering wheel torque is the most important
variable affecting the steering feel of a vehicle (cf. Chap. 7). It is perceived via the
sense of touch and can thus be processed very quickly. In the development praxis
the ﬂow of the steering wheel torque is iteratively optimized in many test drives.
To obtain the desired steering feel, different power steering settings, axle kine-
matics, tire properties, etc. are applied and tested. This approach requires very
experienced test engineers and relatively long development times. To reduce these
expenditures, many efforts have been undertaken to develop reference values for
the steering wheel
torque, which could ensure a harmonious steering feel.
Mitschke (2003) provides a summary of the theoretical background as well as
aspects of the steering wheel torque curve in relation to the lateral acceleration of
the vehicle. The steering wheel torque ranges of present-day vehicles continue to
differ signiﬁcantly (Bartenheier 2004).

These studies resulted in a reduced steering torque gradient with rising lateral
acceleration for vehicles with power steering. To obtain a pronounced mid feeling
the power assistance from the center position is set very low. With increasing
lateral acceleration and thus rising lateral force at the tires the power assistance

42

Fig. 2.12 Range of measured
steering wheel torques of
sports cars (Pfeffer and Harrer
2007)

P. Pfeffer et al.

]

m
N

[
 
e
u
q
r
o
t
 
l
e
e
h
w
g
n
i
r
e
e
S

 

t

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

0

1

2

3

6
4
Lateral acceleration [m/s2]

5

7

8

increases disproportionally, thus causing the steering wheel torque to decrease
degressively. Figure 2.12 shows the range of measured steering wheel torques for
various sports cars. It can be seen that the steering wheel torque curves are widely
spread even for this speciﬁc sector of the vehicle market. Vehicle developers are
therefore posing themselves the question of what the best possible curve shoud be
for attaining a harmonious steering wheel torque curve (Heißing and Brandl 2002).
Therefore, this chapter discusses the calculation of the vehicle torque for stationary
cornering. In addition we will present a method to analytically factor in the power
assistance to achieve a harmonious steering support. These observations exclu-
sively consider quasi-stationary cornering without any input of friction or
dynamics. The frictional and dynamic behaviour of the steering wheel torque is of
course very important for vehicle development, but the quasi-stationary behaviour
establishes the basis for any additional ﬁne tuning of the power steering system
(Braess 2001).

2.4.1 Calculation of Steering Wheel Torques

The steering feel is particularly important for speeds above 60 km/h, as the
steering wheel angles decrease in this speed range. For this reason the kinematic
steering ratio will be considered as constant in the following discussion. We can
also neglect the self-aligning torque caused by axle kinematics at smaller steering
wheel angles. By restricting ourselves to moderate lateral accelerations,
the
pneumatic trail can be regarded as constant, too. In addition, we shall also dis-
regard the friction within the steering system.

The steering torque around the steering axle MS can be calculated as the product
of the lateral forces FY of the left and right front wheel and the sum of the

2 Basic Principles of the Steering Process

43

Fig. 2.13 Steering torque at
the left front wheel

MS

Steering arm

rS

D

Steering axle

rP

rτ

FY

MS

MH ¼

MS
iS (cid:2) AS

FY ¼ mF (cid:2) ay

constructive trail rτ and the pneumatic trail rP (Fig. 2.13). Formula 2.2 is valid for
smaller steering angles, which are typical for higher driving speeds.

MS ¼ FY (cid:2) rs þ rP

ð

Þ

The driver has to apply a steering wheel torque MH reduced by the kinematic

steering ratio iS and the steering assistance ratio AS (Mitschke 2003).

This equation is also valid as deﬁnition of the steering assistance ratio.
The lateral force, which has to be supported at stationary circular travel, and has
to be equal to the lateral force at the front axle, is the product of the proportional
mass of the vehicle at the front axle mF and the lateral acceleration ay.

The equation for the steering wheel torque, which has to be applied by the

driver, is found by combining the Eqs. (2.2)–(2.4).

ð2:2Þ

ð2:3Þ

ð2:4Þ

44

MH ¼

mF (cid:2) rs þ rP
ð
iS (cid:2) AS

Þ

(cid:2) aY ¼

(cid:2) aY ¼

mF (cid:2) r
iS (cid:2) AS

MS
iS (cid:2) AS

P. Pfeffer et al.

ð2:5Þ

In this equation r is the total trail.
Assuming a constant total trail r and a constant steering ratio, the lateral
acceleration gradient of the steering wheel torque is derived from the lateral
acceleration as follows:

For vehicles without power steering the increase of the steering reinforcement
is AS = 1. This results in a constant lateral acceleration gradient of the steering
wheel torque independently of the lateral acceleration. The target ranges for this
gradient are presented in Chap. 7.

(cid:1)

dMH
daY

¼

mF (cid:2) r
iS

AS (cid:3) aY
A2
S

(cid:3)

dA2
daY

S

dMS
daY

¼

mF (cid:2) r
iS

2.4.2 Steering Reinforcement

By introducing the self-aligning factor CA in Eq. (2.5) the steering assistance can
be calculated as follows:

AS ¼

mF (cid:2) r
iS (cid:2) MS

(cid:2) aY ¼ CA (cid:2)

aY
MS

steering assistance. The unit

The self-aligning factor is calculated by multiplying the proportional vehicle
mass at the front axle by the total trail divided by the kinematic steering ratio. It
represents a vehicle-speciﬁc measure for the self-aligning or centering potential of
the vehicle. The numerical value of the self-aligning factor is equal to 1 m/s2
lateral acceleration without
the
self-aligning factor can be kg m or Nm/(m/s2). As the self-aligning factor is
vehicle-speciﬁc and thus independent of the lateral acceleration, the shape of the
steering reinforcement can be determined via the lateral acceleration (Fig. 2.14).
Evaluation of various vehicles showed that the steering reinforcement AS of the
vehicles increased almost linearly with the lateral acceleration (Fig. 2.14). Vehi-
cles, which were subjectively considered to display a very harmonious steering
wheel
torque range, were characterized by a particularly pronounced linear
behaviour. We will therefore proceed with the assumption that the optimum
steering reinforcement increases linearly to the lateral acceleration (Pfeffer and
Harrer 2007).

to express

ð2:6Þ

ð2:7Þ

ð2:8Þ

2 Basic Principles of the Steering Process

45

Fig. 2.14 Steering
reinforcement function AS
related to the self-aligning
factor in dependence on the
lateral acceleration for
different vehicles

0

0

1

3

2
Lateral acceleration [m/s2]

4

5

6

7

8

This allows us to represent the steering reinforcement AS as a linear function of

the lateral acceleration. This results in the following equation:

AS ¼ CA (cid:2) DA þ KA (cid:2) aY
ð

Þ ¼

ð
(cid:2) DA þ KA (cid:2) aY

Þ

ð2:9Þ

mF (cid:2) r
iS

The parameter DA describes the basic support and is therefore denoted as
gradient factor. The degressivity factor KA deﬁnes the measure of leveling of the
increase of the steering wheel torque with an increase of lateral acceleration. This
steering reinforcement function is applicable for purely manual steering systems
(without support, i.e. DA = iS/(mF ⋅r) = 1/CA and KA = 0) and for various parameters
KA shown in Fig. 2.15.

Combining the Eqs. (2.4) and (2.8) results in the following equation for the

steering wheel torque curve in relation to lateral acceleration:

Fig. 2.15 Steering
acceleration as a function of
lateral acceleration

w/o power-assistance
 = 0.12
D

 = 0.38  K

D

 = 0.38  K

 = 0.16

D

 = 0.56  K

 = 0.12

A

A

A

A

A

A

2

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

]
)

m
g
k
(
/
1
[
A 
C

/

S
A

5

4

3

2

1

4.5

3.5

2.5

1.5

0.5

]
[
 

S
A
 
o
i
t
a
r
 
e
c
n
a
t
s
s
s
a
 
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

i

0

0

1

3

2
4
Lateral acceleration [m/s 2]

5

6

7

8

46

Fig. 2.16 Steering wheel
torque as a function of lateral
acceleration with linear
steering assistance ratio AS

]

m
N

[
 
e
u
q
r
o
t
 
l
e
e
h
w
g
n
i
r
e
e
S

 

t

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

P. Pfeffer et al.

without power assistance
dVL = 0.38  kVL = 0.12
dVL = 0.38  kVL = 0.16
dVL = 0.56  kVL = 0.12

0

1

2

3

4
6
Lateral acceleration [m/s2]

5

7

8

MH ¼

(cid:2) aY ¼

mF (cid:2) r
iS (cid:2) AS

mF (cid:2) r
ð
(cid:2) DA þ KA (cid:2) aY

Þ

(cid:2) aY ¼

1
þ KA

DA
aY

iS (cid:2) mF (cid:2)r
iS

ð2:10Þ

The steering wheel torque curve of Eq. (2.10) is shown in Fig. 2.16. Without
steering assistance the steering wheel torque increases linearly with the lateral accel-
eration. In contrast, in the presence of steering assistance the curve rises degressively.
This characteristic is naturally detectable in the measurements, too (Fig. 2.12).

The larger the chosen degressivity factor KA, the sooner the steering wheel
torque curve levels off. A linear steering reinforcement function provides for a
harmonious increase of the steering wheel torque. The only requirement is to
determine the gradient factor DA and the degressivity factor KA. In practice this can
be done by determining the target values for the steering wheel torque in relation
to the lateral acceleration for two or more points. A time-consuming, selective
optimization of steering assistance diagrams becomes obsolete.

2.4.3 Steering Assistance Torque

The total steering torque around the steering axle of the front wheels now results
from the steering assistance torque and the torque applied by the driver (Fig. 2.17).
In practice the dependence of the power-assistance curve on the steering wheel
torque is used to tune steering systems. The required steering assistance torque MA
is calculated as the difference between the steering torque at the wheels and the
torque applied by the driver:

MA ¼ MS (cid:3) MH (cid:2) iS

ð2:11Þ

]

m
N

l

[
 
s
e
e
h
w

i

 
t
n
o
r
f
 
g
n
d
r
a
g
e
r
 
e
u
q
r
o
t
 
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

0

2 Basic Principles of the Steering Process

47

Fig. 2.17 Steering torque
and steering assistance torque
in relation to the steering
wheel torque

Power-assistance M A

Driver M S *i S

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Steering wheel torque [Nm]

By inserting the Eqs. (2.2), (2.7) and (2.9) the steering assistance torque can be
expressed as a function of lateral acceleration or as a function of the steering wheel
torque.

MA ¼

ð

aY mF (cid:2) r (cid:2) DA þ mF (cid:2) r (cid:2) KA (cid:2) aY þ iS
DA þ KA (cid:2) aY

Þ

¼

ð

MH mF (cid:2) r (cid:2) DA þ iS (cid:2) MH (cid:2) KA (cid:3) iS
1 (cid:3) KA (cid:2) MH

Þ

With the help of this formula, the required steering assistance torque can be
expressed analytically. This allows the parameterization of the assistance range
using only the gradient factor DA and the degressivity factor KA in relation to the
steering wheel torque or the lateral acceleration.

In hydraulic steering systems the power steering assistance results from the
pressure differential between the right and the left chamber of the cylinder, while
in electromechanical steering systems it results from the applied motor current.
The differential pressure is calculated as follows:

For electromechanical steering systems the required motor current IE is cal-
culated with the help of the motor constant KT and the transmission ratio iE
between motor shaft and steering angle at the front wheel:

ð2:12Þ

ð2:13Þ

ð2:14Þ

Dp ¼

MA
rS (cid:2) AP

IE ¼

MA
iE (cid:2) KT

With this approach of a linear steering reinforcement via the lateral accelera-
tion, a harmonious, quasi-stationary steering wheel torque curve can be derived.
By applying this compact, analytical determination of the steering reinforcement,
it is possible to determine the necessary steering assistance with the help of only

48

P. Pfeffer et al.

two parameters. To map the acceleration dependence a data pair of gradient factor
and degressivity factor has to be assigned to each acceleration. The gradient factor
DA indicates the degree of the increase of the steering wheel torque from the center
position and the degressivity factor KA inﬂuences the leveling of the steering wheel
torque at increasing steering angles. This analytical approach is an elegant and
efﬁcient way to determine the shape of the steering assistance, with which a
point-by-point determination of the steering assistance becomes obsolete. In order
to attain a harmonious curve of the steering wheel torque, the required curve of the
supporting pressure in hydraulic steering systems or the motor current required for
electromechanical systems can be derived directly from the level of the desired
steering assistance.

2.5 Four-Wheel Steering

Known for special purpose vehicles for a long time, this was introduced to the
passenger car industry by Japanese manufacturers in 1985 (Sano et al. 1985, 1987).
To improve driving dynamics a rear-wheel steering was mechanically coupled to
the front axle.

As shown in Fig. 2.18, the system was designed to ensure an increased agility at
large steering angles (low driving speeds), while the sideslip angle and the phase
shift between lateral acceleration and yaw rate are reduced and the stability of the
vehicle behaviour is improved.

The next important step was the introduction of the electrically controlled
rear-wheel steering by BMW. The steering was controlled by a characteristic map
dependent on the speed and the steering angle of the vehicle. In difﬁcult driving

Fig. 2.18 Steering strategy for four-wheel steering: At low speeds the wheels turn in opposing
directions (left) while they turn in the same direction at high speeds

2 Basic Principles of the Steering Process

49

situations such as in a double lane change this system displayed signiﬁcant
improvements with respect to the steering effort, the sideslip angle, and the yaw
rate curve. This system was followed by others which will be described in detail in
Chap. 17.

2.6 Active Suspension Steering

Any action, which produces lateral forces acting on the vehicle, can be utilized to
steer. The term ‘roll steer’ denotes any steering movement characterized by a
change of track or camber, which results from a rolling motion of the body of the
vehicle and its (elasto-) kinematics (Matschinsky 2007). This roll steering beha-
viour is utilized only when cornering to inﬂuence the self-steering behaviour of the
vehicle. An active generation of a rolling movement to steer the car would hardly
be accepted by the driver and has therefore never been applied, although roll
steering can generate considerable yaw rates.

Another effect is wheel load control as utilized for active suspension steering.
The vehicle with its four wheels is hyperstatic. For that reason, an active sus-
pension system enables a change of the individual wheel loads. The wheel sus-
pension design provides for a camber or a toe angle. Under normal driving
conditions the lateral forces at the two sides of the vehicle compensate each other,
as the vertical wheel loads are approximately equal, too. By actively generating
unequal wheel loads the lateral forces become unequal too and can be utilized to
steer the vehicle without any activation of the actual steering system (cf.
Fig. 2.19). This effect is produced by a diagonal change of the vertical wheel loads
and does not generate any movement of the vehicle body.

This toe-in and camber effect decreases at higher lateral acceleration rates and
changes of the yaw ratio caused by wheel load degression become dominant.
During wheel load degression the following effect comes into play. The lateral
traction increases degressively with the wheel load, i.e. the bigger the difference
between the wheel loads on the inner and outer side of the bend gets, the lower the
resulting lateral force and the lateral force potential (cf. also Chap. 2). Active

Fig. 2.19 Active suspension
steering in relation to lateral
acceleration (Rau 2007)

50

P. Pfeffer et al.

suspension can thus inﬂuence the self-steering behaviour of the vehicle, too (over-
and understeering). An increase of the roll stabilization at the front axle can
promote the understeering behaviour of the vehicle, while an increase of roll
stabilization at the rear axle promotes its oversteering tendency.

This effect is utilized by active stabilisators, which are primarily used for roll
stability, to inﬂuence the self-steering behaviour (over- and understeering). It can
also be generated and utilized by active power generating elements such as the
ABC system. The steering effect of active suspension is dependent on the speed
and on the toe-in and camber design of the wheel suspension. This steering effect
is in any case considerable (cf. Fig. 2.20). Rau (2007) quantiﬁes this effect with 10˚
per wheel for a speed of 80 km/h and a tension of 2,500 N.

Active suspension steering can be used to improve the driving comfort on the
one hand and to increase driving security and agility on the other. It serves to fulﬁll
the following functions:

• crosswind compensation
• compensation of transversely sloped road surfaces
• track-keeping assistance
• variation of yaw ampliﬁcation and enhancement of stability and agility of the

vehicle

• support for μ-split brake maneuvers
• stabilization in the limit ranges.

As the effect of active suspension steering is reduced at lower driving speeds, it
can only be employed as an additional feature for vehicles with regular steering

Steady state yaw response when
bracing during straight driving

Steady state yaw response when steering

]
s
/
°
[
 
e
t
a
r
 

w
a
y
 
.
t
a
t
S

2.5

1.5

2

1

0.5

0
0

]
s
/
°
[
 
e
t
a
r
 

w
a
y
 
.
t
a
t
S

2.5

1.5

2

1

0.5

0

0

500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000

Wheel load change per wheel  [N]

4

2
10
6
Steering wheel angle [°]

8

12

Fig. 2.20 Comparison between steering effect by active suspension and regular steering
according to Rau (2007); 80 km/h and 0.5˚ toe-in

2 Basic Principles of the Steering Process

51

systems, which it will therefore never replace. However, the increased use of
active elements in the chassis will broaden the application of active suspension for
all of its different possible functions.

Steering Requirements: Overview

Sina Brunner and Manfred Harrer

The decision to buy a new car is signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the customer’s sub-
jective impression when driving. Here, the chassis exerts a critical inﬂuence on
driveability. In chassis development, particular attention is paid to vehicle
dynamics, driving comfort and driving safety. A major part of vehicle dynamics is
determined by the steering response, essentially dependent on the steering. The
prime task of the steering is to transform the angle of the steering wheel, as given
by the driver, into a corresponding change of direction. The wheels turn as the
driver initiates a change of the steering angle, resulting in a change of orientation.
The driver must be enabled to clearly predict the response of the vehicle.

This chapter gives a short overview of the various requirements for a steering
system, outlining the subjects Function and steering feel, Package, Weight, Costs,
Quality, Energy and environment, Acoustics and vibrations, System safety and
Legal requirements.

3.1 Function and Steering Feel

Steering feel is the subjective perception of the dynamic response by the vehicle
on the driver’s control of the steering wheel. Steering feel may be deﬁned in two
ways: steering behaviour and response behaviour.

Steering behaviour is the ability of the vehicle to transform any change of
course that the driver initiates with the steering into a response that the driver may

predict. The steer-angle, set at the steering wheel, has to correlate to the angle of
the wheels by a continuous function, i.e. the installed steering transmission may
not produce any jumps.

Response behaviour is the ability to transmit information on changes of wheel
load, rolling resistance and side force by a change of the applying steering wheel
momentum. Information transmitted by the steering may be distinguished into
useful and disturbing information. Useful information is any information sup-
porting the vehicle control, including, for example, feedback on the limit of
adhesion of the wheels. Disturbing information is, for example, periodic agitation,
such as ﬂuctuations of the braking power. Disturbing information should therefore
be suppressed within the steering system.

Besides the tyres and axle kinematics, the steering feel depends signiﬁcantly on
the design of the steering system. Each steering has its speciﬁc advantages and
disadvantages, depending on the construction. For example, hydraulic steering is
superior to electro-mechanical steering with regard to the response behaviour,
while electro-mechanical steering is better adapted to suppressing disturbing
behaviour,
information. Concerning
electro-mechanical steering provides substantially more parameters than hydraulic
systems. This includes speed-dependent power assistance, active return and the
dampening depending on the steer-angle speed.

the manipulation

steering

the

of

3.2 Package

The package is any geometrically and technically suitable arrangement of all the
components in a vehicle, basically eliminating targeting conﬂicts concerning the
space required by the individual components and their functional dependence on
each other.

In passenger cars, rack-and-pinion steering has been used almost exclusively for
quite some time now. Different arrangements of the steering arise from the way the
engine is installed. In the case of transversely installed engines, that nowadays drive
the major part of front-wheel drive vehicles, the steering gear is almost always
arranged in the direction of the trafﬁc behind the engine-gear unit, because other-
wise no suitable connection with the intermediate steering shaft can be achieved.
Thus, the tie rod has to be connected behind the centre of the wheel as well, hence
the steering gear is usually connected elastically with the front-axle support. Rubber
bushings are used, so that the elastokinematically desired toe-in change is main-
tained when a side force applies. If the engine is installed in parallel (which is
common in rear-wheel drive vehicles of the superclass), the steering gear is
preferably arranged in front of the axis, because connecting the tie rod in front of
the wheel centre results in a higher tuning potential with regard to elastokinematics.
Here the steering gear is rigidly screwed on the axle support, merging very agile and
immediate steering with the desired elastic toe-in change via the front-axis wish-
bone. If space considerations force the connection of the tie rod behind the wheel

3 Steering Requirements: Overview

55

Fig. 3.1 Location of the
steering gear of a Porsche
Cayenne

centre, the steering gear has to be connected elastically with the front-axle support,
as in the case of the transversely installed engine. Then it is usually located between
the engine and the gearbox under the clutch housing (Fig. 3.1).

By comparison, vehicles with steering that is integrated above the engine-gear
unit are only rarely found. The unavoidable connection of the steering gear to the
cowl resulted on the one hand in problems with the rigidity and, hence, in unin-
tentional steering elasticity. On the other hand, the ﬂuid noise in the steering gear
was ampliﬁed by the cowl metal acting as a resonator.

In addition to the arrangement of engine and gear, the axle kinematics critically
affect the location of the steering. The maximum wheel turning angle, the effective
lever length of the tie rod and its stretched position are crucial for the arrangement
of the steering gear. One needs to consider as well that tie rods do not stay in their
original place in traction mode but will describe ‘envelopes’, as the gear rack and
the wheel support are moving. A deﬁned minimum distance of approx. 15 mm
from any adjacent component has to be generally maintained during these motion
sequences, and the admissible joint bending angles may not be surpassed.

Other than the typical problems of packages, as, for example, conﬂicts of space
between the upper steering column and the arrangement of the pedals or the
separation of the intermediate steering shaft from the cowl, other speciﬁc problems
of the front-end package have to be solved with regard to the various imple-
mentations of the steering assistance. With any power-assisted steering,
the
arrangement of the power steering pump and of the required tubes or pipes is a
major challenge. Often, several dozen tube variations may arise, especially when
different engine units are used on one vehicle platform. The electro-mechanically
supported steering requires the electric motor, the control device and the output
reduction gear to be ﬁtted into the available space while observing that the distance
to the vehicle battery has to be kept short in order to minimise conduction loss.
Heterodyne steering requires, in addition, that the superposition angle actuator will
be integrated into the present package. It is evident that the superposition angle

56

S. Brunner and M. Harrer

actuator is ever more often relocated into the upper area of the steering column, to
minimise space conﬂicts in the front-end.

The arrangement of the steering gear and the steering column in the engine
compartment will often result in considerable thermal charges as well. This
problem is further aggravated by the desire to improve vehicle aerodynamics,
reducing the ﬂow through the front-end. At some steering components, continuous
temperatures of 100 ˚C are increasingly common. Plastics, elastomers, surface
coatings and lubricants in the steering gear and the steering column and the
electrical system components are pushed to their limits as complex temperature
shieldings must often be ﬁtted into the available space. Thermally favourable
variations are combinations of a transverse engine (exhaust duct and catalytic
converter in front) with a rear steering gear or, in case of the parallel engine, a
steering gear that is implemented in front, close to the cooling air duct. On the
other hand, a rear steering that must be placed between the parallel engine and the
gearbox will face the highest thermal charges.

3.3 Weight

Increased demand for efﬁcient vehicles and low CO2 emissions puts pressure on
the car development to reduce weights. Therefore the weight of the steering
matters as well.

The weight of a steering increases with complexity. Its speciﬁc power is an
important characteristic of the weight of the steering. The speciﬁc power is deﬁned
as power per mass; its dimension is [W/kg]. Among the steering types described
here, the electro-hydraulic power steering has the highest speciﬁc power and the
lowest weight in comparison to other steering variations. The overall weight of the
hydraulic steering is, according to the vehicle class, something between 12 and
16 kg, comprising of the components steering gear, power steering pump, pipes
and hydraulic oil. Electro-mechanical power steering (EPS) has a higher overall
weight than hydraulic power steering (HPS). The weight of the EPS is essentially
dependent on the mechanical power demand and, thus, mainly on the front-axle
load of the vehicle. If little power is demanded from the electro-mechanical power
steering—for example, by vehicles in the compact car segment—the weight of the
EPS is almost equal to that of the hydraulic power steering. In general, the higher
the required mechanical power, the heavier is the electric power steering (Fig. 3.2).
The excess weight of an electro-mechanical power steering unit may be justi-
ﬁed only by the fuel saving attainable and its extended functionality, compared
with conventional steering. There is a clear trend for steering manufacturers to
make a signiﬁcant effort
to try to reduce the unfavourable weight of the
electro-mechanical power steering for larger vehicle classes as well.

3 Steering Requirements: Overview

57

F
max. tie rod

[kN]

superclass/SUV

EPS

HPS

compact class

m

steering

[kg]

Fig. 3.2 Weight comparison HPS versus EPSEPS

3.4 Costs

Hydraulic steering assistance of the kind built and integrated today has been used
to support the steering power since the 1950s. It is a highly standardised tech-
nology developed during this time which is still found in most modern vehicles.
The commonly used vane-type pumps and hydraulic steering gears are produced
by millions and, due to their high level of maturity, provide little further possi-
bilities for cost reduction.

The challenge that all the OEMs (Original Equipment Manufacturers) are
facing now is the switch to new steering technologies, following the electriﬁcation
of the steering line. This switch produces a rise of costs especially for high-power
electro-mechanical steering units. Here, the main cost factors are the brushless DC
motor, the control device, the sensors and the necessary output reduction gear that
converts the rotation of the engine into a translational movement of the gear rack.
It is therefore sensible to deﬁne, develop and use components that are stan-
dardised for all the OEMs. This entails the realisation of larger scale effects and,
thus, cost savings. Various modular designs for the above-mentioned purposes are
currently emerging in the automotive industry.

3.5 Quality

Steering units of modern vehicles are subject to highest quality standards, e.g., the
effectiveness of the steering has to be maintained for the whole life span, without
servicing. This corresponds to a driving distance of approx. 300,000 km or an
active period of 10 years, the typical desired complaint rate being as low as
500 ppm (parts per million).

58

S. Brunner and M. Harrer

In spite of the mature technology of hydraulic power steering, there are still
appreciable complaint rates. Foremost among these are leakages due to the high
number of tube connections between the system components, internal pollution
increasing wear and leakage, and ﬂuid noise of the circulating oil per se (see Sect. 3.7).
With electro-mechanical steering, the number of warranty cases is signiﬁcantly
lower. Here the challenge is rather to improve the quality in terms of noise and
wiring load. One disadvantage of electro-mechanical steering is the higher war-
ranty cost. Unlike with HPS systems, individual subunits cannot be exchanged any
more if warranty cases arise; the higher complexity of EPS systems, due to inte-
grated control devices and permanently connected electric motors, requires in most
cases the exchange of the complete steering gear including its electrical compo-
nents, causing substantial add-on costs for the after-sales.

3.6 Energy and Environment

Due to increasing discussions about climate protection, the automotive industry
has lately been criticised quite frequently. Consequently, the European car man-
ufacturers, in compliance with the EU, undertook major efforts to decrease the
CO2 output of their vehicles. It was reduced by intelligent lightweight construc-
tion, reduction of the road resistance, hybridisation of the powertrain and the
associated electriﬁcation of the auxiliary units.

Two ways of development are emerging in the area of steering. One of them is
the spreading application of power steering pumps with variable ﬂow volume in
electro-hydraulic power steering, reducing the pump loss. The other is the
advancing substitution of hydraulically assisted steering by electro-hydraulic or
electro-mechanical steering in the compact and middle class.

This switch of technology will soon also affect superclass and SUV vehicles.
Those power steering technologies allow the realisation of the highest savings in
consumption, meaning that the required electric power is drawn from the wiring
only when the driver is̄ actively steering. Furthermore, this steering equipment is
able to maintain the steering assistance of hybrid vehicles in the electric traction
mode.

3.7 Acoustics and Vibrations

Increasing demand for comfort in all areas of life extends inevitably into the
automotive industry as well. Overall vehicle acoustics are gaining importance. The
noise level of new vehicles is continuously reduced, so that the noise of the
auxiliary units will appear more and more prominent. The development of steering
is facing various problems of an acoustic nature.

3 Steering Requirements: Overview

59

Borne noise is the main problem of electro-mechanical steering, being induced
by vibrations of the electric motor and the output reduction gear. As for
electro-hydraulic power steering, ﬂuid noises like hissing valves, the noise of the
power steering pump and vibrations by system instabilities, for example the rattle
of the steering, should be mentioned.

3.8 System Safety

DIN EN 61508 stipulates that safety is the absence of unacceptable risks and that
damage to the health of people, either directly or indirectly, is a result of damages
to objects or the environment. Referring to steering equipment, safety require-
ments can be distinguished into legal, mechanic, actuator-based and functional
safety (Fig. 3.3).

Different requirements for system safety emerge from the individual systems.
The steering is a component that is relevant to safety, therefore special legal
requirements apply (see Sect. 3.9).

Mechanical requirements essentially concern static and dynamic solidity, e.g.,
in the most critical cases of load, as in parking or kerb impact collision, the tie rod
may be exposed to static forces of 15 kN and higher. Yet it may not be extremely
rigidly designed, because in the case of abuse, the wheel supports, screw con-
nections and especially the steering gear have to be protected against damage by
purposeful distortion of the tie rod. Results of abuse even have to be obvious to the
driver due to the skewed position of the steering or the wheel, and because the
necessary visit to the garage will spare the components and especially the vehicle
passengers from more considerable secondary damage.

Safety requirements are distinguished by electro-mechanical and hydraulic
power steering equipment, depending on the kind of actuator. The hydraulic
steering provides one critical case, which is the sudden loss of power support, e.g.,
by a failure of the power steering pump. If that happens, the steering forces rise
dramatically, however, the vehicle will remain under control because the steering
wheel is mechanically coupled to the steering gear. The necessary steering forces,
however, must not exceed a level that the driver can reasonably apply.

Safety requirements for active steering systems like electro-mechanical or
heterodyne steering are much more complicated and complex. Simply put, the
serious fault case, unintentional actuator activity, must be avoided. Therefore, not

Fig. 3.3 Safety requirements
for steering equipment

60

S. Brunner and M. Harrer

only the control functions of the actuator must be developed and approved
according to criteria relevant for safety but any potential external impacts, such as
faulty sensor signals, electromagnetic incompatibility, insufﬁcient energy supply
etc., have to be considered in system safety as well.

3.9 Legal Requirements

The steering is a component that is relevant for safety and therefore subject to
strict legal requirements. These requirements are intended to ensure that the
vehicle will remain steerable in any active condition. The statutory requirements
can be found in the corresponding directives, including §38 StVZO (German trafﬁc
law) and the European directive 70/311 EEC that will be replaced by ECE-R 79 in
2014.

§38 StVZO stipulates that the steering equipment must ensure easy and safe
handling of the vehicle; if necessary, the vehicle must be equipped with assisted
steering. If assisted steering fails, the vehicle must remain manageable.

The steering equipment shall ensure easy and safe handling of the vehicle up to its
maximum design speed… There must be a tendency to self-centre… If a vehicle is ﬁtted
with ASE [auxiliary steering equipment], it shall also meet the [additional] requirements…

Section 70/311 EEC, as of 2008.1

In addition, the directive 70/311 EEC stipulates the permissible control effort.
In a vehicle that is steered by muscular power (without steering assistance) and
maximum permissible load of the steered axis, the power applied to the steering
wheel must not be more than 250 N (ECE-R 79: 150 N) when steering a vehicle at
10 km/h out of a straight course into a circle of 12 m radius. In vehicles with
auxiliary steering, the power required on failure of the auxiliary steering must not
exceed 600 N (ECE-R: 300 N at 20 m of radius), this is safely realised in modern
steering equipment. Moreover, this directive stipulates that the back wheels may
not be the only steered wheels of a vehicle. Vehicles with all-wheel steering shall
be able to cross a straight level distance at 80 km/h without unusual steering
correction by the driver.

Legal requirements for the steering column are found, e.g., in ECE-R 116. This
is a law that stipulates the test of an anti-theft device which is mounted at the
steering column. When abused (by turning the steering wheel while the locking
mechanism is closed), the locking system has to resist either a torque of 300 Nm
under static conditions or a torque of at least 100 Nm shall cause slippage of the
lock without damaging parts of the steering equipment.

1 English quotation acc. to http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:
1970L0311:19990216:EN:PDF Sect. 4.1.1 [Translator’s note].

3 Steering Requirements: Overview

61

Other directives of the FMVSS (Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard) and
the ECE (Economic Commission for Europe) include provisions on the protection
of passengers during a trafﬁc accident. They will be only cursorily listed here,
however:

• FMVSS 208: Occupant Crash Protection [in connection with the steering

• FMVSS 204: Steering Control Rearward Displacement
• FMVSS 203/ECE 12: Impact Protection for the Driver from the Steering Control

column]

System

• FMVSS 302: Flammability of Interior Materials
• FMVSS 107: Limitation of Surface Reﬂexions.

There are different basic methods how to control the direction of a car purpose-
fully. Wheeled cars with pneumatic tyres may have integrated either single-pivot,
buckling or axle-pivot steering. The ﬁrst two types suffer the disadvantage that
their footprint shrinks when steering and interfering forces will act on a lever arm
that corresponds to half a tyre track. Moreover, either the front or rear tyres or all
the tyres together may be steered. For high-speed cars, however, a third design is
favoured: axle-pivot steering on the front axle. Therefore, only this type will be
considered here. The rotational axis of the tyre trunk, or “steering knuckle”, on the
tyre suspension (e.g., a “kingpin”) is usually steady when the car is steered (pure
rotation of the tyre trunk); however, there are now many cars whose suspensions
feature a variable (“virtual”) axis of rotation.

4.2 Characteristics of the Steering Geometry

When a car is turning very slowly, strictly speaking, without any lateral force, then
all the tyres have to be oriented tangentially to concentric arcs. Their centre is
called the instantaneous centre of the car.

This suggests Ackermann’s or the A-condition. According to Ackermann, these
ideal steering wheel angles at the inner and outer tyre result from the relationship
depicted in Fig. 4.1 (ignoring the changing longitudinal position of the tyres):

Fig. 4.1 Kinematic relationships when cornering (Ackermann), car behaviour when rolling
around the centre M. j distance of the steering axes on the road, see Fig. 4.22; δo,A steering wheel
angle at the outer tyre; δi,A steering wheel angle at the inner tyre; ΔδA Ackermann angle; RS track
arc radius; L wheelbase; V centre of mass of car

Fig. 4.2 Distance
descriptions to Fig. 4.1 EG
steering axis (kingpin axis);
j distance of the steering axes
on the road; bF front track; ro
scrub radius (positive)

cot do;A ¼ cot di;A þ

j
l

ð4:1Þ

δi,A, δo,A
l
j = bF − 2ro

steering wheel angle according to Ackermann, ˚ see Fig. 4.1
wheelbase, mm
distance of the steering axes, in mm, see Fig. 4.2

If the scrub radius is negative, this is a positive number.

4 Steering Kinematics

65

ð4:2Þ

The difference of the steering wheel angles inside (i) and outside (o) is called

the Ackermann angle (relative steering angle): δA = δi,A − δo,A.

The track diameter DS, i.e. the diameter of the smallest arc that the outer steered

tyre may describe, results from:

DS ¼ 2RS ¼ 2

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

l
sin do;max

þ ro

DS
δo,max

track diameter, in mm
largest steering wheel angle of the outer tyre, in ˚.

It is obvious that speedy cars require a small wheelbase and a wide steering
wheel angle. The steering wheel angles are limited by the design of the suspension,
the space for bumping, compression/rebounding of closed wheels and the working
angle of the drive shafts of powered axles. A short wheelbase has less favourable
driving dynamics and is not a solution for lengthy cars anyway.

For a given track arc diameter, the main chassis dimensions, wheelbase and
wheel track, directly affect the required steering wheel angle. This relationship has
to be properly discussed during the early development stages of a car.

A kinematic discussion of these variables is shown in Fig. 4.3 (static steering

design).

Fig. 4.3 Kinematic relationship between wheelbase, wheel track and track arc

66

M. Trzesniowski

Pure rolling (without the effects of tyre slip and suspension elasticities) implies
a geometric relationship between wheelbase, wheel track, steering wheel angle and
track arc diameter. In the conceptual phase of car development a comprehensive
consideration of these parameters may be attained either from legal stipulations
(least radii of roads) or from speciﬁcation demands. If the speed and, hence, the
slip angles are low, the instantaneous centre of the car M will be located on the
rear axle (see Fig. 4.3). The cornering forces increase with increasing speed, the
tyres respond with higher slip angles so that the instantaneous centre moves
towards the front axle, cf. also Fig. 4.4.

The track radii result from the dimensions as follows:

do ¼ arcsin

l
RS

ð4:3Þ

RS
RS,R
δo

track arc radius, mm
rear track arc radius, mm
steering wheel angle of the outer tyre, ˚

q

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
R2
S (cid:2) l2

Rtc;i ¼

(cid:2) 0; 5ðbF þ bR þ bV;RÞ

Fig. 4.4 Cornering with lateral acceleration. αF,i, αR,i, αF,o, αR,o slip angles in front or behind,
inside or outside; β sideslip angle; M instantaneous centre acc. to Ackermann; M′ actual
instantaneous centre

4 Steering Kinematics

67

Rtc,i
bV,R

turning circle radius of the rear tyre, mm
rear tyre width, mm

r

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Þ2
a2 þ ðRS cos do þ e (cid:2)

bF
2

Rtc ¼

bF, bR wheel track in front or rear, mm
Rtc
a, e

track arc radius, mm
distances, mm.

A wheelbase l of 3,000 mm, front and rear track widths of 1,490 and 1,540 mm
and a track arc radius of 7,500 mm will result in a required steering wheel angle at
the outside tyre of 23.6˚. The smallest radius Rtc,i, circled by an inner rear tyre that
is 346 mm wide, is 5,186 mm.

The track arc radius is rather a theoretical value. The turning circle radius
(between kerbstones) or, more accurately, the turning circle diameter is more
obvious to the driver, that is why this value is found in the speciﬁcations, such as
model sheets and measuring reports. Common values of passenger cars are about
11 m.

When a car turns, there is a lateral acceleration and the tyres have to build up a
slip angle to transfer the lateral forces. The centre on which the car is cornering
results from the intersection of the perpendicular line to the actual path of the
moving wheels, see Fig. 4.4. In contrast to the ideal A-centre, this centre is moving
forwards. The picture also demonstrates that in the case of an A-steering, the slip
angles of the outer tyres are smaller than those of the inner tyres.

Other observations on the maximum steering wheel angle arise from the actual
behaviour of the cornering tyres. When cornering fast, an A-design prevents the
lateral force potential of the tyres from being fully exploited. Especially higher
wheel loads on the outside would permit higher lateral forces. Yet the slip angles
are behaving exactly the opposite way. If the outer wheel is turned more than the
inner one (Fig. 4.5), the available space in the wheel arch is better used (this
matters only in slow corners), the steering will respond faster and forces the higher
loaded outer wheel to assume a higher slip angle (dynamic steering design). The
cornering stability of the front axle can be increased in this manner. This
advantage, however, is only effective when cornering fast; tight cornering will
hardly exploit the lateral force of the tyres. This effect will therefore occur only at
turning radii of ρ = 20 m (Reimpel and Betzler 2000), corresponding, according to
the car, to a steering wheel angle of 5–10˚. Higher steering wheel angles should
cause the actual curve of the Ackermann angle to approach the nominal curve
again, so that tension, wear of the tyres and road resistance in narrow corners are
reduced. Figure 4.6 shows such a course of the A-angle.

68

M. Trzesniowski

Fig. 4.5 Increase of the cornering force in front when cornering wide, i.e. for small steering wheel
angles. The outer tyre is turned more than the inner tyre. The A-angle Δδ is therefore negative

If the steering wheel angle is small, the steer angles of the inner and outer

wheels may therefore be equal (a parallel steer, then the A-angle is zero).

The difference from the ideal A-angle is called steering error:

DdF ¼ do (cid:2) do;A ¼ DdA (cid:2) Dd

ð4:4Þ

ΔδF
δi, δo
ΔδA
Δδ

steering error, better: artiﬁcial steering divergence, ˚
steering wheel angle inside or outside, ˚
toe-out on turns according to Ackermann, ˚. ΔδA = δi,A − δo,A
artiﬁcial toe-out on turns, ˚. Δδ = δi − δo.

Fig. 4.6 Curve of an ideal,
A-angle Δδ. In addition, the
position of the front wheels is
schematically shown for this
ideal curve

4 Steering Kinematics

69

Fig. 4.7 Steering geometry parameters acc. to Matschinsky (2007). Rear view (left, cross-plane
YZ) and side view (right, parallel plane XZ) σ kingpin inclination angle. Typical values design
attitude: 5 to 16˚; τ castor angle. Typical values design attitude: 1–5˚; ro scrub radius. Counted
positively outward from the penetration point A. Typical values when mounted: −20 to +80 mm;
rσ lateral offset; ra interfering force arm; rτ,k castor offset. Typical values when mounted: 15–
45 mm; nτ trail: Positive if the wheel centre is behind the steering axis EG. Typical values when
mounted: −5 to 18 mm; εV Camber angle. Positive if the wheel is outwardly tilted (slanted).
Typical values when mounted: −2 to 0˚

The steering should therefore generate a toe-out curve similar to the one shown in
Fig. 4.6. This diagram displays the curve of the A-angle as a function of the steering
wheel angle at the inner wheel δi. In addition, the curve of the toe-out ΔδA is shown.
The resultant steering divergence ΔδF is depicted for a steering wheel angle.

If the steering wheel angle is low, the outer tyre is turned more than the inner
tyre. There is a transitional zone in which the tyres are parallel, and for stronger
turns, the curve approaches the A-curve by about 50 % of its value (Remark: For
tighter turns the curve reaches 4˚ and the A-curve 8˚).

Fig. 4.8 Target areas of parameters of passenger car front axles, acc. to Heissing (2004)

70

M. Trzesniowski

The divergence from the Ackermann design is sometimes given in percent:

Percent Ackermann ¼

(cid:3) 100%

ð4:5Þ

Dd
DdA

0 %
100 % Ackermann: The artiﬁcial toe-out on turns corresponds neatly to the

Ackermann: Parallel turn

Ackermann angle.

A divergence from the Ackermann design has the favourable side effect that the
track diameter will be smaller while the car geometry remains the same. A mea-
surement series has shown that the track diameter can be reduced by approx. 0.1 m
for each 1˚ of steering divergence (Reimpel and Betzler 2000). The following
numerical equation illustrates this:

DS ¼ 2

þ ro

(cid:2) 0; 1 (cid:3) DdF

(cid:3)

(cid:1)

l
sin do;A;max

ð4:6Þ

ΔδF
DS
ro
l

artiﬁcial steering divergence, ˚
track diameter, m
scrub radius, m
wheelbase, m.

The maximum steering wheel angles of passenger car wheels are 45–50˚. This

permits for middle class cars typical track diameters of about 8 m.

4.3 Characteristics of the Wheel Position

The position of the front wheels is described by different parameters, some of them
are discussed in Chap. 5. There are further variables that cannot be represented by
visible design parameters but result from computing several geometrical variables.
They are helpful for the assessment and layout of the steering geometry (Fig. 4.7).
The kingpin inclination angle σ and the castor angle τ substantially affect the
change of the camber εV when the wheel is turned. The steering axis EG intersects
the road in point A. The horizontal distance between the CTC W and A, as seen in
the rear view, is the scrub radius ro, although the CTC W usually does not move at
this radius, because the actual distance of the two points is wider when steering (cf.
also Fig. 4.9). The steering axis is tilted with the castor angle τ. The wheel centre
does not need to be located on the projection of the steering axis but can be shifted
either forwards (positive along X) or backwards (negative along X) by a trail nτ.
The distance of the points W and A, as seen in the side view, is the castor offset rτ,
k. If a negative trail nτ is provided (negative along X), the trail rτ,κ is reduced by the
same amount and the camber will change more favourably upon steering.

4 Steering Kinematics

Fig. 4.9 Forces at the front
tyre: a left front wheel is
shown. W CTC;
A intersection of steering axis
and road; EG steering axis; δ
steering wheel angle; FW,X,b
braking force; FW,Y lateral
force; FW,Z wheel load; rτ,k
castor offset; rτ,T trail

71

Corresponding to the trail there is a lateral offset rσ. The lateral offset is the
horizontal distance between wheel centre and steering axis, as seen in the rear
view. The vertical distance ra of the wheel centre from the steering axis is
important for the response to longitudinal forces (from drive torques) acting on the
steering. This distance is also called longitudinal or interfering force arm, because
all the forces issued by the tyre of the passively rolling wheel upon the bearings in
the wheel centre, are transferred to the hub carrier and on to the steering.

Figure 4.8 shows target values of some parameters from the passenger car

development.

The above geometrical values describing the wheel position allow to the

computation of the effects of forces on the tyre, Fig. 4.9.

If a braking force FW,X,b applies at the tyre in X direction, it combines with the
scrub radius to generate a spatial moment around the Z axis (Matschinsky 2007):

MA;Z;b ¼ FW;X;b (cid:3) ro

ð4:7Þ

MA,Z,b moment of the braking power around the intersection A of the steering
axis, in Nm. This moment turns around the Z axis and not around the
steering axis
braking power of the tyre, N
scrub radius, m.

FW,X,b
ro

The moment around the steering axis results from the projection of its vector on

the axis:

MA;b ¼ FW;X;b (cid:3) ro (cid:3) cos r (cid:3) cos s

ð4:8Þ

MA,b moment of the braking power around the steering axis, Nm.

72

M. Trzesniowski

It is obvious that a larger scrub radius ro causes a larger moment of the braking
power around the steering axis. The scrub radius should therefore be very small, so
that differing friction conditions on braking will affect the steering less. Negative
scrub radii (i.e. ro is turned from the CTC W outwards) are also used in passenger
cars to generate a stabilising righting effect if the brakes should respond unequi-
laterally. The geometry of a negative steering offset may be described like this: the
joint points E and G of the hub carrier have to shift towards the wheel centre so
that the brake disk will have to be relocated farther out. This can entail that the
brake disk of narrow drop-centre rims loses about 25 mm of diameter while the
rim diameter remains the same. This target conﬂict can be resolved by separating
the triangular wishbone into two support rods that engage at two separate joints of
the hub carrier, creating a quadrangle. At the intersection of two support rods, the
usually solid joints E or G turn into virtual joints and the solid steering axis
becomes an ideal axis. These virtual joints may be arranged in or beyond the brake
disk without any problems.

Corresponding to the braking power, a lateral force FW,Y is effective over the
longitudinal distance between the force and the penetration point A of the steering
axis on the road. The overall distance results from the addition of kinematic castor
(castor offset rτ,k) and pneumatic trail rτ,T.

The steering axis is not perpendicular to the road, therefore the distance of the
wheel centre to the road changes when steering. The front end rises or lowers. This
means that the wheel load effects the steering moment, a part of which has to be
contributed by the driver. This phenomenon can be computed using the wheel load
arm q, unfortunately, it cannot be visualized that easily. The wheel load arm
referring to the Z axis is:

q ¼ ro (cid:3) tan s þ rs;k (cid:3) tan r

ð4:9Þ

q wheel load arm, mm.

Angles and lengths: see Figs. 4.7 and 4.9.
A wheel load does not issue a moment around the steering axis if the axis is

either vertical or the vertical force intersects the steering axis.

The wheel load arm q is deﬁned to be positive if the moment generated by the
wheel load produces a self-centring action, i.e. acts to reduce the steering wheel angle
δ. This is also called a weight righting of the steering because the wheels are returned
by the wheel load into the straight position. This deﬁnition of a positive wheel load
arm means that the wheel load is righting as soon as q and δ have the same sign.

The wheel load arm can also be considered an alteration of the front end’s level

above the steering wheel angle:

q ¼ (cid:2)

dz
dd

ð4:10Þ

If the wheel load arm q is positive, steering with a positive steering wheel angle

δ (turning the inner wheel) will lift the body.

4 Steering Kinematics

73

Fig. 4.10 Righting of
to Matschinsky (2007).
the steering by lateral acceleration, acc.
A Penetration point of the steering axis with the road; W CTC; α slip angle; M centre of
corner Index values: i or o inside or outside; F or R front or rear

The wheel load arm should be very small, so that ﬂuctuations of the wheel load

will not impact the steering.

However, weight righting matters almost exclusively at very low speed or when
parking. At high speed, the aligning moments of the side forces are much bigger,
Fig. 4.10.

The steering wheel angles are generally smaller at high speed than they are in
slow corners. The nature of the Ackermann angle at the front wheels is therefore
negligible, e.g., whether it is an Ackermann design or a parallel turn. The slip of all
the wheels makes the centre M shift forwards. The side forces FW,Y,F resulting
from the slip are chieﬂy responsible for generating the perceptible torque at the
steering wheel. The righting effect of the wheel loads is low in comparison. In
contrast to the camber side forces FT,Y,ε, the slip side forces engage around the
castor offset rτ,T behind the CTC W; they are larger at the outside because the
wheel load shifts towards the outer wheels. If the front axle is driven, the driving
forces, effecting a torque around the steering axis by way of the interfering force
arm ra, add to the forces shown in Fig. 4.10.

74

M. Trzesniowski

Fig. 4.11 Inﬂuence of castor and steering axis inclination on the change of camber. UF front
wheel centre; δ steering wheel angle; P instantaneous centre of the wheel centre UF; ρ curvature
radius of the trajectory of UF

σ
5°
12°
12°
12°

a
b
c
d
εV (δ = 0 °) = 0 ° 
tyre radius 300 mm

τ
3°
3°
9°
9°

ro
50
0
15
0

rτ,k
16
16
5
5

Fig. 4.12 Curves of camber, castor and wheel load arm q upon steering, acc. to Matschinsky
(2007). Positive steering wheel angles δ at the inner wheel, negative angles at the outer

4 Steering Kinematics

75

Fig. 4.13 System overview, axle-pivot steering. The steering wheel angle δH at the wheel is
transformed into the steering angles δo and δi of the outside and inside wheels by the gear, with
the internal gear ratio iG, and by the linkage

Fig. 4.14 Compliance measurement of the steering of an immobile passenger car, acc. to
Reimpel and Betzler (2000). The wheels were ﬁxed during the measurement and a torque was
applied to the steering wheel. As expected, the yielding ΔδH,e at the wheel increases with the
torque. The resistance, that is the stiffness of the steering, increases as well. Thus the curve
becomes less steep. The wheel is turned to the right and left. A hysteresis occurs and a residual
angle ΔδH, Re remains at the unloaded wheel

The righting moment at the steering gear, including all the forces, according to

Matschinsky (2007), derives from:

(cid:5)

MG ¼ FW;Y ;F;o (cid:3) ðrs;k;F;o þ rs;T;F;oÞ (cid:2) FT;Y;e;F;o (cid:3) rs;k;F;o (cid:2) FW;Z;F;o (cid:3) qF;o (cid:2) FW;X;a;F;o (cid:3) ra;F;o
(cid:9)(cid:7)

(cid:8)

þ FW;Y;F;i (cid:3) ðrs;k;F;i þ rs;T;F;iÞ þ FT;Y;e;F;i (cid:3) rs;k;F;i þ FW;Z;F;i (cid:3) qv;i þ FW;X;a;F;i (cid:3) ra;F;i
MG=iG
AS

MH ¼

(cid:6)(cid:7)

iT;o

iT;i

ð4:11Þ

76

M. Trzesniowski

Fig. 4.15 Variable steering ratio of a hydraulically assisted rack-and-pinion steering in a sports
car (Porsche 911 Carrera), acc. to Achleitner (2005). a Model year 2005. While the steering
wheel angle is small, the gear ratio is similar to that of the predecessor model, 17.1:1. If the
steering wheel angle is more than 30˚, the steering ratio drops down to 13.8:1. b Predecessor
model with steady gear ratio

Fig. 4.16 Steering linkage for independent suspension. Initial situation top left: The two joints
Ul and Ur of the steering arms (4) on the left and on the right must be convenient connected to the
steering gear (1). a Vertical steering gear; b steering gear parallel to the steering axis EG;
c central tie rod and ball joints; d rocker arm as intermediate lever; e gear rack as tie rod; f gear
rack and intermediate lever

MG
rτ,k
rτ,T
FW,Y

Moment at the steering gear when rotating, Nmm
kinematic castor, mm
pneumatic trail, mm
side forces by tyre slip, N

4 Steering Kinematics

77

FT,Y,ε
FW,Z
FW,X,a
ra
iT
MH
iG
δG
AS

side forces by tyre camber, N
wheel loads, N
drive at a wheel, N
drive rocker arm, mm. See Fig. 4.7
steering linkage gear ratio,—See Fig. 4.17
moment at the steering wheel (steering wheel torque), Nm
steering gear ratio,with iG = δH/δG. δH angle at the steering wheel,
angle at the drop arm,
Steering ampliﬁcation.

For most kinds of wheel suspensions, the kinematic castor rτ,k increases at the
inner steering wheel angle δ and drops at the outer steering wheel angle. The castor
offset rτ,T decreases with increasing lateral acceleration. This reduces the inﬂuence
of the outer side force FW,Y,F,o until it may even reverse, i.e. the side force will then
act to increase the steering wheel angle. This effect is usually not very pronounced,
however, because the steering linkage gear ratio grows at the outer turn more than
at the inner turn. Thus the contribution of the outer tyre to the steering moment
drops relative to the inner tyre.

The spatial slip of the steering axis to the road (castor and steering axis
inclination angle) causes the camber angle of the wheel to alter when steering. The
tendency is obvious from the following. If the steering axis does not have a castor
angle (τ = 0˚) and if the camber is 0˚ in the straight position, then a cornering
steering angle δ of 90˚ will add an amount to the camber angle that is exactly equal
to the steering axis inclination. More detailed analysis results in Fig. 4.11. When

Fig. 4.17 Transmission angles of steering linkages, acc. to Matschinsky (2007). The linkage
with rack gear and, alternatively, with a drop arm (dashed) in point D are depicted for a left front
wheel. βU, βT Transmission angles; u Length of the tie rod; a Longitudinal overlap of steering arm
and tie rod; r length of the steering arm; cSt Stiffness of the tie rod; cδ torsional stiffness of a wheel
around the steering axis; e effective lever arm of the tie rod; f effective lever arm of the drop arm

78

M. Trzesniowski

steering, the wheel centre UF circles around the steering axis EG. In the side view,
this trajectory looks like an ellipse. In the straight position (δ = 0), the tangent to
this trajectory is inclined by the castor angle τ (with nτ = 0). The associated radius
of curvature ρ is determined by the centre P. The centre itself is the intersection of
the steering axis with the vertical level at UF. The geometry gives:

q ¼ ro=ðtan r (cid:3) cos sÞ

ð4:12Þ

The curvature εV(δ) is therefore proportional to the steering axis inclination
angle σ. When a steering wheel angle is applied, a positive steering axis inclination
bends the curve towards positive camber angles.

The change rate of the camber over the steering wheel angle depends on the

castor angle and the steering axis inclination angle, cf. Matschinsky (2007):

deV
dd

¼

tan s (cid:3) cos d þ tan r (cid:3) sin d
tan eV (cid:3) ðtan s (cid:3) sin d (cid:2) tan r (cid:3) cos dÞ þ 1

ð4:13Þ

εV

camber angle, δ steering wheel angle.

Figure 4.12 compares the effects of some different designs of steering

geometry.

Version a has a low steering axis inclination and a low castor, hence, wider
distances to the CTC, i.e. scrub radius ro and kinematic castor rτ,k. Versions c and d
have the widest angles of steering axis inclination and castor; they differ only in
the scrub radius.

The tangent of the camber curve at a steering wheel angle = 0˚ in the versions c
and d is substantially more level than those of the other curves. The inclination of
the tangent at the curves a and b is about three times larger, corresponding to the
relation of the castor angles τ. The wider steering axis inclination of version b
bends the curve much stronger than that of version a. Hence, beyond a steering
wheel angle of −30˚ (outside) the camber will turn positive. In general, the camber
of the (deﬂecting) outer wheel should drop into the negative zone while the inner
wheel should have a positive camber or at least not an increasingly negative one.
Versions c and d are therefore more favourable with regard to the camber while b
has an undesirable positive outer camber.

The castor increases at the inner wheel in all the versions and decreases at the

outer wheel down to negative values.

All versions suffer the effect of weight centering in the straight position, because
the wheel load arm q is positive when the steering wheel angle is δ = 0˚. At the inner
wheel (positive steering wheel angles) this is also true when other steering wheel
angles apply (q and δ having the same sign), for the outer wheels it is only true beyond
a speciﬁc steering wheel angle. Version d gives the best result in that respect. Version
a, as expected, requires the largest steering wheel angle: δ = −30˚.

If the castor offset rτ,k is non-zero, the CTC moves laterally to the steered car. If
the castor offsets of both front axle wheels are equal, the front end is laterally
shifted. In any case, all versions display this behaviour in the straight position.

4 Steering Kinematics

79

Different castor offsets cause a relative transverse movement of the two wheels.
This increases the deformation of the tyres and therefore the steering forces when
parking. Version a is closest to the ideal of inner and outer castor being equal.
Versions c and d may expect the largest parking forces.

Versions b and d have a scrub radius of 0 mm, however, their CTCs still move
when cornering because the castor is non-zero. If the steered wheel should really
turn on the spot, then the steering axis would have to cut the road in the CTC W.
Then scrub radius and castor alike would be zero.

4.3.1 Steering Ratio

Once the greatest necessary steering wheel angle is known, the required gear ratio
between steering wheel and front tyres must be deﬁned. Regulations for road vehicles
stipulate (so far) a permanent mechanical connection between steering wheel and
steered tyres. The steering movement is transferred from the wheel to the tyres by the
steering linkage (tie rods, drag links etc.), operated by a steering gear (Fig. 4.13). The
gear has an internal gear ratio iG to reduce the steering wheel forces. The linkage
usually has a gear ratio between gear and tyres that is changing with the steering wheel
angle.

The kinematic steering ratio iS from wheel to tyres results from the wheel angle

δH and the steering wheel angles:

iS ¼ dH=dm

ð4:14Þ

kinematic steering ratio, -
steering wheel angle, ˚

iS
δH
δm mean steering wheel angle of the tyres, ˚. δm = (δo + δi)/2.

The gear ratio will usually not be the same all over the steering range. The
above equation therefore applies only to individual ranges of wheel angle and
steering wheel angle.

The overall gear ratio has a lower limit because at high speed the steering response
should be indirect; values of less than 14 are rarely found in passenger cars. The upper
limit results from what steering force is sensible when parking, this depends on whether
power-assistance is given and rarely surpasses a gear ratio of 20 (i.e. 4–5 wheel turns,
end-stop to end-stop; 3–4 are more common). The overall gear ratio is realised by the
product of linkage ratio and gear ratio. The average of outer and inner steering angle
has to be considered for the linkage ratio. If the effective trace levers are known
(projection of the levers onto a plane that is normal to the kingpin axis), the linkage
ratio may be computed from the relation of steering arm to drop arm. The quotient of
effective steering arm and pinion radius is used for rack-and-pinion steering (cf.
Sect. 5.2.2).

80

M. Trzesniowski

The kinematic steering ratio differs from the real conditions by the fact that all
transmission elements will display elasticities and free travel. The steering wheel
can therefore be turned without moving the tyres. A measurement at a passenger
car with rack-and-pinion steering may illustrate how signiﬁcant these divergences
can be for car, Fig. 4.14.

Typically, the effective steering ratio which the driver will perceive upon
driving is the dynamic steering ratio, resulting from the kinematic gear ratio by
overlapping the yielding of the transmission elements:

idyn ¼ iS þ

DdH;e
DdH

ð4:15Þ

idyn
ΔδH,e
ΔδH

dynamic steering ratio,
elastic yielding at the wheel,
steering wheel angle range at the wheel when ΔδH,e occurs.

In other words, the driver perceives that elasticities in the steering system will
amplify the steering ratio. The steering wheel must in fact be turned more than what is
necessary in theory to apply a speciﬁc steering wheel angle of the tyres. If the steering
torque is increased—e.g., by a power-assistance, aerodynamic downforce or off-road
driving—, the proportion of the yielding will also increase (see Sect. 5.2.2).

If several articulated chains are active, they may cause car steering with gear
racks to suffer unintentional changes of the kinematic steering ratio across the
steering wheel angle range. Of course, front-wheel drives are inferior to standard
drives here, because of the cramped space between engine and gearbox. The gear
ratio of front-wheel drives will therefore drop to 17 or 30 % from the straight
position to the full steering wheel angle while rear-wheel drives face only a drop of
5–15 % (Reimpel and Betzler 2000).

One way to overcome the required compromise of any speciﬁc steering ratio is

to use gears with variable gear ratios.

The steering ratio iS or δH/δm may then be high around the middle position
(straight driving and minor steering wheel angles) but large steering wheel angles
of the tyres will lower the ratio, cf. Fig. 4.15 (see also Chap. 11).

4.4 Steering Linkage

No matter whether a rack-and-pinion steering or any other steering gear is used,
the movement of this gear, ﬁxed to the frame, must be transferred to the steering
arms at the hub carrier. The best solution for an independent suspension is to apply
(ﬂexibly coupled) linkages that have to transmit not only the steering movement
but also the motion of the lifting wheel when giving. Figure 4.16 shows some
possible arrangements of linkages.

Version a has parallel rotational axes of the steering gear (1) and the opposite
guide lever (2b). The drop arm (2), the guide lever and the middle section of the

4 Steering Kinematics

81

three-piece tie rod (3) are arranged in a planar four-bar linkage (more precisely, in
a parallelogram). The two levers move the outer parts of the tie rod. This version
has an unfavourable friction. All six joints of the leverage will trace almost the full
steering wheel angle. Additionally, there is the undesirable impact of free travel of
the joints. Version b is very similar to version a, but the axes of the steering gear
(1) and the guide lever (2b) are adapted to the inclination of the steering axis EG.
This is required for wide steering axis inclination angles, as otherwise, the righting
effect caused by the giving of the wheels would be too large. Version c has a
middle section of the tie rod (3) that is supported in ball joints. This rod has one
more degree of freedom: a rotation around its axis. Therefore, the centres of the
joints of the two outer tie rods have to be positioned on this axis of the central tie
rod, so that they cannot perform any undesirable rotation. Version d transmits the
movement of the steering gear (1) via two relay arms (2, 2b) to the tie rods (3).
A clearance develops in the middle of the car (possibly for the engine), but
unfavourably high reaction forces occur, resulting in big elastic distortions. Ver-
sion e is a rack-and-pinion steering. Its simplicity and its low number of parts are
evident. Version f has a gear rack that does not move the steering arms (4) directly
but via an inserted lever (5). The disadvantages are obvious from a comparison
with the above considerations. There are more parts integrated than in a simple
gear rack, increasing mass, free travels and elasticities.

Consider the transmission angles occurring at the basic arrangement of levers
and push rods (here called tie rods). They are critical for the safety of the steering,
Fig. 4.17.

If the transmission angle βU or βT is equal to zero, then the linkage is unstable.
Though rack-and-pinion steerings are lacking the drop arm and the centre of
rotation D is a distant point, there is still the steering arm. The angle βU of the
driven steering arm in particular may not drop below a least value, so that the
steering linkage will not be strained. A least angle is necessary to accommodate for
free travels and elasticities. The transmission angle should not fall short of 25˚.
The linkage gear ratio results from:

iT ¼

ddG
dd

¼

e
f

ð4:16Þ

iT
δG
δ
e, f

linkage gear ratio, -
rotary angle of the drop arm,
steering wheel angle of the tyre,
effective lever arms, mm. See Fig. 4.17.

The length of the steering arm r is a factor for assessing the safety reserves of
the steering. Figure 4.18 shows the curve of important variables over the trans-
mission angle βU for a numerical example of a tie rod of u = 300 mm in length.
Diagram c, representing the critical energy consumption until the leverage is
strained, reveals that short steering arms require wider transmission angles so that
the minimum
the least energy consumption will not be undercut. In fact,

82

M. Trzesniowski

Fig. 4.18 Effect of the transmission angle on the safety of the steering, acc. to Matschinsky
(2007), See also Fig. 4.17. u = 300 mm. a The effective rocker arm e of the steering arm around
the steering axis E increases with the transmission angle and the length of the steering arm r.
b The longitudinal overlap a of steering arm and tie rod is a measure of the distance from the
straining point. Small values of a increase the risk of straining. Long steering arms and large
transmission angles are desirable with regard to this aspect as well. c The tie rod is the only
elastic link in the transmission chain with the stiffness cSt. The effective torsional stiffness of a
wheel around the steering axis is then cδ = cSte2. Therefore the energy consumption before
buckling of the linkage is U = cSta2/2

transmission angles of passenger cars are 20˚ for long steering arms and 30˚ for
short steering arms (Matschinsky 2007).

Now the transmission of rack-and-pinion steerings shall be examined in detail.
The position of the steering gear (in front of or behind the axis) is decisive for how
to arrange the pinion in respect to the gear rack and how to adjust the steering
arms. The steering by the driver is transferred from the steering shaft to the pinion
and further to the gear rack. The transmission chain has to be set up in such a way
that the tyres will turn right when the wheel is turned right, Fig. 4.19.

The steering arms may point forwards or backwards, whatever the position of
the steering gear. The levers, however, must be tilted along the longitudinal plane
of the car to achieve a proper A-steering, see Fig. 4.20.

When seen from above, the transmission links (tie rods and levers) and the front
axle describe in any case a trapezoid and not a parallelogram. Therefore this
arrangement is called a steering trapezoid. If the tie rods are pointing outward, then
the steering arms are longer, though it is the same gear. The vertical movement of
the wheels will then provoke less relative movement of the tie rods and a smaller
righting effect.

4 Steering Kinematics

83

Fig. 4.19 Steering gear in front of the axis. The motion of the wheel is transferred from the
pinion or gear (1) on the steering shaft to the gear rack (2). Its ends are jointly connected by the
tie rods (3) to the steering arms (4). When the gear rack is shifted, the hub carrier (5) turns around
point E. The pinion (1) must be arranged below the gear rack so that the motion of the steering
wheel is transferred in the same direction. The steering arms point outward to fulﬁl Ackermann’s
condition (angle λ is negative)

Fig. 4.20 Arrangement of the steering arms for an A-steering. If the connection of the tie rod U
is located in front of the axle, then the steering arm has to point outward. If, on the other hand, the
joint U is behind the axle, the lever will point towards the car. The backward extension of the
lever meets the intersection of the rear axle and the middle of the car to create ideal A-angles

However, the basic adjustment of the steering arms does not ensure, that the
desired curve of the A-angle (see Fig. 4.6) will really be achieved. The joint points
T and U at the tie rod move in a very different manner when the car is steered,
Fig. 4.21. The gear rack joint T moves in a straight line, crosswise to the direction
of the trafﬁc, but the connection U at the steering arm rotates around the steering
axis EG, describing a circle in space.
When the steering is designed,

the joint points deﬁned by the following
methods must be precisely adjusted, so that the actual curve of the steering wheel
angle approaches the desired curve (nominal curve) in the best way possible.

84

M. Trzesniowski

Fig. 4.21 Motion of the tie rod upon steering. Steering causes the point T to move with the gear
rack, parallel to the road, towards, T′. The second tie rod link U turns on the steering axis EG,
becoming U′. This example does not include any castor angle, hence, in the rear view, the circular
path is perpendicular to the steering axis

There are several basic ways to arrange gear and linkage around the front axle.
The gear may be either in front of or behind the axle and, independent from this,
the steering arms may point either forward or backward. The pinion may be above
or below the gear rack. Figures 4.22, 4.23 and 4.24 show basic arrangements of
approximately equal steering geometry. The tie rods represent the mobile link
between the gear rack and the steering arms, transferring push-and-pull forces.

Compression and rebound of the wheels should not produce a toe-in change of
the wheels, i.e. no steering movement. The decisive factor in this context is the
relative position of the joint points T and U at the tie rod with regard to frame and

Fig. 4.22 Steering behind the axle. If the gear is located behind the front axle, then the steering
arms are pointing inward. The gear is asymmetrical, which is common for two-seaters (driver at
left). The pinion is located above the gear rack. The tie rods are mounted at the ends of the gear
rack

4 Steering Kinematics

85

Fig. 4.23 Steering behind the axle. The gear is behind and above the central line of the front
axle. The steering arms are facing forward. Kinematic arguments demand extended tie rods,
therefore the connection to the gear rack is established in the middle (‘centre tap’). If the tie rods
are too short, an undesirable righting effect upon compression and rebound will be the result. The
pinion is located under the gear rack. Note that in this case the steering arms are not oriented like
in Fig. 4.20 but the other way, inward. Nevertheless, the whole arrangement of the steering
produces a curve of the A-angle according to Ackermann

Fig. 4.24 Steering in front of the axle. This arrangement has the gear located in front of the axle
and the steering arms pointing to the back and inwards. The pinion is seated above the gear rack

chassis. If there is a relative movement between the giving of the joint points, a
steering movement of the wheels is the unavoidable result (bump steering).

The steering arm needs to be deﬁned before carrying out any kinematic studies.
Figure 4.25. The length of the steering arm r is commonly in the range of about
100 mm.

Another argument for the position of steering arm and tie rod—if the steering
arms are in front—is the space available in the rim. Even the largest steering wheel
angle of the wheels should not cause a collision of tie rod and rim. On the contrary
—a safety distance will be left so that, in spite of elasticities of the steering, there

86

M. Trzesniowski

Fig. 4.25 Deﬁning the steering arm joint point. U the link to the steering arm is required for
determining the position of gear and tie rod. The steering arm is pointing either outwards (U′) or
inwards (U), cf. Fig. 4.20, in the rear view it is found either left or right of the steering axis EG.
Compute the distance k from the deﬁned values of the angle λ and the length of the steering arm r

will always be sufﬁcient space left between the parts, Fig. 4.26. If a large steering
wheel angle is needed, it may be necessary to shift the steering arm vertically
towards the wheel centre, where the rim offers the widest space in longitudinal
direction.

Once the steering arm point U is deﬁned, the second link to the tie rod T has to
be determined. Instantaneous centres may help, see Figs. 4.27, 4.28, 4.29, 4.30 and
4.31. Once the linking point T is deﬁned, the position of the steering gear is given,
because the corresponding points of the other side of the car result from mirroring
along the central plane of the car.

If the steering gear requires a high position, the tie rod may be positioned above

the upper wishbone as well, Fig. 4.28.

If the wishbones are initially parallel, the tie rod will also be parallel to them,

Fig. 4.29.

The position of the tie rod may be projected for other wheel suspensions as well
by computing the instantaneous centres. Figures 4.30 and 4.31 show the realisation
for a strut suspension (MacPherson). It is obvious that, the higher the linking point
U of the tie rod is located at the steering arm, the further will the mounting point T
shift along the gear rack to the middle of the car. This may cause problems if the

4 Steering Kinematics

87

Fig. 4.26 Necessary clearance of the linkage. The left front wheel is shown. Even at the largest
steering wheel angle δmax, the tie rod UT has to stay some distance away from the rim. This limits
the available space. It is also obvious that the steering arm has less available space the higher it is
located in the rim

Fig. 4.27 Determining the position of the tie rod. The joint points of the wishbones, E and C as
well as G and D, are known, as is the steering arm connection U. This helps to compute the centre
P1. The centre P2 results from the intersection of the straight lines GE and DC. Next, determine
the angle α of the straight line UP1 and the lower wishbone GD. It is important which way the
angle is turned, starting at the wishbone, because the angle from the connection of the centres
P1P2 has to be applied in the same direction. In other words, if U was beneath the wishbone, then
α had to be applied the opposite way, beginning at the line P1P2. The instantaneous centre of the
tie rod P3 results from the intersection of the straight line UE with the leg that was drawn last.
Now the articulation point T of the tie rod can be determined, since it results from the intersection
of P3C and P1U

88

M. Trzesniowski

Fig. 4.28 Determining the
position of the tie rod. The
approach for this ﬁgure is the
same as for Fig. 4.27. The
only difference is the
arrangement of the steering
arm UE. It is above the upper
wishbone EC, pointing
backwards and inside. As a
result, the articulation point T
is attached to the gear rack
above the wishbone

track is small and the steering gear is long. An extreme case may require to mount
the tie rods not at the ends of the gear rack but in its middle.

Double wishbone axles suggest to arrange the steering gear in such a way that
the tie rods will be located in the planes of the upper or lower triangular wish-
bones. If the articulation points T of the gear rack are on the axes of rotation, then
there will be no steering movement upon compression and rebound, at least when
driving straight, see Fig. 4.32.

The methods described above assume a planar model, rarely found in actual
cars. The points of the linkage computed that way can therefore only serve as

Fig. 4.29 Determining the position of the tie rod. The approach for this ﬁgure is for the major
part the same as for Fig. 4.27. The joint points E, C and G, D are known, as is the steering arm
link U. The centre P1 is here an inﬁnitely distant point, though, and the wishbones are parallel. P3,
may be determined by the help of a parallel of P2, removed by a distance a, that intersects the line
UE (observe the orientation, whether up or down, as in Fig. 4.27). Include the tie rod centre P3 to
compute the rack articulation point T just from the intersection of the line P3C and the tie rod

4 Steering Kinematics

89

Fig. 4.30 Determining the tie rod position at a MacPherson axle. The steering arm of this
MacPherson axle and its connection U are located above and in front of the front axle. The wheel
support and its joints E and G are known, as is the wishbone GD. The support E, mounted to the
chassis, and the wishbone help to construct the lateral centre P1, intersecting the normal on the
direction into which the shock strut moves with the extension of the wishbone. Now the centre P2
results from the intersection of a parallel of the centre line P1E, crossing G and the line ED. The
angle α is applied, beginning at the line P1P2, in the same direction as the angle measured
between P1E and P1U. Based on the line UG, the centre P3 can be designed. The tie rod centre P3
immediately yields the second tie rod articulation point T, located on the line P3D

Fig. 4.31 Determining the position of the tie rod at a MacPherson axle. The approach to
determine the second tie rod articulation point T is as for the preceding picture, only the
arrangement of the steering arm is different. Here it is turned inwards and its articulation point U
at the tie rod may also be located beneath the wishbone connection G

clues. The designer will ‘approach’ the exact deﬁnition of the linkage by drawings
or, more up-to-date, at the computer. This will be successful faster than extensive
auxiliary designs considering the 3D nature of steering and chassis (Matschinsky
2007).

90

M. Trzesniowski

Fig. 4.32 Position of the tie
rods without self-steering
effect. Plan view (below) and
rear view (top). When driving
straight, the tie rod with the
joints T and U is located in
the plane of the upper
triangular wishbone with the
articulation points E, C and F.
The gear rack joint T is on the
axis of rotation CF of the
wishbone. The connection U
between tie rod and steering
arm is also arranged in the
plane of the wishbone

Table 4.1 Remedial actions against self-steering effect, acc. to Staniforth (1999)
Steering movement upon

Remedial action

Shifting the gear

Tie rod length

Compression

Toe-in

Rebound

Toe-out

Toe-out

Toe-in

Toe-out

Toe-out

In front of the axle: raise
Behind the axle: lower
In front of the axle: lower
Behind the axle: raise
–

–

–

Toe-in

Toe-in

–

In front of the axle: extend
Behind the axle: shorten
In front of the axle: shorten

If steering movements occur in the car prototype built when giving, this
behaviour can be improved by shifting the steering gear or by adapting the length
of the tie rods, see Table 4.1.

Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

This chapter is an introduction to lateral vehicle dynamics and steady and dynamic
cornering. Basic discussions will serve to analyse the essential factors inﬂuencing
the lateral vehicle dynamics of a car and the steering wheel angle and torque
indicated by the driver. Models are required for a more detailed analysis, they
expand upon the fundamental relationships for slow and fast cornering (see
Chap. 2). Steady-state circular driving will be discussed based on the linear single
track model. This leads to dynamic cornering. We do this the classic way by
applying analytic equations. Their big advantage is that the relationships may be
easily understood. When the effects of shifting the dynamic wheel load will be
included, the single track model has to be extended into a Dual-track model. This
is usually done using numerical simulations, because closed equations serve little
to illustrate these relationships.

5.1 Vehicle Modelling: Linear Single Track Model

The most important aspects of driving dynamics are probably these: why can a car
be steered in a deﬁned manner, why does it go consistently and why is it not
substantially deﬂected from its course by outside inﬂuences? Especially at higher
speed and cornering this was a marked problem until the 1960s. As was shown in
Sect. 1.2, the theoretical examinations trace back to Riekert and Schunck (1940).
They developed the single track model which gets by with very few degrees of

P. Pfeffer (&)
Munich University of Applied Science, Munich, Germany
e-mail: peter.pfeffer@steeringhandbook.org

H.-H. Braess
ehemals BMW AG, Munich, Germany

M. Harrer and P. Pfeffer (eds.), Steering Handbook, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-05449-0_5,
(cid:1) Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017

91

92

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

freedom. Yet these help to analyse and discuss the most important aspects of
driving dynamics. The following two essential simpliﬁcations were assumed:

• All the forces act on a plane ﬂat road. The height of the centre of gravity must be
ignored, because the centrifugal force is acting there, hence, it does not apply
any additional load to the outer tyre or discharge to the inner tyre, i.e. the left and
right tyre of each axle is exposed to the same load. They may therefore be added
up to ‘one tyre’. This assumption excluded rolling of the car, eliminating this
degree of freedom.

• The equations of the system are linearised. The tyre force is assumed propor-
tional to the slip angle, without any lead-in area. The trail is negligibly small in
comparison to the wheelbase. Assuming small angles (slip, sideslip angle, …)
the trigonometric functions are linearised.

With these assumptions the model is suitable for the on-centre area and normal
driving up to approx. 4 m/s2. The dynamic range near the force closure limit
cannot be computed, because the dynamic wheel load distribution and the tyre
force limit will dominate then. However, a normal driver drives mostly within this
very range, therefore it is crucial for the perceived driveability.

Figure 5.1 shows the axis systems used. XE and YE refer to the earth-ﬁxed level
axis system. The car is moving with an on-board axis system XV and YV at its
centre of gravity (ISO 8855). The angle that the car’s central plane assumes against
the earth-ﬁxed XE axis is the yaw angle ψ. The centre of gravity moves at the
speed v. The speed vector v will usually not point towards the central plane of the
car but be tilted against it by a sideslip angle β. The course angle results from the
sum of yaw and sideslip angle. The car turns around the instantaneous centre ICM
that results from the polar radii perpendicular to the speed vectors. On steady
circling, the centre ICM is removed from the centre of gravity by the radius of
curvature R. At very low speed, without a steering angle applied to the rear axle
and with negligible side forces, the speed vectors are located in the respective
central planes of the tyres. In that case the instantaneous centre is on the level of
the rear axle. The steering angle δA, also called Ackermann’s steering angle or
A-angle (see Sect. 4.2) is required at the front axle. The orientations marked in the
picture are deﬁned as positive. They develop when driving a left turn.

5.1.1 Dynamic Equations

For the acting tyre and air forces, see Fig. 5.1. The principle of linear momentum
in the on-board coordinate system is along the car:

mV (cid:1) at (cid:1) cos b (cid:3) mV (cid:1) ar (cid:1) sin b ¼ FYF sin d þ FXF cos d þ FYR sin dR þ FXR cos dR þ FXa
ð5:1Þ

5 Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

93

Instantaneous centre
ICM @ v > 0

ICM @ v

0

+
αδαδ
R
F

−

−

(

F

R

)

δ
A

YV

Y
E

Ψ

XV

X
E

R

ra

a

Centre of gravity

YV

FXR

FYR

α
R

lR

δ
R

vR

MZ

vy

ta

ψ

FYa

v

β

vx

lF

XV

FXF

FXa

FYF

δα
F
vF

Fig. 5.1 Forces and kinematic variables in the single track model

and laterally:

mV (cid:1) at (cid:1) sin b þ mV (cid:1) ar (cid:1) cos b ¼ FYF cos d þ FXF sin d þ FYR cos dR þ FXR sin dR þ FYa
ð5:2Þ

δ is the steering angle at the front axle and δR is the steering angle at the rear axle.
The lateral front and rear tyre forces are FYF and FYR, FYa is the lateral aerody-
namic force. As was seen in Chap. 2, the acting point of the lateral force is shifted
by the trail. This trail is very small in comparison to the wheelbase, it may
therefore be disregarded for this purpose.

The principle of conservation of angular momentum around the car axis ZV in

the centre of gravity yields:
IZ (cid:1) €w ¼ ðFYF cos d þ FXF sin dFÞ (cid:1) lF (cid:3) ðFYR cos dR þ FXR sin dRÞ (cid:1) lR þ MZa ð5:3Þ

applying MZa as the aerodynamic yaw torque.

94

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

⋅
Fl⋅ψ

vYF

α
F

δ

vF

⋅
ψ

vX

v

β

vy

vX

Rl⋅⋅ψ

v

vYR

vX

δ
R

vR

α
R

vY

CoG  

Fig. 5.2 Relationship of speeds in the single track model

Assuming small side forces and disregarding the transient tyre behaviour, there
is a linear relationship between the front and rear slip angles, αF and αR, and the
corresponding (axial) lateral tyre force:

FYF ¼ CaF (cid:1) aF and FYR ¼ CaR (cid:1) aR

ð5:4Þ

The proportionality Cα is called cornering stiffness.
The relationship between the slip angles, the front and rear steer-angles δ and δR
and the sideslip angle β is deduced from Fig. 5.2. Since the car is rigid, the
longitudinal component of the speed has to be equal for every point of the car.
Appling this to the centre of gravity and the front and rear axles gives:

Along the car, the lateral speed changes by the rotating part of the yaw velocity,

multiplied by the distance:

vX ¼ v cos b ¼ vR cosðdR (cid:3) aRÞ
vX ¼ v cos b ¼ vF cosðdF (cid:3) aFÞ

and

vYR ¼ vR sinðdR (cid:3) aRÞ ¼ v sin b (cid:3) _w (cid:1) lR
vYF ¼ vF sinðdF (cid:3) aFÞ ¼ v sin b þ _w (cid:1) lF

Combining Eqs. 5.5 and 5.6 gives:
v sin b (cid:3) _w (cid:1) lR
v cos b

tanðdR (cid:3) aRÞ ¼

and tanðdF (cid:3) aFÞ ¼

v sin b þ _w (cid:1) lF
v cos b

If the angles are assumed to be small, the above equation for the front axle
simpliﬁes to:

and for the rear axle:

aF ¼ (cid:3)b þ dF (cid:3)

aR ¼ (cid:3)b þ dR þ

_w (cid:1) lF
v

_w (cid:1) lR
v

ð5:5Þ

ð5:6Þ

ð5:7Þ

ð5:8Þ

ð5:9Þ

5 Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

For small angles, the sideslip angle is computed as the quotient of lateral and
longitudinal speed.

b ¼

vy
vx

After linearising the small angles and replacing the radial tyre forces in Eqs. 5.1
and 5.3 by 5.4 and the slip angles by 5.8 and 5.9, this results in the following
linearised dynamic equations of the car:

mV (cid:1) at (cid:1) b þ mV (cid:1) ar ¼ CaF (cid:1) (cid:3)b þ dF (cid:3) lF

þ CaR (cid:1) (cid:3)b þ dR þ lR

þ FYa

mV (cid:1) at ¼ FXF þ FXR þ FXa
 

!

 

_w
v

 

!

_w
v

!

_w
v

 
IZ (cid:1) €w ¼ CaF (cid:1) (cid:3)b þ dF (cid:3) lF

!

_w
v

(cid:1) lF (cid:3) CaR (cid:1) (cid:3)b þ dR þ lR

(cid:1) lR þ MZa

The dynamic equations describe the behaviour of the car in its degrees of freedom.
Even if steer-angle, driving and aerodynamics forces are known, speed, yaw angle,
sideslip angle and centripetal acceleration remain unknown. The required addi-
tional equation was derived by Mitschke and Wallentowitz (2003) from a geo-
metrical discussion of the trajectory. The radius of curvature R is computed as a
function of the course angle β + ψ and the trajectory u:

1
R

¼

ð

d b þ w
Þ
du

The speed results from the derivation of the trajectory:

v ¼

and hence

¼

du
dt

1
R

d b þ w
Þ
ð
v (cid:1) dt

¼

_b þ _w
v

The centripetal acceleration is:

ar ¼

¼ v2

v2
R

_b þ _w
v

(cid:2)

(cid:3)
_b þ _w

¼ v (cid:1)

95

ð5:10Þ

ð5:11Þ

ð5:12Þ

ð5:13Þ

ð5:14Þ

ð5:15Þ

ð5:16Þ

This is the previously lacking relationship. Equations 5.11–5.13 and 5.16 help to
simulate the motion of the car if the driving forces in front FXF and rear FXR, the
aerodynamic forces FXa and FYa, the torque MZa and the steer-angles at the front
axle δ and the rear axle δR are known.

96

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

5.1.2 Steering Angle: Steering Wheel Angle—Power-Assisted

Steering

The driver does not set the steering angle at the tyre but the steering wheel angle at
the steering wheel. The relationships between steer-angle, steering wheel angle,
wheel torque and power-assisted steering will therefore be discussed in this sec-
tion. We suppose for the sake of simplicity that the same steering angle applies at
the left and the right tyre, because the single track model does not permit any
differentiation; small angles are assumed as well, then the trigonometric functions
can be linearised. Any friction, damping and free travel is ignored.

Figure 5.3 shows a simple rack-and-pinion steering system. A steering wheel
angle δH or a torque MH is applied to the wheel. This input variable is transmitted
by the steering column to the torsion bar with the torsional stiffness CT. The
pinion, with the degree of freedom δH
* , transforms this rotation into a translation of
the gear rack sR. The steering arm with length rL, helps to reconvert the translation
into a rotation δ*. The elasticity of the tie rod and the axle mounting are included
in the steering stiffness CR which transfers the steering torque to the wheel, gen-
erating a steering angle δ. The kinematic relationships describe a steering without
distortion of the torsion springs, i.e. without any forces or torques acting. The
kinematic steering ratio iS produces a steering angle of:

ð5:17Þ

d ¼

dH
iS

Kingpin inclination
σ
 
angle

Left tyre  

Steering axis

Tyre lateral force
front left

FYFl  

D  

ro 

Tie rod

 

 

 

Castor angle

τ
 

 
rL 

D  

 

r  
τ
rP  

 

Steering 
arm

FYFr  

Fig. 5.3 Integration of the steering into the single track model

Steering-wheel angle/
torque

HMδ
,H

δ
*
H

rPi  

 

*δ

 

Torsion bar
stiffness CT  

FYFl

 
Wheel mounting-
torsional stiffness C

δ
R  

5 Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

The rack shift sr, based on the pinion radius rPi, is:

sr ¼ dH (cid:1) rPi

If no forces are included, the steering angle is equal to the steering arm angle δ*
which can be computed as a function either of the rack shift, the pinion torsion or
the steering wheel angle:

d ¼ d(cid:4) ¼

¼ dH (cid:1)

sr
rL

rPi
rL

iS ¼

rL
rPi

So the kinematic steering ratio results as well from the ratio of steering arm length
and pinion radius:

As forces and a torques are applied, these need to be considered. The single track
model allows to disregard longitudinal forces when a constant driving speed is
assumed, therefore the scrub radius ro does not cause a torque around the steering
axis. The side forces are observed at the left and right tyres, FYFl and FYFr, because
they generate a torque around the steering axis. The steering torque MS can be
computed by adding the side forces times the full castor r resulting from the sum
of constructive castor rτ and trail rP (see Sect. 2.4.1).

MS ¼ FYFl þ FYFr

ð

Þ (cid:1) rs þ rP

ð

Þ ¼ FYF (cid:1) r

ð5:21Þ

This steering torque acts to realign the tyres, therefore it is also called the
self-aligning torque of the axle. The torque MH that the driver has to apply is
reduced by the kinematic steering ratio and the steering assistance ratio AS:

A smaller wheel torque corresponds to a higher kinematic steering ratio and a
stronger power-assist. The difference of the steering wheel angle and the pinion
angle can also be used to compute the wheel torque:

The torque at the front axle alters the torsional stiffness of the axle support:

With no elasticity applied between the torsional angles of pinion and steering arm,
the following is also valid:

MH ¼

MS
iS (cid:1) AS

(cid:4)
MH ¼ CT dH (cid:3) d(cid:4)
H

(cid:5)

MS ¼ CR d(cid:4) (cid:3) d
ð

Þ

H ¼ d(cid:4) (cid:1) iS
d(cid:4)

97

ð5:18Þ

ð5:19Þ

ð5:20Þ

ð5:22Þ

ð5:23Þ

ð5:24Þ

ð5:25Þ

98

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

Now the relationship between steering wheel angle and steering angle using the
Eqs. 5.22–5.25 yields:

dH ¼ d (cid:1) iS þ

¼ d (cid:1) iS þ

MS (cid:1) iS
CS

FYF (cid:1) r (cid:1) iS
CS

with the total steering stiffness of the steering axes CS:

1
CS

¼

þ

1
CR

1
CT (cid:1) i2
S (cid:1) AS

ð5:26Þ

ð5:27Þ

If the total steering stiffness is inﬁnite or if there is no steering torque, the steering
wheel angle is equal to the steering angle times the kinematic steering ratio. The
steering stiffness is the result of the torsion bar stiffness and the torsional stiffness
of the axle mounting aligned in series, hence, the less stiff component sets an upper
limit to the steering stiffness. A high steering ratio or a strong power-assist stiffens
the steering system.

The relationship between steering wheel angle and steering angle is described
by Eq. 5.26, disregarding mass and inertia of the steering driveline. This inertia is
relevant in particular for very fast steering movements or for free control (see
Sect. 5.2.6). Characteristics and target values of real systems are described in
Sect. 5.2.

The steering stiffness acts like a reduced cornering stiffness, called the effective
cornering stiffness Cα,eff. According to Mitschke and Wallentowitz (2003), for the
front axle, it may be computed as follows:

1
CaF;eff

¼

1
CaF

þ

1
CS=r

ð5:28Þ

This equation shows that
the effective cornering stiffness derives from the
cornering stiffness and the steering stiffness relative to the trail. One uses the
dynamic Eqs. 5.11–5.13 and 5.16 and replaces the cornering stiffnesses by these
effective cornering stiffnesses at the front and rear axles to include the inﬂuence of
the steering on the driveability. This inﬂuence is often disregarded for the rear axle
and only the cornering stiffness at the front axle is reduced.

For a more detailed discussion of the steering behaviour, the steering model

shown in Fig. 5.3 can be extended as needed (see Sect. 5.1.7).

5.1.3 Steady-State Circular Driving

The driveability is through evaluated through circular driving at constant speed,
also called steady-state circular driving. Many dynamic parameters of a car that are
important for lateral dynamics, for example the self-steering gradient, can be
determined by this driving manoeuvre. Realisation and evaluation are deﬁned in

5 Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

99

ISO 4138 (2004). The single track model serves to compute the relevant variables
with simple analytic equations. A detailed derivation of the equations to compute
the related variables is found in Mitschke and Wallentowitz (2003). The circular
driving test overlaps the centre of curvature with the instantaneous centre of the
car; i.e. the car turns around the centre of the very circle it is driving on. The
longitudinal acceleration is zero and there is only lateral acceleration. The sideslip
angle does not change and the yaw speed is constant, therefore, Eq. 5.16, which
serves to compute the lateral acceleration, is reduced to the following:

aY (cid:5) ar ¼

¼ v (cid:1) _w

v2
R

ð5:29Þ

The steering wheel angle is proportional to the lateral acceleration. For a car
without all-wheel steering, it is:

dH ¼

þ m (cid:1) iS

iSl
R

CaR;eff lR (cid:3) CaF;eff lF
CaF;eff (cid:1) CaR;eff l

aY ¼ dH0 þ

aY

ð5:30Þ

iSl
v2
ch

This provides the characteristic speed as:

v2
ch ¼

(cid:4)

CaF;eff (cid:1) CaR;eff l2
m CaR;eff lR (cid:3) CaF;eff lF

(cid:5)

ð5:31Þ

The characteristic speed is the speed that requires twice the steady steering wheel
angle and the highest yaw response in a single track model with linear behaviour.
One needs to check in reality whether the linear single track model is still valid at
these operating points. Generally it will not be.

At very low speed, the lateral acceleration is about zero and the steering

steering wheel angle is equal to the so-called Ackermann steer angle:

The following steering angle is then required at the front tyre:

dH aY ¼ 0

ð

Þ ¼ dH0 ¼

iSl
R

dD aY ¼ 0

ð

Þ ¼

l
R

ð5:32Þ

ð5:33Þ

This angle is the Ackermann steer angle or the dynamic reference steer angle.

The steady-state circular driving allows to measure different gradients of car
response or to deduce them from models. Table 5.1 lists the variables deﬁned in
ISO 8855/DIN 70000 and the way they may be computed in the single track
model. The ratio of a parameter change relative to another parameter, beginning at
a steady equilibrium, is called the gradient. This equilibrium is given in the
steady-state circular driving.

100

Table 5.1 Important
of
DIN 70000/ISO 8855 and their computation in the single track model
Variable

steady-state

Deﬁnition

circular

values

the

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

driving

according

to

Single track
modela
¼ v2
ch
isl
¼ l
v2
ch
¼ 0

¼ isl
v2
ch

¼ mF (cid:1) r
iS
¼ m (cid:1) lR(cid:1)r
l2 (cid:1) i2
S (cid:1)AS

¼ m (cid:1) lR(cid:1)r
l (cid:1) iS
v2
(cid:2) (cid:3)2

1 þ v
vch

n/a
¼ mlF

l (cid:1) CaR;eff

¼ (cid:3) iSl
vch

CaReff lR
m (cid:1) lF

¼ l
v2
ch
¼ 1
v2
ch

Steering sensitivity

steering angle gradient

Dynamic reference steering angle gradient (neutral

Steering wheel angle gradient (inverse steering

self-steering)

response)

Steering-wheel torque gradient

Steering-wheel torque/angle gradient

@aY
@dH
@d
@aY
@dD
@aY

@dH
@aY

@MH
@aY
@MH
@dH

Steering-wheel/sideslip angle gradient

Roll angle gradient

Sideslip angle gradient

Self-steering gradient EG

Stability factor

Directional coefﬁcient

@uY
@aY
@b
@aY
@dH
@b
@dH
@aY
Self-steering

(cid:3) @dD
@aY

1
iS

¼ 1
iS

@dH (cid:3)@dH0
@aY

gradient/wheelbase
Stability factor/sideslip

angle

a Without power-assist (power-assist = 1), with constant overall steering ratio and without
four-wheel steering

5.1.4 Understeer and Oversteer

The terms understeer and oversteer are very often used to describe car handling.
tyres ‘drift’ during
A car is commonly called understeering when its front
cornering so that the trajectory radius becomes larger. By contrast, oversteer
means that the rear of a car is drifting outwards. These terms are often used for
unsteady driving manoeuvres, too. However, DIN 70000/ISO 8855 deﬁnes these
terms only for the steady-state circular driving.

The mode of steering is called understeer if the self-steering gradient is posi-
tive, i.e. the lateral acceleration increments and the steering wheel angle, as a
function of the kinematic steering ratio, increases faster than the dynamic refer-
ence steering angle (see Fig. 5.4):

@dH
@aY

1
iS

(cid:3)

@dD
@aY

[ 0

ð5:34Þ

The steady state that has a self-steering gradient of zero,

the lateral
acceleration increments and the steering wheel angle, as a function of the kine-
matic steering ratio, is exactly the same as the increase of the dynamic reference
steer-angle, is called neutral steer.

i.e.

neutral

δ
H
a

y

0 =

0

ð5:35Þ

ð5:36Þ

5 Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

101

Constant Speed

neutral

Constant radius

δ
H

i

S

l

e
g
n
a
-
r
e
e
t
S

δ
H

i

S

l

e
g
n
a
-
r
e
e
t
S

A cker m a n n

E G

-

δ
H =
0
a y

1
2
v

Understeer

Oversteer

EG

Ackermann

Understeer

Oversteer

Lateral acceleration

 a y

Lateral acceleration

 ay

Fig. 5.4 Deﬁnition of understeer and oversteer at constant speed and circle radius at a constant
overall steering ratio

@dH
@aY

1
iS

(cid:3)

@dD
@aY

¼ 0

@dH
@aY

1
iS

(cid:3)

@dD
@aY

\0

The steady state is called oversteer if the self-steering gradient is less than zero,
i.e. lateral acceleration increases and the steering wheel angle as a function of the
kinematic steering ratio increases slower than the dynamic reference steer-angle.

If the car is oversteering, the radius of its circle lessens as the lateral acceler-
ation rises, though the steering wheel is steady. The circular driving with constant
radius has a simpler relationship because the dynamic reference steering wheel
angle does not change. This circular driving is shown in Fig. 5.4 on the right side.
Both deﬁnitions of the self-steering effect given by ISO 8855 assume the
steering angle to be a quotient of the steering wheel angle and the kinematic
steering ratio (Fig. 5.4). Elasticities of steering driveline and suspension and the
variable steering ratio will usually make the actual steering angle deviate from this
quotient. Therefore, the self-steering effect of cars with variable steering ratio
should be acquired for different speeds or radii (Kraaijeveld et al. 2009).

The steering wheel angle in Fig. 5.5 is illustrated by two cars in steady-state
circular driving with a steady radius. Car A is linear and understeering at a low
lateral acceleration. Increasing lateral acceleration reveals a rising tendency to
oversteer. Then this tendency reverses, and at the transitional point the behaviour
is neutral, followed by oversteer. The speed at which twice the A-angle is required
is the characteristic speed.

The self-steering gradient is usually unsteady, hence the real non-linear char-
acteristic speed will deviate from the characteristic speed of linear theory. Modern
cars are designed to understeer, to ensure stability. A reversal to oversteer is

102

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

Fig. 5.5 Deﬁnition of
understeer and oversteer for
constant speed and radius at a
constant overall steering ratio

δ
H

l

e
g
n
a
 
l
e
e
h
w
 
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

δ
2 H

0

δ

0H

steady radius 

understeer

oversteer 

Ackermann wheel angle 

Car B

neutral

Car A

2

vkrit
R

2

vch
R

v hc
 ,

2

raenil
R

Lateral acceleration a y

avoided. Car B, on the other hand, is a purely oversteering car. With increasing
speed and lateral acceleration, the steering wheel angle has to be reduced. If the
steering wheel angle is zero, the critical speed and therefore the limit of stability is
achieved.

5.1.5 Transient Response: Response Time of a Steering

Wheel Step Input

ISO 7401 stipulates that different steering inputs can be used to assess the transient
behaviour. The step steering input is very common. A step is theoretically applied
and the steady steering wheel angle is achieved during measurement by a fast
steering wheel angle ramp (see Fig. 5.6).

The response time to a quick steering input matters in addition to the stationary
yaw gain. The car should not respond either too fast or too slowly. Several
response times are available. The response time TA is often used; describing for a
step steering input, it describes the time difference between the rise of the steering
wheel angle and that of the yaw speed to 63.2 % of the steady value.

The time is calculated as follows, acc. to Mitschke and Wallentowitz (2003):

TA ¼

2 (cid:1) mv
CaF;eff þ CaR;eff

(cid:1)

K2
I
lF (cid:1) lR
1 þ K2
I
lF (cid:1) lR

ð5:37Þ

TA Response time, 63.2 % of the steady value
KI

Inertia radius around vertical axis.

The response time TA corresponds approximately to the equivalent response
time (delay time) in the Weir & DiMarco diagram (see Fig. 7.12). Ideal values of

l

 
e
g
n
a
 
l
e
e
h
w
 
e
h
t

 
f
o
 
e
v
r
u
C

 
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r

i

l

 
e
c
h
e
V

5 Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

103

Fig. 5.6 steering wheel
angle and response to step
steering input (ISO 7401)

100 %

50 %

steady value

 90% of the steady value 

T A

t0

a Response time

Time

Tmax

b

b peak 

response time 

modern cars are less than 0.1 to 0.15 s at 80 km/h. At other times, the 90 %
response time (Pacejka 2006) or the time till the ﬁrst yaw speed maximum (Decker
2009) is used.

5.1.6 Yaw Gain

The dynamic response should deviate only slightly from the stationary yaw gain in
the range of the steering frequency that the driver has to enter. The natural yaw
frequency of cars as a function of speed is the result (see Fig. 5.7).

The yaw gain is characterised by the undamped natural yaw velocity frequency

(Mitschke and Wallentowitz 2003).

(cid:4)
CaF;eff (cid:1) CaR;eff (cid:1) l2 þ mv2 CaR;eff (cid:1) lR (cid:3) CaF;eff (cid:1) lF
Iz (cid:1) m (cid:1) v2

(cid:5)

x2

w ¼

Yaw damping:

Dw ¼

CaF;eff (cid:1) l2

F þ CaR;eff (cid:1) l2
R

2Iz (cid:1) v2 (cid:1) xw

þ

CaF;eff þ CaR;eff
2mvxw

ð5:38Þ

ð5:39Þ

The following is aimed for: Amplitude response without signiﬁcant resonance
magniﬁcation, limited angles of phase difference, natural yaw frequency not too
low natural yaw frequency, neither too low or too high yaw damping (Fig. 5.8).

104

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

Fig. 5.7 Natural yaw
frequency of different car
designs (analytic steering
model)

Natural yaw frequency 

Car. 1
Car. 2
Car. 3
Car. 4
Car. 5
Car. 6
Car. 7
Car. 8
Car. 9
Car. 10

50

100

150

200

Speed

[km/h]

Fig. 5.8 Yaw damping of
different car tunings (analytic
steering model)

Yaw damping 

]
z
H

[
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
 

w
a
y

 
l

a
r
u
t
a
N

i

]
 
[
 
 
g
n
p
m
a
d
w
a
Y

 

4.5

5

4

3

2

3.5

2.5

1.5

1

0

3.5

4

3

2

1

2.5

1.5

0.5

0

0

Car. 1
Car. 2
Car. 3
Car. 4
Car. 5
Car. 6
Car. 7
Car. 8
Car. 9
Car. 10

50

100

150

200

Speed

 [km/h]

5.1.7 Steering Models

The steering inﬂuences the driving and steering behaviour of a car decisively. The
steering model described in Sect. 5.1.2 already covers the essential elasticities in
the steering driveline or in the wheel suspension. Extended steering models are
required for detailed examinations and in particular to calculate the steering wheel
torque and the transmission behaviour of the steering. Figure 5.9 shows a selection
of steering models. An extensive overview of steering models may be found, for
example, in Braess (2001) and in Zschocke (2009).

The steering models are extended according to the task, for example, very
detailed mechanical, hydraulic and electric steering models have been developed.

5 Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

105

Fig. 5.9 Steering models for different applications, acc. to Braess (2001)

Models with three or more degrees of freedom are used (Pfeffer 2006) to examine
wheel shudder and, the transmission behaviour of steerings. Models with two
degrees of freedom are mostly used for examinations of driving dynamics.
Additional considerations are:

• separate degrees of freedom for both front wheels in connection with the two

track model for different wheel loads

• misalignment of the tyre forces and inﬂuences of the footprint

106

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

• friction, inertia and damping
• axle drive shaft torques of front-wheel drives, possibly complemented by effects
of the limited-slip differentials and the electronic chassis system, as, for
example, ABS
• steering support

Very detailed modelling of hydraulic and electric components for dynamic
purposes is mostly renounced, because the inﬂuence of dynamics is low but would
considerably prolong the processing times.

5.1.8 Steering Model with Power-Assist and Friction Effects

Analytic observations of the single track model including steering are based on the
disregard of power-assist and friction, as well as the assumption of a constant
steering ratio. These simpliﬁcations have to be made to derive the closed equations
in a manageable way. This analytic car model will in the following be compared to
a model with power-assist and friction effects. The car parameters used are listed
in Table 5.2.

The difference between the analytic and the simple steering model is the inertia
required for the simulation over time. Quasi-steady manoeuvres as, for example,
circular driving produce the same behaviour. The complex model applies an ESF
friction element according to Pfeffer et al. (2008) to the gear rack and steering
column frictions. The complex steering model with power-assist includes an
additional two-fold power gain. No steady power-assist is used in reality, because
it would rise with increasing wheel torque and lateral acceleration (see Chap. 2).
Figure 5.10 shows the inﬂuence of the different modelling methods and the

power-assist.

5.1.9 Discussion of the Inﬂuence of the Vehicle and Steering
Parameters on the Driving and Steering Performance

The driving and steering performance of a car is marked by the car and steering
parameters. The following table describes variations of a middle class car whose
order of magnitude is found in the normal tuning area of car design development.
The selected diverse car and steering parameters have the greatest inﬂuence on
driveability, according to experience.

The simulation of the following diagrams applies a single track model, together
with the complex steering model and the parameters listed in Table 5.3. The
diagrams show to what extent the car and steering parameters inﬂuence drive-
ability (Figs. 5.11, 5.12, 5.13, 5.14).

5 Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

107

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

t
s
i
s
s
a
r
e
w
o
p

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

x
e
l
p
m
o
C

x
e
l
p
m
o
C

s
t
i
n
U

s
l
o
b
m
y
S

8
5
9
7
0
0
.
0

4
9
1
1
.
0

8
5
9
7
0
0
0

.

8
5
9
7
0
0
0

.

8
5
9
7
0
0
0

.

4
9
1
1
0

.

4
9
1
1
0

.

4
9
1
1
0

.

0
0
7
1

8
.
2

4
.
1

4
.
1

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

5
1
7
8
3
1

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
6
2

2
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

5
1

0
5

0
0
0
0
4

6
2
5
2
2

2

2

6
4
1
1
.
0

7
.
5
4

4
0
.
0

l
e
d
o
m

0
0
7
1

8
2

.

4
1

.

4
1

.

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

8
3
4
9
1
1

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
6
2

2
0
0

.

4
0
0

.

6
0
0

.

5
1

0
5

0
0
0
0
4

8
7
6
5
1

2

1

6
4
1
1
0

.

.

7
5
4

4
0
0

.

e
l
p
m
i
S

l
e
d
o
m

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

8
3
4
9
1
1

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
6
2

8
2

.

4

.

1

4

.

1

2
0
0

.

4
0
0

.

6
0
0

.

5
1

0
5

0
0
0
0
4

8
7
6
5
1

2

1

6
4
1
1

.

0

.

7
5
4

4
0
0

.

c
i
t
y
l
a
n
A

l
e
d
o
m

0
0
7
1

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

8
3
4
9
1
1

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
6
2

8
2

.

4
1

.

4
1

.

2
0
0

.

4
0
0

.

6
0

.

0

5
1

0
5

g
k

m

m

m

2

m
g
k

d
a
r
/

N

d
a
r
/

N

d
a
r
/

N

d
a
r
/

N

/

U
m
m

m

m

m

m

m

m

F
l

R
l

z
J

l

τ
r

P
r

r

S
i

G
I

i
P
r

L
r

T
C

R
C

S
C

S
A

C
J

T
d

f
f
e
,
F
α
C

f
f
e
,
R
α
C

F
α
C

H
α
C

0
0
0
0
4

8
7
6
5
1

1

2

e
e
r
g
e
d
/
m
N

d
a
r
/

m
N

d
a
r
/

m
N

d
a
r
/
s

m
N

2

m
g
k

g
k

F
u
m

s
l
e
d
o
m
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d

f
o

s
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
P

2
.
5

e
l
b
a
T

r
a
c

e
h
t

f
o

a
i
t
r
e
n
i

f
o

t
n
e
m
o
m
w
a
Y

t
n
o
r
f

*
s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

g
n
i
r
e
n
r
o
c

l
a
u
t
c
A

r
a
e
r

*
s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

g
n
i
r
e
n
r
o
c

l
a
u
t
c
A

t
n
o
r
f

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

g
n
i
r
e
n
r
o
C

r
a
e
r

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

g
n
i
r
e
n
r
o
C

o
i
t
a
r

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

c
i
t
a
m
e
n
i
K

o
i
t
a
r

r
a
e
g

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

s
u
i
d
a
r

n
o
i
n
i
P

h
t
g
n
e
l

m
r
a

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

l
i
a
r
t

l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
M

l
i
a
r
T

c
i
t
a
m
u
e
n
P

r
o
t
s
a
c

l
l
u
F

n
o
i
s
n
e
p
s
u
s

+

l
e
e
h
w

t
n
o
r
f

s
s
a
m
g
n
u
r
p
s
n
U

a
i
t
r
e
n
i

n
m
u
l
o
c

d
n
a

l
e
e
h
w
-
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

r
a
b

n
o
i
s
r
o
t

g
n
i
p
m
a
D

g
n
i
t
n
u
o
m
e
l
x
a

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

l
a
n
o
i
s
r
o
T

r
a
b

n
o
i
s
r
o
t

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

l
a
n
o
i
s
r
o
T

o
i
t
a
r

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
s
a

r
e
w
o
P

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
P

e
s
a
b
l
e
e
h
W

s
s
a
m

r
a
C

A
F

k
c
a
r
T

A
R

k
c
a
r
T

108

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

x
e
l
p
m
o
C

t
s
i
s
s
a
r
e
w
o
p

0
0
0
0
0
6
1

0
5
1
(cid:6)

2
:
0
(cid:6)

2
1

7
.
1

x
e
l
p
m
o
C

l
e
d
o
m

7
1

.

0
0
0
0
0
6
1

0
5
1
(cid:6)

2
:
0
(cid:6)

2
1

e
l
p
m
i
S

l
e
d
o
m

7
1

.

c
i
t
y
l
a
n
A

l
e
d
o
m

s
t
i
n
U

s
l
o
b
m
y
S

e
e
r
g
e
d
/
m
N

2

m
g
k

m
N

/

N

k
c
a
r

k
c
a
r

C

F
u
J

r
F
k

r
F
F

r
F
k

M

m
N

C

r
F

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

e
r
i
t
n
e

e
c
r
o
f

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

c
i
t
a
t
s

t
i

m

i
l

r
e
w
o
l

d
n
a

r
e
p
p
U

e
l
x
a

n
a

f
o

s
e
r
y
t

h
t
o
B

*
*

n
m
u
l
o
c

a

s
a

n
o
i
s
n
e
p
s
u
s

f
o

s
s
a
m
g
n
u
r
p
s
n
u

+

l
e
e
h
w

t
n
o
r
f

a
i
t
r
e
n
I

n
o
i
t
a
t
o
r

f
o

s
i
x
a

l
a
c
i
t
r
e
v

e
h
t

f
o

n
o
i
t
c
n
u
f

e
c
r
o
f

n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

c
i
t
a
t
s

t
i

m

i
l

r
e
w
o
l

d
n
a

r
e
p
p
U

n
m
u
l
o
c

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

l
e
d
o
m
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
S

l
e
d
o
m
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
f

l
a
i
t
n
e
n
o
p
x
e

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
S

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

2
.
5

e
l
b
a
T

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
P

]

m
N

[
 
e
u
q
r
o
t
 
l
e
e
h
W

 

25

20

15

10

5

0

]
s
/
1
[
 
e
l
g
n
a
 
l
e
e
h
w
-
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S
/
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
V
w
a
Y

 

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

]
°
[
 
e
l
g
n
a
 
l
e
e
h
W

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4

]
 °
[
 
e
l
g
n
a
 
p

i
l
s
e
d
S

i

F
i
g
u
r

5 Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

109

steady

- state circular driving

steady

- state circular driving

Simple steering model
Complex steering mode
Complex steering model 
with power assist

Simple steering model
Complex steering mode
Complex steering model 
with power assist

1

2
Lateral acceleration

3

4
 [m/s2]

5

0

1

2

Lateral acceleration

3

4
 [m/s2]

5

steady

- state circular driving

steady - state steering sensitivity

Simple steering model
Complex steering mode
Complex steering model 
with power assist

0

1

2

Lateral acceleration

3

4
 [m/s2]

5

50

100

150

200

Speed

 [km/h]

Fig. 5.10 Inﬂuence of steering friction and power-assist on driveability during steady-state
circular driving (a–c: constant radius R = 100 m, d lateral acceleration = 4 m/s2)

Simple steering model
Complex steering mode
Complex steering model 
with power assist

5.2 Basic Dynamic Steering Design

In the early development stages of a front-driven car the most important steering
parameters, for example, the steering ratio, can be deﬁned by using the linear
theory of the single track model, valid now up to about 0.4 g. Once this car design
is achieved, wheelbase, mass and its distribution as well as the cornering stiffness
of the front and rear axle are at least approximately known.

5.2.1 Steering Axis Design: Steady State Self-aligning

Torque

The steering-swivel axis describes the axis of rotation of the steered front tyre
without considering lateral or longitudinal forces (see Chap. 4). It is assumed that
this axis changes only slightly for low forces, then the geometrical conditions

110

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

0
1

r
a
C

0
0
7
1

8
.
2

4
.
1

4
.
1

0
0
6
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

5
1
7
8
3
1

2
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

5
1

0
5

0
0
0
0
4

5
1
1

2

6
2
5
2
2

2

9

r
a
C

0
0
7
1

8
.
2

4
.
1

4
.
1

0
0
6
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
6
8
5
1
1

2
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

5
1

0
5

0
0
0
0
4

8
.
1

3
0
1

5
8
6
4
1

1

8

r
a
C

0
0
7
1

8
.
2

4
.
1

4
.
1

0
0
6
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

5
1
6
7
2
1

2
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

1
.
7
1

0
5

0
0
0
0
4

5
1
1

2

4
3
2
8
1

1

7

r
a
C

0
0
7
1

8
.
2

4
.
1

4
.
1

0
0
6
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

6
8
2
1
2
1

8
1
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

8
5
0
.
0

5
1

0
5

0
0
0
0
4

5
1
1

2

8
7
6
5
1

1

6

r
a
C

0
0
7
1

8
.
2

4
.
1

4
.
1

0
0
6
2

0
0
0
0
0
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

3
6
0
0
1
1

2
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

5
1

0
5

0
0
0
0
4

8
.
1

3
0
1

5
8
6
4
1

1

5

r
a
C

0
0
7
1

8
.
2

4
.
1

4
.
1

0
0
3
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

8
3
4
9
1
1

2
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

5
1

0
5

0
0
0
0
4

5
1
1

2

8
7
6
5
1

1

4

r
a
C

0
0
7
1

2
1
.
1

8
6
.
1

8
.
2

0
0
6
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

8
3
4
9
1
1

2
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

5
1

0
5

0
0
0
0
4

5
1
1

2

8
7
6
5
1

1

3

r
a
C

0
0
7
1

5
2
.
1

5
2
.
1

5
.
2

0
0
6
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

8
3
4
9
1
1

2
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

5
1

0
5

0
0
0
0
4

5
1
1

2

8
7
6
5
1

1

2

r
a
C

0
0
5
1

8
.
2

4
.
1

4
.
1

0
0
6
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

8
3
4
9
1
1

2
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

5
1

0
5

0
0
0
0
4

5
1
1

2

8
7
6
5
1

1

7
4
7
7
5
9
7
0
0
.
0

7
4
7
7
5
9
7
0
0
.
0

7
4
7
7
5
9
7
0
0
.
0

7
4
7
7
5
9
7
0
0
.
0

7
4
7
7
5
9
7
0
0
.
0

7
4
7
7
5
9
7
0
0
.
0

7
4
7
7
5
9
7
0
0
.
0

7
4
7
7
5
9
7
0
0
.
0

7
4
7
7
5
9
7
0
0
.
0

7
4
7
7
5
9
7
0
0
.
0

7
0
2
6
6
3
9
1
1
.
0

7
0
2
6
6
3
9
1
1
.
0

6
7
4
7
7
0
6
3
1
.
0

7
0
2
6
6
3
9
1
1
.
0

7
0
2
6
6
3
9
1
1
.
0

7
0
2
6
6
3
9
1
1
.
0

7
0
2
6
6
3
9
1
1
.
0

7
0
2
6
6
3
9
1
1
.
0

7
0
2
6
6
3
9
1
1
.
0

7
0
2
6
6
3
9
1
1
.
0

1

r
a
C

0
0
7
1

8
.
2

4
.
1

4
.
1

0
0
6
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

8
3
4
9
1
1

2
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

5
1

0
5

g
k

m

m

m

2

m
g
k

d
a
r
/

N

d
a
r
/

N

d
a
r
/

N

v
e
r
/

m
m

m

m

m

m

m

0
0
0
0
4

5
1
1

d
a
r
/

m
N

d
a
r
/

m
N

2

e
e
r
g
e
d
/
m
N

1

8
7
6
5
1

d
a
r
/

m
N

m

F
l

R
l

z
J

l

τ
r

P
r

r

S
i

G
I

i
P
r

L
r

T
C

T
C

R
C

S
C

S
A

F
α
C

H
α
C

t
n
o
r
f

n
i

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

g
n
i
r
e
n
r
o
C

d
n
i
h
e
b

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

g
n
i
r
e
n
r
o
C

f
f
e
,
F
α
C

n
i

a
s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

g
n
i
r
e
n
r
o
c

l
a
u
t
c
A

e
h
t

f
o
a
i
t
r
e
n
i

f
o
t
n
e
m
o
m
w
a
Y

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
P

e
s
a
b
l
e
e
h
W

s
s
a
m

r
a
C

A
F

k
c
a
r
T

A
R

k
c
a
r
T

r
a
c

t
n
o
r
f

d
n
i
h
e
b

o
i
t
a
r

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

c
i
t
a
m
e
n
i
K

r
o
t
s
a
c

e
v
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

l
i
a
r
T

c
i
t
a
m
u
e
n
P

r
o
t
s
a
c

l
l
u
F

o
i
t
a
r

r
a
e
g

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

s
u
i
d
a
r

n
o
i
n
i
P

h
t
g
n
e
l

m
r
a

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

r
a
b

n
o
i
s
r
o
T

r
a
b
n
o
i
s
r
o
t

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

l
a
n
o
i
s
r
o
T

e
l
x
a

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

l
a
n
o
i
s
r
o
T

o
i
t
a
r

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
s
a

r
e
w
o
P

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

g
n
i
t
n
u
o
m

e
l
x
a

h
c
a
e

f
o

s
e
r
y
t

h
t
o
B

a

s
t
i
n
U

l
o
b
m
y
S

s
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

d
n
a

r
a
C

3
.
5

e
l
b
a
T

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
2
2

d
a
r
/

N

f
f
e
,
R
α
C

a
s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

g
n
i
r
e
n
r
o
c

l
a
u
t
c
A

5 Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

111

Fig. 5.11 Steering wheel
angle as a function of lateral
acceleration (constant radius
R = 100 m)

Steady- State Circular Driving

Car. 1
Car. 2
Car. 3
Car. 4
Car. 5
Car. 6
Car. 7
Car. 8
Car. 9
Car. 10

Car. 1
Car. 2
Car. 3
Car. 4
Car. 5
Car. 6
Car. 7
Car. 8
Car. 9
Car. 10

]

m
N

[
 

e
u
q
r
o
T

 
l

e
e
h
w
-
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

]
°
[
 
e
l
g
n
a
 
l
e
e
h
w
-
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

 

0

0

25

20

15

10

5

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

Lateral acceleration

 [m/s2]

Steady-State Circular Driving

Fig. 5.12 Steering wheel
torque as a function of lateral
acceleration (constant radius
R = 100 m)

1

2

3

4

5

Lateral Acceleration

 [m/s2]

allow to compute the static righting moment at the front tyres (steering torque MS)
according to Mitschke (1972) as follows:

MS ¼ mF (cid:1) g (cid:1) d (cid:1)

(cid:2)
(cid:4)
r0
0 tan r (cid:3) rs (cid:3) fR (cid:1) rdyn

(cid:5)

tan s

(cid:3)

with

r0
ð
0 ¼ rstat tan r þ eV

Þ þ r0

ð5:40Þ

ð5:41Þ

2

0.3

]
°
 
/
 
2
s
/
m

[
 
/
 
e
l
g
n
a
 
l
e
e
h
w
-
g
n
i
r
e
e
t

/

S
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
l
e
c
c
A

 
l
a
r
e
t
a
L

 

0.35

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

]
s
/
1
[
 
e
l
g
n
a
 
l
e
e
h
w
-
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S
/
y
t
i

l

c
o
e
V
w
a
Y

 

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

112

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

Fig. 5.13 Lateral
acceleration/Steering wheel
angle as a function of Vehicle
Velocity (lateral
acceleration = 4 m/s2)

Steady Steering Response

Car. 1
Car. 2
Car. 3
Car. 4
Car. 5
Car. 6
Car. 7
Car. 8
Car. 9
Car. 10

50

100

150

200

Vehicle Velocity [km/h]

Steady Steering Response

Fig. 5.14 Yaw Velocity/
Steering wheel angle as a
function of Vehicle Velocity
(lateral acceleration =
4 m/s2)

Car. 1
Car. 2
Car. 3
Car. 4
Car. 5

Car. 6
Car. 7
Car. 8
Car. 9
Car. 10

50

100

150

200

Vehicle Velocity [km/h]

Using the steering moment, frictions at the steering axes and the steering system,
the steady limit of the steering angle can be assessed, beyond which the steering
self-aligns at low speed, i.e. without a lateral force resulting from a lateral
acceleration.

5 Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

113

5.2.2 Determination of the Stability Factor

The stability factor is computed from the self-steering gradient as a function of the
wheelbase:

K ¼ m (cid:1)

CaR;eff (cid:1) lR (cid:3) CaF;eff (cid:1) lF
CaR;eff (cid:1) CaF;eff (cid:1) l2

ð5:42Þ

A particular signiﬁcance is attributed to the effective cornering stiffness at the front
axle (quasi-steady, Pacejka 2006), because the qualities of axle design, steering,
roll stiffness of the spring suspension, and roll-steer effect act together.

CaF;eff ¼

(cid:4)

1 þ l
lR

eu;F (cid:1) CaF þ DeV;u;F (cid:1) CaF

(cid:5)

h
Cu

þ rs þ rP

ð

Þ CaF
CS

ð5:43Þ

CaF

distance of the centre of gravity from roll axis
rolling steering factor at the front axle
portion of camber as a result of rolling
roll stiffness

h
eV;u;F
DeV;u;F
Cφ
rτ + rP mechanical and pneumatic trail
CS

bottom-top steering stiffness.

In modern car design the effective cornering stiffness may be approximated as

follows (see also Eq. 5.28):

CaF;eff (cid:5)

CaF

ð
1 þ rs þ rP

Þ CaF
CS

ð5:44Þ

The signiﬁcance of castor offset, cornering stiffness of the front axle and
“bottom-top” steering elasticity is evident. Depending on the desired self-steering
effect, the nominal cornering stiffness may be decreased at the front axle down to a
half, with mixed tyres, i.e. narrower tyres at the front axle, even down to a third.

5.2.3 Steady State Yaw Gain and Steering Sensibility

A car should respond neither too strongly nor too weakly to steer-angles. The
stationary yaw gain serves as a steady assessment quantity.

_w
dH

¼

1
iSl

v
1 þ Kv2

¼

1
iSl

v
1 þ v2
v2
ch

ð5:45Þ

The yaw gain of modern cars is the highest between 100 and 120 km/h (see
Fig. 5.15). According to Weir and diMarco (1980), the optimum range is about

114

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

Fig. 5.15 Stationary yaw
gain of the car variants
(analytic steering model)

 Steady Steering Response

Car. 1
Car. 2
Car. 3
Car. 4
Car. 5

Car. 6
Car. 7
Car. 8
Car. 9
Car. 10

50

100

150
Vehicle velocity [km/h]

200

0.3 1/s at 80 km/h. This is used to determine the steering ratio around the middle
position with a desired self-steering effect (Eq. 5.45).

This range ensures that a too fast car does not generate a too high lateral
acceleration. This lateral acceleration as a function of the steering wheel angle
input (steering response) is calculated as follows:

ay
dH

¼

1
iSl

v2
1 þ v2
v2
ch

¼

_w
dH

v

ð5:46Þ

Figure 5.16 shows this lateral acceleration gain as a function of speed. It is
evident that the lateral acceleration gain increases further, in spite of the drop of
yaw gain over speed.

Fig. 5.16 Steady state
steering response of the car
variants (simple steering
model)

Steady State Steering Response

0.45

0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

]
s
/
1
[
 
e
l
g
n
a
 
l
e
e
h
w
-
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S
/
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
V
w
a
Y

 

0

0

Car. 1
Car. 2
Car. 3
Car. 4
Car. 5
Car. 6
Car. 7
Car. 8
Car. 9
Car. 10

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

]
°
 
/
2 
s
/
m

[
 

e
l
g
n
a
 
l
e
e
h
w
-
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s
/
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
l
e
c
c
A

 
l
a
r
e
t
a
L

50

100

150

200

Vehicle Velocity

 [km/h]

5 Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

115

5.2.4 Steering-wheel Torque/Lateral Acceleration Gradient

(Steady State)

In addition to the static self-aligning moment which predominates at low speed, a
dynamic self-aligning moment overlaps at higher speed. The gain of this
self-aligning moment at the steering wheel, of particular meaning for the steering
feel, should not be too low or too high.

The steady-state of the wheel torque/lateral acceleration gradient is:

(cid:2)

dMH
daY

¼

mF (cid:1) r
iS

AS (cid:3) aY
A2
S

(cid:3)

dA2
daY

S

ð5:47Þ

Optimal values, beginning at the zero position, are 2 to 3 Nm/m/s2. An additional
friction torque at the steering wheel or column of approx. 0.1 to 0.5 Nm should
also be considered.

5.2.5 Frequency Response Wheel Torque/steering

wheel angle

Besides the optimal steering paths and the gain of the steering wheel torque over
the lateral acceleration, there are further characteristics which are signiﬁcant for
the ideal adaptation of the steering behaviour to the driver. First, there is the
quasi-steady increase of the steering-wheel torque over the steering-wheel angle,
the steering stiffness.

The frequency response acc.

to Mitschke and Wallentowitz (2003) is as

FðsÞ ¼

steering wheel torque ðsÞ
steering wheel angle ðsÞ

¼

(cid:6) (cid:7)
MH
dH

(cid:1)

1 þ Tz1s þ Tz2s2
1 þ 2rf
s2
m2
f

s þ 1
m2
f

stat

follows:

with:

Tz1 ¼

m (cid:1) l2
R þ IZ
m (cid:1) v (cid:1) lR

Tz2 ¼

IZ
caR (cid:1) lR

(cid:6) (cid:7)
MH
dH

¼

m (cid:1) lR (cid:1) r
i2
S (cid:1) l2

v
1 þ v=vch
ð

Þ

stat

ð5:48Þ

ð5:49Þ

ð5:50Þ

ð5:51Þ

As with the response to steering wheel angles, the curve of the steering-wheel
torque should not signiﬁcantly deviate from the quasi-steady curve for common
steering frequencies.

116

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

A signiﬁcant phase has a negative effect on the subjective steering evaluation.
Acc. to Hill (1987), the subjective rating decreases by approx. two points when a
steering frequency of 0.5 Hz and a 20˚ phase shift occurs.

5.2.6 Free Control Stability

Driving stability is usually determined with a ﬁxed steering wheel (ﬁxed control).
Safe driveability requires, in addition, that a wheel which is left alone (free con-
trol) or even turned and then left alone should not suffer a build-up of the coupled
yaw steering vibration and any noise should fade away.

The simplest calculation is made in a single track model (two degrees of
freedom), complemented by the equilibrium of torques around the steering axes,
according to Braess (1967). A more precise assessment is possible according to
Segel (1966). Figure 5.17 shows how the steering-wheel is suddenly left alone
after a steady cornering of 4 m/s2. The return depends very much on inertia and
dampings or frictions. The simple steering model without friction takes much
longer to fade away, thus friction, damping and inertia have to be considered
during tuning. Electromechanical systems help to ideally design these returns by
applying special functions.

5.2.7 Natural Frequency and Damping of the Steering

Döhring (1961) explained already that the steering elasticity and, hence, the nat-
ural frequency of the steering at a steady steering angle are crucial for the accuracy
of the car and its wheel shudder. A recent publication by Mouri et al. (2007)
expanded the topic to the extent that the movement of the wheel could be opti-
the
mised with regard to the desired steering feel. Figure 5.18 shows that

 Simple 
 Complex 
 Complex with power-assist 

 Simple 
 Complex 
 Complex with power-assist 

40

30

20

10

0

-10

-20

-30

-40

]
°
[
 
e
l
g
n
a
 
l
e
e
h
w
-
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

]
s

/
°
[
 
 
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v
 
w
a
Y

13

14

15

18

19

20

13

14

15

18

19

20

17
16
Time [s]

17
16
Time [s]

Fig. 5.17 Return of modern cars

5 Basics of Lateral Vehicle Dynamics

117

Fig. 5.18 Perception of the
steering feel as a function of
natural frequency and
damping (values assessed at a
ﬁxed steer-angle)

associated values of the natural frequency are in the range of 6 to 7 Hz while the
damping is between 0.8 and 0.9.

5.2.8 Minimising the Self Steering due to Uneven Braking

Forces at the Front Axle

While the steering design matters primarily for the lateral dynamic driving,
additional effects result for the longitudinal dynamics. One example is the μ-split
braking with different braking forces at the front axle. The negative scrub radius,
automatically inﬂicting a steer-angle, can minimise the developing yaw moment
and the resultant traction loss of the braking car. A simpliﬁed assessment is
described by Braess (1965) and a more detailed one by Braess (1970).

For front-wheel-drive cars, a negative scrub radius is commonly used. Other
cars implement rather small values. With EPS steering system, it is possible to
generate additional torque to compensate the steering wheel torque from the driver
(see Chap. 19). This superposition steering can achieve the countersteering
movement without any interference of the driver.

5.2.9 Stable Steering Braking System

The separation of the brake circuits increases the safety, if any part of the braking
system should fail. The developing yaw moment can be compensated by the
negative scrub radius (Heissing and Ersoy 2007) if a diagonal arrangement is
chosen so that one front tyre is always braked (Braess and Seiffert 2007). This
arrangement may be regarded as a mechanical preliminary stage for the modern
electric interconnected subsystems.

118

P. Pfeffer and H.-H. Braess

5.2.10 Inﬂuence of Aerodynamics on Driveability

Any modern car has an aerodynamic lift that affects the two axles differently and,
hence, the loads and the trim (Hucho 2005). In general, the lift alters the lateral
acceleration potential and the self-steering effect, i.e. it impacts the hazard of
under- or over-steer. A strong rear lift reduces the driving stability in the upper
speed range, a lift at the front axle reduces the steering-wheel torque, causing the
steering to “go free”, i.e. to lose steering precision. As a consequence, the front lift
coefﬁcient should be less than 0.1, at least for strongly motorised cars with higher
top speed.

5.2.11 Front-wheel Drive Vehicles

Front-wheel drive cars differ in various aspects of the self-steering effect from
rear-wheel drive cars (see e.g., Krummel et al. 1981; Gillerspie and Segel 1983).

• signiﬁcantly higher front load throughout,
• impact of the drive moment on the steering for inclining structures and, for

asymmetric axle drive shafts, even when driving straight,

• direct inﬂuence of the driving forces on the yaw moment when a steering angle

• indirect inﬂuence of the driving forces on the lateral force of the tyres and

applies,

self-aligning moments.

All these effects and their inﬂuence on the lateral vehicle dynamics (self-steering
effect, change of load in corners, low road friction etc.) and on the steering beha-
viour (steering forces, steering returnability etc.; Krummel et al. 1981) have to be
taken into account. The drive power of front-wheel driven car was signiﬁcantly
increased during the last decades. Reducing the interfering force arm was helpful in
designing axles (Heissing and Block 2001; Simon et al. 2009). Some other mea-
sures include controlled differential locks and further torque-inﬂuencing systems.
Acoustics and Vibrations

Acoustics and Vibration technology for car development has gained signiﬁcance
and made major progress over the last few years. Sound patterns and volume of
noises, as well as frequency and volume of car vibrations have to be considered
while the car is being developed. Noises perceived as unpleasant should be very
faint while warning noises have to be loud enough to meet certain safety standards.
In addition, the noises of middle class and superclass cars are ‘designed’ in such a
way that they correspond to what the customers expect. This is also true for any
noticeable vibrations. The driver is in contact with the wheel and feels any
vibrations occurring there at all times. The design of these vibrations of the
steering wheel, including mounted parts and body, with regard to comfort is a
major task. How acoustics and vibrations are perceived is an increasingly
important argument for the decision to purchase.

The steering assumes a central role among the mechatronical systems, substan-
tially inﬂuencing the fahrgefuhl. Steering systems are some of the most powerful
mechatronics in car construction, but they are also among those emitting the strongest
noise. The relationship of acoustic Pacoustic and mechanical power Pmechanical can
be estimed as a proportional function of the acoustic efﬁciency ζ acoustic.

facoustic ¼

Pacoustic
Pmechanical
A range of 10−8 ≤ ζ acoustic ≤ 10−4 is valid for most mechatronics systems. If
the acoustic efﬁciency is known, it is possible to compute the sound power level
LW in dB.

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

(cid:1)

LW ¼ 10 lg

f (cid:2) Pmechanical
P0
P0 ¼ 10(cid:3)12½Hearing threshold in Watt(cid:4)

Pacoustic
P0

¼ 10 lg

(cid:3)

¼ 10 lgðfÞ þ 10 lg

(cid:1)

Pmechanical
P0

(cid:3)

ðdBÞ

ð6:2Þ

More precise assessments require empirically gained level equations or emis-
sion values from artiﬁcial sound sources (ETS values) in compliance with the VDI
directives (Verein Deutscher Ingenieure = Association of German Engineers).

6.1 Interfering and Operating Noise

For acoustics it is useful to distinguish steering noise by operating and interfering
noise. The systems are classiﬁed either by degree of inﬂuence by the driver or by
operating time and exposure time of the noise emission. One premise is whether a
steering function can be deliberately turned on by the driver or is activated
automatically by the system. Deliberate or direct operations produce operating
noises, heard, e.g., when the steering lock or the steering control is used. Noise
emissions resulting from unconscious or indirect operations are interfering noises.
An example would be the rattling that occurs when driving on bad roads or during
parking. The driver will subjectively accept operating noise more than interfering
noise, after all, there was a deliberate action and the resulting emission is learnt or
even an expected feedback. The objective of car development complies with that.
To achieve high-quality sound, the operating noise over time may be audible but
not irritating and any interfering noise must be inaudible. A car brand may dis-
tinguish itself by its acoustics quality only though proper engineering of the
operating noise. Table 6.1 shows typical steering noise symptoms in the crossover
of operating time and type of noise.

6.1.1 Sound Sources of Steering Systems

A controlled power-assist may be either hydraulic, electric-hydraulic or electric.
Active steering with hydraulic steering-assist can produce any kind of hydro- or
vibroacoustic phenomena. The emission is usually related to the load. A classiﬁ-
cation of the phenomena is shown in Fig. 6.1. It is classiﬁed per inﬂuence of
construction groups or design details on the noise, assisted by the type of

6 Acoustics and Vibrations

123

Table 6.1 Classiﬁcation of the noise symptoms of steering systems

Operating noise (conscious direct
inﬂuence by the driver)

Interfering noise (unconscious indirect
inﬂuence by the driver)

Operating time
(long)
Operating

time (short)

Steering control

(hum, cracking, grinding)

Steering lock (click)
End-stop (bang, hoot)

Coil spring (grinding)
Parking (sing, hiss, squeal, rattle, hum)
Gearbox pressure part (rattle)
Free travel of the gear (rattle)
Hydraulic return line (cavity rattle)

Fig. 6.1 Sound and vibration
sources of steering systems

Steering

Power-assist

Steering geometry

Mechanical

Mechanical

End-stop pulse

Free travel chatter 

Bearing free travel chatter

Wheel vibrations

Dovetailing noise

Steering lock clicking

Hydraulic

Wheel adjustment whir

Cavitation knocking

Kinematics

Valve flow hiss

System fluctuations

Steering valve repeating rattle

Steering kick-back

Road feedback

Pulsating howl

Tube resonances

Electric-mechanic

Running E-motor

Control howl

Cogged belt/spur gear

Ball-type linear drive

power-assist and the structure of the steering geometry. The phenomena are
classiﬁed as either “mechanical”, “hydraulic”, “electromechanical” or “kine-
matic”, corresponding to the main sources of noise. The sound ﬂow through the
system is not only governed by the source but also by the place, the transmission
path to the interior and the kind of excitation.

Volume, pitch and pulse are determined by the respective free dynamic forces
and their physical nature. Any rotating parts produce a harmonic behaviour. The
resulting rotational noise consists of ﬂuctuations of the alternating force per
rotation Z (1st harmonic), the rev U and the ordinal n, being an integer multiple

124

S. Sentpali and R. Hintersteiner

(harmonics). With such harmonic phenomena, the noise behaviour is very much
dependent on rev. Typical ordinal noises of hydraulic power-assistance systems
arise from the pressure pulses of the pump while those of electric systems originate
in variations of the magnetic attraction.

fnord: ¼ Z (cid:2) n (cid:2) U
U in 1=min

60 Hzð

Þ

ð6:3Þ

The amplitudes of the harmonic orders pass the full range of frequencies as the
rev changes. Broadband noises are generated by the grinding of bearings, covers or
overcritical pressure release in the hydraulic steering valve. The operating noise is
mostly an overlapping of many noises and their variations.

6.1.2 Electric Steering Systems

Recording the emitted sound pressure level of an electric steering system while
steering, and disassembling the amplitude curves over time by frequencies, both
help to generate a diagram of a characteristic curve family according to Fig. 6.2.
Now the individual components—the partial sound sources—can be recog-
nised. They are allocated to the ordinals from the gear ratios of the electric motor
and the gearbox. The actual condition of the emissions has to be known to reduce
them by low-noise design. Once the sound sources are sorted by volume and
interfering frequency band, an action plan for car construction can be developed,
arranged by the same priorities. Adjust the design by the sound ﬂow present, see
the example in Fig. 6.3. Possible secondary actions may be assessed at virtually
every component boundary. For example, this could mean one inserts viscous
damping, installs an elastic decoupling or applies local impedance materials at the
boundary layers. Any change that directly reduces the noise excitation is called a
primary action, examples include avoiding inexact power measurements, discon-
tinuities or dead times of the control.

6.1.3 Hydraulic Steering Systems

The noise sources of hydraulic systems are mainly of hydraulic nature. Only the
alternating pressure overlaying the static pressure produces audible or noticeable
vibrations, also called pressure pulsation, as shown in Fig. 6.4.

The origin of pressure pulsations are ﬂuctuations of the volumetric current and
their interaction with hydraulic impedances. These are generated by local masses
of oil volumes and the volume storage capacity, as well as the resonance lengths of
the tube systems. Tuning and optimising of the acoustics has to be done in the full
system (Fig. 6.5). For this purpose, mount the complete subsystem on special

6 Acoustics and Vibrations

125

Fig. 6.2 Sound emission spectrum of an electric steering system

Fig. 6.3 Sound ﬂowchart of an electric steering systems with electric motor excitation

component
test benches. When running independent acoustic evaluations of
component systems, maintain the correlation to the full car. The dynamic forces or
structure-borne sound accelerations are recorded at all the interfaces. Any lacking
mounting impedances are either computed are measured in space according to
their phase relationships in time. Assess the acoustic immissions by settling the

126

S. Sentpali and R. Hintersteiner

300

r
a
b

 
/
 
k
c
u
r
D

200

100

p
dynamic

p
static

Pressure pulsation
(High-pressure kidney)

Alternating pressure function
(Cylinder space)

0

0

40

80

120 160 200 240 280 320 360

Rotary angle

Fig. 6.4 Overlapping of static and dynamic pressure pulsation of a hydraulic pump

Fig. 6.5 Steering
components for mounting on
a system test bench

measurement values of the component against the virtual body. If temporal data
are the basis, the result can be made audible and disclosed to a subjective audit by
a jury. Acoustic optimisation in the projected car includes air noise emission;
structure-borne sound excitation of the pump-, body-, ﬂuid- and tube-sound
transmission behaviour of the hydraulic tubes; free travels of dovetailings and
shafts; and the implementation of isolating system bearings.

A high priority is the tuning of the high-pressure tube, also called the tuning of
the stretch tubes between high-pressure pump and steering valve. Execute these
tests on system test benches. Limit the test set-up to the hydraulic components and
their arrangement as given by the available car space. Insert plastic pipes of
various lengths and diameters and positions of throttles into the stretch tubes.
These resonators may reduce noise by much more than 40 dB. The share of the
throttle positions (x) is \20 dB, see Fig. 6.6.

Table 6.2 gives typical noise phenomena and the required remedy. Beside the
parking noise that originates mainly from the howling pump, hissing sounds may

6 Acoustics and Vibrations

127

Pump

Relief hole

Steel tube

Stretch tube

100m

x=300 mm

X=200 mm

x

throttle

Resonator pipe

x=250 mm

Measuring point: Steering gear pressure port, Variation

Throttle position (x) in first chamber

]
r
a
b
[
 
n
o
i
t
a
s
l
u
p
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

1

10m

1m

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

3500

Pump speed [rpm]

Fig. 6.6 Variation of throttle position during workbench tuning of a stretch tube

Table 6.2 Classiﬁcation of noise phenomena of steering systems
Phenomenon

Cause and remedy

Pump howling

Minimise pressure pulsation at the steering gear by tuning panels and

resonators in the stretch tube

Steering rattle

Unstable control circuit, due to high demands to steering rev and

Steering chatter

pressure, optimise the valve gradient and increase volume in the
return line

Hydraulic chatter due to cavitation enforced by off-road excitation,
tune the panel positions and the back pressure in the return line to
the tank

Steering hiss

Overcritical pressure release in the valve, tune the back pressure by

panel(s) in the return line

Inﬁltration of structure-

borne sound

Acoustic short circuit of the rubber stoppers of the suspension at too
high static load, design the softness of the rubber and the best
attachment site with a high input impedance

be heard just before the steering stop which are the result of overcritical pressure
release across the control edge of the steering valve. Overcritical pressure release
drives the ﬂow speed at the valve edge to the speed of sound, creating an over-
lapping blast of very high acoustic power. This noise may be clearly reduced by
increasing the back pressure in the return line or by a gradual pressure release
across several panels arranged in a row. Integrating one or more such panels can
avoid the hiss completely. If more than one panel is used, geometric graduation of
the cross sections is recommended.

Note, however, that panels and throttles will raise the circulation pressure and,
hence, the energy consumption. Rattling noises may occur if the wheels are

128

S. Sentpali and R. Hintersteiner

quickly turned to low friction values. Hydraulic chatter is the result of cavitation
behind the steering valve, e.g., when a speed bump is passed over during circular
driving.

6.2 Stability

The acoustic contribution of individual components in the steering depends on the
nature of the problem or excitation. Hydraulic chatter and steering rattle are
phenomena of hydraulic steering that result from the stability of the power-assist.
Both phenomena can be well controlled by the design of the return lines and by
adjusting the magnitude of the steering valve gradient. However, the application
engineer is facing a conﬂict here: robust system designs that are robust with
respect to steering rattle are more sensitive to hydraulic chatter and vice versa.

6.2.1 Hydraulic Steering Clattering

Passing speed bumps or bad roads generates peak-shaped excitations of the wheel
and its transmission by the gear rack into the hydraulic cycle of the full system.
This can produce a chatter of the mechanical free travel of the rank, and from
cavitation in the hydraulic runback to the tank, behind the steering valve. It is
classiﬁed by cause as a hydraulic chatter, subjectively indistinguishable from
mechanical chatter and sporadically appearing without any immediate action of
the driver. This chatter is obviously interfering noise and should be suppressed
below audibility. The complicated mechanical and hydraulic processes in a
steering system whenever the wheels receive a peak excitation are illustrated in the
similarly complicated sound ﬂowchart in Fig. 6.7.

Circular driving produces hydraulic clatter when bumps are crossed at 5–
20 km/h. Hydraulic/mechanical interaction cause this excitation to send powerful
pressure and volumetric current ﬂuctuations into the tube system, particularly into
the runback system (Fig. 6.8).

Pressure peaks in a not optimised hydraulic runback can rise to 100 bar when
crossing a bump, just by cavitation. Figure 6.9 reveals the quick pressure drop in
the low-pressure range up to the vapour pressure limit and the subsequent high
pressure peak, audible inside the car as chatter. The pressure at the steering gear
output drops signiﬁcantly in the volumetric ﬂow lows. The hydraulic liquid
evaporates and after a short time condenses instantaneously. This excites the
components to vibration. Tuning the dynamic volume gain and the back pressure
in the runback avoids this noise by connecting a hydro-acoustic capacity to the
steering valve at the outlet side.

6 Acoustics and Vibrations

129

Tie rod

Strut

Chassis

Dovetailing/variable

Interior emission

Road source

Tyres/wheel rim/wheel hub/kinematics

Gear rack

Pinion/thrust

Valve shaft

Gear rack

Piston

Cylinder space left/right

Cylinder tubes left/right

Valve hydraulics

Valve mechanics

Return line LG

Pressure tube

Universal joint LG

Cooling circuit

stretch hose support

Intermediate steering shaft

Cooler return line with throttle

Servo pump

Cowl gasket/gaiter

Compensation tank

Suction tube/Compensation tank

Sliding coupling

Cowl

Supports/engine/chassis

Supports/engine/chassis

LS Decoupling

Interior emission

Interior emission

Interior emission

Universal joint QT

Wheel

Steering column mounting QT

Steering column mounting cowl

Traverse support

Cowl

A-column

Interior emission

Cowl

Disk

Interior emission

Interior emission

Fig. 6.7 Sound ﬂow during excitation from off-road driving or bumping

With high-capacity steering systems as they are found in sports saloons, this
hydro-acoustically acting impedance may render the automatic control system
unstable, which is evident from rattling vibrations at maximum cornering.

6.2.2 Steering Rattle

Parking produces varying radial forces, exciting a vibration of the steering, due to
the discontinuity in the friction curve of the wheels on the road when static transits
to kinetic friction. Hence, especially weakly dampened systems on low friction
roads are inclined to rattle. All the hydromechanical steering may vibrate. The
main contribution is made by the pulsating oil volume in the elastic runback. If the
dynamic volume storage capacity of the hydraulic runback into the oil tank is
decreased, the amplitudes will be signiﬁcantly lower (Fig. 6.10).

130

S. Sentpali and R. Hintersteiner

Fig. 6.8 Functional diagram of the hydraulic cycle of a steering

Fig. 6.9 Pressure curve and graphic depiction of the cavitation peaks of hydraulic chatter

Indeed, sufﬁcient dynamic storage volume is required to prevent a pressure drop
below the vapour pressure and, hence, the hydraulic steering chatter phenomenon.
Figure 6.11 shows examples of how a fuel return line is optimised. The ideal
length of the volume storing runback stretch tube is determined during a test drive.
Progressive volume increase as a function of the back pressure is adjusted by the
material and inherent stiffness of the ﬂexible tubing. The material stiffness is the
result of the dynamic modulus of elasticity that applies to the system of rubber and
fabric in the tube, the inherent stability is determined by oval cross sections.

6 Acoustics and Vibrations

131

Pressure fluctuations
(red)
(0-160 bar) 
(blue) steering valve output (0-8 bar) 

steering valve input

Rattle

12

14
"soft" runback with high volume increase or long flexible tubing portion

15

16

13

s

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20
0

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20
0

Bar(linear)
8
7
6
5
4
3
2

1
0

Bar(linear)
8
7
6
5
4
3
2

1
0

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

s

"hard" runback with low volume increase or short flexible tubing portion

Fig. 6.10 Pressure curve in the hydraulic runback with “soft” and “hard” ﬂexible tubing material

6.2.3 Steering Wheel Nibble

Perceptible vibrations at the wheel may be classiﬁed in a similar manner as the
subjective distinction of noise by operation and interfering sound (Table 6.1). The
same is true here: if the oscillations at the wheel correlate with the steering or
driving manoeuvre deliberately initiated by the driver, then this is an artiﬁcial
signal feedback. Subjectively, the driver of a sports car will even expect it as
feedback from the road. The opposite is the steering wheel nibble (SWNs),
resulting from rotations in the frequency range of 10–30 Hz at medium speed. The
complete steering system of wheel, column, gear, wishbones and trailing arms
including wheel guidance and tyres may vibrate. The rotary oscillation in the
wheel that can be ampliﬁed by resonance excitation is perceived as extremely
annoying and makes the driver feel unsafe. The amplitudes are limited by the
system damping and the friction of the wheels on the road. On account of low
amplitudes in the wheel there is neither an interference with the steering behaviour
nor are the oscillations relevant for safety. Any SWNs, however, are immediately

132

S. Sentpali and R. Hintersteiner

Fig. 6.11 Optimisation of a fuel return line to avoid (hydraulic) steering chatter and rattle

reported to the customer service and can produce high warranty costs for the
manufacturers. Two different SWN phenomena are distinguished by driving cycle:

• The free rolling SWNs develop from imperfections of the wheel at loadless
straight driving. Its causes are dynamically alternating forces from imbalances,
tyre force ﬂuctuations or wheel eccentricity.

• The braking-excited SWNs develop during braking at medium speed, due to
thickness variations of the brake disk. They produce an oscillating braking
torque at the wheels and excite the wheel to a rotary vibration, transferred by the
steering kinematics.

Lateral movements need to be eliminated before measuring rotary oscillations.
A phase-related difference measurement by means of two tangentially arranged
acceleration sensors is used (Fig. 6.12).

The acceleration amplitude of the rotary oscillations aSWN. derives from the

absolute value of the complex vector sum according to

aLDS: ¼

(cid:4)
(cid:4)
~a1 (cid:3) ~a2
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
2

(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:5)
(cid:4)
(cid:4) m=s2

(cid:6)

ð6:4Þ

The phase position of the tyres has a major inﬂuence on the SWN amplitudes.
There may be amplitudes up to 5 m/s2 (Fig. 6.13). Their cause is the kinematic and
elasto-kinematic design of the steering geometry that transforms the gear ratio
from the wheel to the steering wheel.

133

2a

1a

6 Acoustics and Vibrations

Fig. 6.12 Sensor array to
measure the rotary oscillation
amplitude SWN

Fig. 6.13 SWN as a function
of the wheel phase position at
a brake pressure of 10 bar
Source Nowicki et al. (2005)

SWNs are avoided by suitably tuning the system components and their kine-
matic relations. The prime motivation is to avoid a match of the excitation fre-
quency and the system’s natural
frequency at medium speed. When the
system-immanent resonance is traversed outside of this operation cycle, there
must be enough damping in the steering. Some steerings allow to vary damping
and natural frequency by differently stiff wishbones. Figure 6.14 shows the
amplifying function over the excitation frequency for different wishbone versions.

6.3 Structure-Borne Sound Transmission in Hoses

and Cables

The acoustic description of material properties of limp components is mostly used
for hydraulic stretch tubings of the power-assist and the loading condition of the
pressure pulse transmission. In addition to this hydro-acoustic perspective, the
following chapter discusses only the structure-borne sound transmission of limp
ﬂexible tubings. Beside the natural noise of the pump, a structure-borne sound

134

S. Sentpali and R. Hintersteiner

soft wishbone

stiff wishbone

sportive wishbone

1
2sN
⋅

n
o
i
t
a
u
t
c
u
l
f
 
e
u
q
r
o
t
 
g
n
i
k
a
r
b
/
e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
a
 
O
W
S

Fig. 6.14 Transmission function of the braking torque ﬂuctuation for differently stiff wishbones;
Source Nowicki et al. (2005)

Frequency in Hz

emission of the engine orders will occur if the pump is fastened to the engine, this
sound is transmitted to the car structure by the high-pressure ﬂexible tubing.

6.3.1 Superposition of Structure-Borne Sound Waves

technical

Particular

The structure-borne sound wave transmission is an overlay of the dominant modes
of the dilational, torsion and bending waves (Fig. 6.15).
interest

is devoted to the dilational wave. This
quasi-longitudinal wave imposes a strain on the material elasticities in longitudi-
nal, radial and tangential direction along the tubing, on account of its radial
contraction. An insulating design of hoses may dampen the noise by as much as
40 dB—a far from negligable secondary sound path in the overall car acoustics.

6.3.2 Acoustically Acting Material Parameters

The elasticity of the tubing wall decisively inﬂuences the structure-borne sound-
wave speed and its damping. The design of dimension and layout and the complex
modulus of elasticity

E ¼ E þ iEg

ð6:5Þ

are important acoustic characteristics of the material.

6 Acoustics and Vibrations

135

Fig. 6.15 Dominant overlaid wave forms

Fig. 6.16 Dynamic modulus of elasticity of an oil pressure tube

High-pressure tubing is isotropic up to an oil pressure of 30 bars. Only at higher
pressure will the modulus of elasticity become increasingly dependent on orien-
tation and position. The radial and tangential E-modulus are coupled via the oil
only for the dilational wave. A linear relation between the modulus of elasticity at
medium oil pressure and the material temperature is assumed (Fig. 6.16).

136

S. Sentpali and R. Hintersteiner

Neutrality area

Material
compression 

σ

Material
stretching

ε

Fig. 6.17 Stress pattern in a bent tubing

6.3.3 Reduction of the Noise Transmission by Bending

Flexible tubing is also used to compensate angular discontinuities, height differ-
ences or engine movements between two components. For bent mounting, the
outer perimeter of the neutral ﬁbre is exposed to a tear (material stretching) and the
inner perimeter to compressive stress (material compression). This ‘trielastic’
behaviour increases the E-modulus acting at the tubing wall (Fig. 6.17).

The result is a rise of the wave speed at shrinking bending radii, proportionally
the standing structure-borne soundwaves

frequencies of

raising the natural
(Fig. 6.18).

The dilatational wave speed is empirically described by 6.6. The coefﬁcient a,
the exponent k and the dilatational wave speed cDW0 are determined by testing on
a tube test bench.

cDW ðRÞ ¼

c2
DW; 1 þ

@

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
2

0

v
u
u
u
t

A

a (cid:2) cDW ; 0
(cid:8) (cid:9)
R
R0

cDW; 1 ¼ lim
R!1

cDW ðRÞ

cDW; 0 ¼ 1m/s; R0 ¼ 1 m

ð6:6Þ

ð6:7Þ

ð6:8Þ

Longitudinal excitation triggers a lateral force that becomes effective with
increasing bending radius, on account of the bending angle. The curve of the
lateral force initiates a bending torque triggering the bending waves. Corre-
spondingly, lateral excitation triggers torsion waves.

6 Acoustics and Vibrations

137

air conditioning suction tubing a=25 , k=0.8, Cdw,oo=115 m/s

metal shaft tube a=20 , k=0.5, Cdw,oo=220 m/s

Hydraulic stretch tubing a=35 , k=0.6, Cdw,oo=173 m/s

400

300

200

100

s
/
m
 
n
i
 
d
e
e
p
s
 
e
v
a
w

 
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
t
a

l
i

D

0

0

250

500

750

1000

Bending radius in mm

Fig. 6.18 Inﬂuence of bent ﬂexible or metal shaft tubings on the dilatational wave speed

6.4 Steering Column and Wheel—Design of Vibrations

The last important link of the steering chain, the steering wheel, is a kind of
indicator for vibrations in the driver’s hands. This chapter describes the design of
the steering and its components to meet the high demand for comfort, including
diminishing oscillations of the wheel, that are generated by vertical and lateral
vibrations of the steering column. Any oscillations of the steering wheel from
excitations by the car or the road from idling up to vmax of the car are minimised.
Figure 6.19 indicates that the body is excited by engine movements via its bearings
or by wheel imbalances or potholes via the front and rear mountings. The car cross
beam, a structuring component that bears the compartment, and the steering col-
umn transfer the vibrations to the steering wheel.

6.4.1 Design Strategy

The following facts need to observed when designing the vibrations of compart-
ment parts that are going to be integrated into the body, like car cross beam,
steering column, steering wheel, air-conditioning etc.:

• Avoid superimposing frequencies of the main components by generating a mode

map.

• Set target frequencies for components in the car.

The design strategy has to pay particular attention to the steering column and

steering wheel.

S. Sentpali and R. Hintersteiner

]

B
d
[
 
a

Level limit in the wheel 

Engine torque pulse

Frequency

138

]
s
/
2

m
g
k
[
 

T

Frequency

Fdyn

a [dB]
T [kgm2/s]

Acceleration level in decibel
Engine angular momentum

Fdyn

Fig. 6.19 Excitation by road or car

Some premium manufacturers aim for supercritical natural frequencies of the
steering column, i.e. the excitation frequencies at idle running and any possible
wheel imbalance at maximum speed are less than the eigen frequency (natural
frequency) of the steering column, avoiding superimposition and resonance.
A high structural stiffness of the components helps to keep vibration levels at the
steering wheel low. The possibility to absorb vibrations of critical engine/gearbox
combinations by an ev. absorber mass acting inside the wheel is available, see
Sect. 6.4.5 for details.

Other car manufacturers prefer an undercritical steering column that passes its
structural eigen frequency when the engine is started. In most cases this requires an
ev. absorber in the steering wheel.

Figure 6.20 represents a mode-map for the popular 4 and 6 cylinder engines,
showing an eigen frequency of the steering column of ≥40 Hz that is overcritically
designed with regard to the idling speed.

Fig. 6.20 Mode-map to
place the eigen frequencies of
components in the car

Chassis and 
aggregate 

4 cyl.
Engine

6 cyl.
Engine

l

a
c
i
t
i
r
c
r
e
d
n
u
 
g
n
n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c
 
r
i

i

A

i

 
s
e
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
 
y
d
o
b
 
l
a
b
o
G

l

l

a
c
i
t
i
r
c
r
e
v
o
 
g
n
n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c
 
r
i

i

A

l

)
e
b
i
t
r
e
v
n
o
c
(

i

l

 
d
e
s
o
c
(
 
s
e
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
 
y
d
o
b
 
l
a
b
o
G

l

)
r
a
c

n
m
u
o
c
 

l

g
n
i
r
e
e

t
s

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Frequency [Hz]

6 Acoustics and Vibrations

139

engine order

3.

Idle running 6 cyl. 

e n gin e ord er

2.

idle running 4 cyl.

Target range: global natural body frequencies of closed cars 

Target: Natural frequency of the
 steering column 

Idle running 8 cyl. 

engine order

4.

]
s
/
1
[
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

t a t
I m b a l a n c e   e x c i
i n   w h e e l
( d e p e n d s  

i o n  
  d i a m .

 

)

            Natural frequencies 
of chassis and components 

1600

1800

2000

0
2200

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

]
h
p
k
[
 

d
e
e
p
s
 
e
l
c
i

h
e
V

0

200

400

600

1000

800
1400
Engine speed [rpm]

1200

Fig. 6.21 Engine speed over excitation frequency and speed

Once the natural frequencies of the single components are known, they can be
implemented in the car in such a way that no unfavourable superimpositions, that
would cause the steering wheel to oscillate, can appear. Mode-maps help to
arrange the single components and their desired eigen frequencies in the car.

For example, the compartment module strategy of some manufacturers who
implement the whole compartment as a single module allows for ways to install
the air-conditioning with an eigen frequency of approx. 15–22 Hz. The global
body modes of a convertible are typically found in this frequency range as well.
A torsional excitation of the body can provoke the air-conditioning to resonate,
raising the levels and causing perceptible vibrations of the wheel in this frequency
range. It is desirable to place the air-conditioning either supercritically or under-
critically to the global torsion eigen frequency of a convertible.

8-cylinder diesel engines are exciting at the 4th engine order. Their idling
speeds are at about 620 rpm, which is higher than those of petrol engines, therefore
the eigen frequency of the steering column of 40 Hz is no longer higher than the
excitation frequency of idle running. These engines often require a wheel absorber.
Figure 6.21 shows the range of the excitation frequency for 4-, 6- or 8-cylinder
engines at idle running, including the corresponding engine order, and the wheel
imbalance excitation over speed.

6.4.2 Target Eigen Frequencies of Components and Car

This chapter discusses target eigen frequencies of components for supercritically
designed steering columns with a eigen frequency ≥40 Hz and no wheel absorber.
Figure 6.22 shows all immediately involved structural components of a com-
partment which are essential to reach the eigen frequency of the steering column.

140

S. Sentpali and R. Hintersteiner

Bracket
 

Steering column

Car cross beam

Mounting brackets to body

Fig. 6.22 Structural components relevant for the eigen frequency of the steering column
including connection sites

These are the car cross beam, also called instrument panel support or compartment
cross beam, as well as the following components: steering column, mount, steering
wheel and body, including their local mounting brackets.

Except for the body, all these components are developed by ancillary compa-
nies, together with the car manufacturer (Hintersteiner et al. 2008). A steering
column manufacturer will discuss the requirements for the eigen frequency of a
steering column in Sect. 10.3.4. The target frequencies for components and sub-
components, some of which are shown in Fig. 6.23, can be gained from benchmark
examinations with a huge number of eigen frequency measurements at steering
columns and their rigid mounts, supported by ﬁnite elements models.

Measurement series reveal that the eigen frequency of the steering column of
benchmark cars will drop in comparison to the eigen frequency of the steering
column in the rigid mount by about 10 Hz (see also Sect. 10.3.4). Half of this drop
is due to the elasticity of the car cross beam and the other half to the inﬂuence of
the body, including its local stiffness at the corresponding screw connection places
towards the car cross beam. This distinction was supported by a huge number of
calculation results.

The construction states System level and Subsystem level, shown in Fig. 6.23,
apply a steering wheel substitute mass (test disk) to achieve a standardisation in
the early project phase. This reduces logistics and development times for the
suppliers of steering column and car cross beam. Knowing the inﬂuence of an
actual steering wheel on the respective construction state is of great importance for
the understanding of the eigen frequencies and the corresponding objective.
Applying a steering wheel instead of the much stiffer substitute mass in the sub-
system level helps to measure or compute much lower eigen frequencies.

The manufacturers facilitate reaching the target frequency by determining the
local static and dynamic body stiffness at the screwing places of the body consoles
shown in Fig. 6.22 and by comparing them with target values (Hintersteiner 2008).

6 Acoustics and Vibrations

141

Assembling condition

Frequency target

Vehicle level
(trimmed body)

40 Hz

System level
(cockpit)

47 Hz
on rigid mount

Subsystem level
(steering column)

50 Hz
on rigid mount

Components level
(steering wheel)

80 Hz
on rigid mount

Fig. 6.23 Components and subcomponents with target eigen frequencies (Hintersteiner 2008)

6.4.3 Calculation Models and Load Cases

Calculation models supporting construction and ﬁnite elements models (FEM) of
the trimmed body and the full car are shown in Fig. 6.24. The Trimmed body FEM
represents a body fully equipped with component masses but without the com-
ponents Chassis, Wheels, Engine, Gearbox and Exhaust system.

In the early development stage, the Full car FEM is approximated by a Trim-
med body FEM to test the components developed in collaboration with suppliers—
such as, for example, steering column, steering wheel and car cross beam—to see
whether the speciﬁcations were met with regard to the eigen frequency of the
steering column. The Full car FEM allows to analyse the additional modes of
aggregate and chassis and to minimise the vibration levels relative to calculation
variants.

Eight loading conditions are used to assess the eigen frequency of the steering
column in the car. The loading condition “Driving Point Response” (inertance)
serves merely to ﬁnd the position of the eigen frequency of the steering column.
An equivalent measurement is carried out by hitting a pulse hammer vertically and
laterally on the steering wheel rim.

The loading condition “Frequency Response” is used to assess the transmission
behaviour. This allows for the analysis of the vertical and lateral acceleration
response of the steering wheel up to 50 Hz by relative comparison of calculation
variants. An equivalent measurement is carried out with electric-dynamic shakers
or a 4 axis hydropulse test rig.

142

S. Sentpali and R. Hintersteiner

+

=

FE-model of
overall
vehicle

Trimmed Body FE model:

Body equipped with mass 

FE-models from:
Chassis (without subframe)
Wheels
Engine, Gearbox
Exhaust system

Fig. 6.24 Finite element models of the trimmed body and the full car

Front suspension damper

Rear suspension damper

Loading points for load case „

Frequency Response : 

„

Engine mounting (EM), Front suspension damper (FSD) 

and Rear suspension damper (RSD) respectively in phase 

and opposite phase   

Loading points and accelaration response at steering wheel 
vertical and lateral for loadcase  Driving Point Response
(inertance) 
Accelaration response at steering wheel vertical and lateral 
for loadcase  Frequency Response

„

„

„

„

Steering column 
vertical

Engine mounting

Body
(Bending, torsion)

Fig. 6.25 Standard load cases to assess the eigen frequency of the steering column and the
transmission behaviour, with calculated result of the load case “Frequency Response”

Figure 6.25 shows a result of the load case “Frequency Response”. A dynamic
standard force of 1 N is excited, both in-phase and opposite phase, at the left and
right engine mounts, the rear- and the front suspension dampers. The curves show
the vertical acceleration response of the steering wheel in (mm/s2). The acceler-
ation levels in (dB) were evaluated to compare arithmetic variants. Similar curves
are plotted and analysed for the lateral acceleration levels at the steering wheel.

6 Acoustics and Vibrations

143

Table 6.3 Effects of steering column parameters on the on-board eigen frequency
Steering column parameter

Eigen frequency of the steering column in the car
after on-board eigen frequency of the steering column
−0.15 Hz/kg
−0.8 Hz/10 mm

Mass of the steering column
Steering column position
(length adaptation)

6.4.4 Parameter Studies

This chapter discusses arithmetically the effect of different parameters of the
steering columns and steering wheels on the on-board eigen frequency of the
steering column. Target on-board eigen frequencies of the steering column apply
to the extreme case, i.e. the steering column is fully extended. The height of
steering columns can be adjusted, beginning at the central position, by about
±30 mm along the column and by about ±25 mm crosswise. When its eigen
frequency is measured, the 4 end positions are evaluated by arithmetic models:
both fully extended and for the height which represents the lowest natural fre-
quency value (extreme case, depends on construction). Table 6.3 lists the effects of
the column position and the total mass of a steering column on the on-board eigen
frequency of the steering column.

Figure 6.26 shows the on-board eigen frequency (vehicle level) as a function of
the eigen frequency of the steering column in the rigid mount (subsystem level).
This curve, gained for a speciﬁc arrangement of car cross beam and body, shows
that the on-board eigen frequency is saturated at an eigen frequency in the rigid
mount of about 57 Hz. Higher frequencies in the rigid mount are not efﬁcient any
more, so that the car cross beam and the body in white consoles have to be
stiffened to realise a 40 Hz steering column on-board.

Table 6.4 shows the effect of the steering wheel parameter mass on the vertical

Eigenfrequency of steering column in the vehicle as a function 
of eigenfrequency of steering column on rigid mount

on-board eigen frequency.

Fig. 6.26 Vertical dynamic
natural frequency of the
steering column on-board as a
function of the natural
frequency of the steering
column in the rigid mount

45

40

35

30

 

e
h
t
 
n

i
 

 

l

n
m
u
o
c
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

 

 
f
o
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
n
e
g
E

i

]
z
H

[
 

l

i

e
c
h
e
v

25

20

40

60

80

Eigenfrequency of steering column on rigid mount [Hz]

144

S. Sentpali and R. Hintersteiner

Table 6.4 Effect of the steering wheel parameter mass on the vertical on-board eigen frequency
Effect on the natural on-board frequency
Steering wheel parameters
−0.4 Hz/100 g
−0.7 Hz/100 g

Mass of the air bag
Mass at the steering wheel rim

Effect of steering wheel eigenfrequency on rigid mount
to steering column eigenfrequency in the vehicle

+ 1,3 Hz Eigenfrequency of 
steering column in the vehicle 
(+3,4 %)

e
h
t
 

n

i
 

n
m
u
o
c
 

l

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s
 
f
o
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
n
e
g
E

i

]
z
H

[
 
e
l
c
i
h
e
v
 

41,0

40,5

40,0

39,5

39,0

38,5

38,0

37,5

37,0

36,5

36,0

40

50

60

70
Eigenfrequency of steering wheel on
                 rigid mount [Hz]

90

80

100

Fig. 6.27 Inﬂuence of the eigen frequency of the steering wheel in the rigid mount on the
on-board eigen frequency of the steering column

The mass of the steering wheel rim itself and the mass spread on it, such as
foam surrounding, rim heating and rocker switches, are very sensitive to the
on-board eigen frequency at 0.7 Hz/100 g.

Figure 6.27 shows the inﬂuence of another steering wheel parameter, the
stiffness of the steering wheel in the rigid mount (component level), on the
on-board eigen frequency of the steering column. It is raised by 1.3 Hz when
the eigen frequency of the steering wheel in the rigid mount is increased from 60 to
80 Hz. Above 90 Hz, the curve levels so much that the on-board eigen frequency
of the steering column cannot be increased much further.

6.4.5 Steering Wheel Absorbers

As discussed in Sect. 6.4.1, steering wheel absorbers can be used to absorb
vibrations in cars with critical engine/gearbox combinations. Diesel engine and/or
automatic gearbox vehicles may optionally have a steering wheel absorber inserted
for a supercritically designed steering column as well. Possible reasons are the
high indicated pressure in diesel engines and the direct connection to the automatic

6 Acoustics and Vibrations

145

(a)

(b)

Absorber mass

Air bag inflator
as absorber mass

Gas generator

Fig. 6.28 Potential vibration absorbers in the wheel: a additional mass, b gas generator of the
airbag

gearbox, set on Drive position when the car is at rest and the brake pedal is pushed.
This may cause vibrations at the steering wheel.

Figure 6.28 shows two steering wheels by different manufacturers with inte-
grated absorbers. A conventional steering wheel absorber with an additional mass
of 440 g is applied in Fig. 6.28a, the steering wheel in Fig. 6.28b applies the gas
generator of the air bag as a 400 g absorber so that no additional mass is required.
The gas generator in Fig. 6.28b is elastically mounted on a radially imple-
mented elastomer, as opposed to steering wheels without absorber function where
it is screwed in regidly. The absorber mass in Fig. 6.28a is ﬁxed to the ﬂoor of the
steering wheel rim by four cylindrical or prismatic elastomer pins.

The tuning of a steering wheel absorber in the full car is controlled by different
measurement series during development. Absorber eigen frequencies of 24–36 Hz
are measured at
typical steering wheel sets. One compares the acceleration
response of the steering wheel rim in vertical (“12 o’clock”, normal to the steering
column axis) and lateral direction (“3 o’clock”, transverse to the car), for engine
idle running and for excitation on a 4 axis hydropulse test rig, both in-phase
(bending excitation) and opposite phase (torsion excitation), with the steering
column either retracted or extended. Figure 6.29 shows the results of such a
measurement series with an extended column.

These measurement series allow the recommendation of an absorber eigen
frequency of 32 or 34 Hz. The level reduction at the steering wheel rim of approx.
5–10 dB, shown in Fig. 6.30, requires a 34 Hz steering wheel absorber according
to the analysis of a full car simulation.

Acceleration levels at the steering wheel can be reduced by approx. 10 dB when
applying a steering wheel absorber during idle running and driving, because of the
excitation about the axes. Vibrations at the steering wheel may be visibly and, for
the passenger, subjectively perceptibly reduced.

146

S. Sentpali and R. Hintersteiner

l

Excitation: Four column hydropulser in phase, v=25 mm/s
 
k
c
o
c
o
 
2
1
 
m

‘

i
r
 
l
e
e
h
w
 
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s
 
t
a
 
l
e
v
e
l
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
e
c
c
A

l

]

B
d
[
 
z
 
n
i
 
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

B
d
 
5

Without absorber 
mass
36 Hz Absorber mass
34 Hz Absorber mass
32 Hz Absorber mass
30 Hz Absorber mass

Recommendation 32Hz Absorber mass

l

‘

k
c
o
c
o
 
2
1
 
m

i
r
 
l
e
e
h
w
 
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s
 
t
a
 
l
e
v
e
l
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
e
c
c
A

l

Excitation: Engine idle

Recommendation
34 Hz Absorber mass

B
d
 
5

Without absorber 
mass
36 Hz Absorber mass
34 Hz Absorber mass

32 Hz Absorber mass

]

B
d
[
 
z
 
n
i
 
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

630

Engine rpm [rev/min]

700

Fig. 6.29 Measured levels at the steering wheel rim in vertical direction without absorber and
with different absorber eigen frequencies

Fig. 6.30 Computed levels
at the steering wheel rim,
vertical direction, without
absorber and with different
absorber eigen frequencies

Calculation load case: Overall vehicle
Four-coloum hydropulser in phase, v=25 mm/s.

B
d
 
5

6 Acoustics and Vibrations

6.5 Conclusion

147

The design of steering column and steering wheel, the car cross beam and the body
with the screw consoles towards the compartment module is an important task with
regard to the vibrations in a car. Persistent contact with the steering wheel allows
the driver to feel the vibrations there.

Concerning idle running and road excitation, the design of the on-board steering
column allows its eigen frequency to be designed either supercritically or under-
critically. To avoid excitation of the steering column by components in the
compartment, such as the air-conditioning, a mode map is used to distinguish eigen
frequencies of the components and excitation frequencies.

Besides the global target eigen frequencies of the bodies loaded with mass, that
were deﬁned during development, targets for the local mounting stiffness at the
body consoles screwed at the car cross beam of a compartment, need to be deﬁned.
If there are still complaints about vibrating steering wheels from test drives, a
steering wheel absorber to reduce these vibrations (amplitudes) for critical engine/
gearbox combinations can be applied.

Target eigen frequencies are deﬁned for the ancillary companies of components
like steering wheel, steering column or car cross beam. These targets derive from a
huge number of measurement series and analysed simulations. A steering wheel
substitute mass serves the manufacturers of steering columns and car cross beams
as a tool of standardisation.

Stable and non-vibrating driving is made available for all car drivers in any
driving condition by the structural design of the components, as described in this
chapter, that are relevant for steering wheel vibrations (steering wheel, steering
column, car cross beam and body).

Steering-Feel, Interaction Between Driver
and Car

Manfred Harrer, Peter Pfeffer and Hans-Hermann Braess

Steering-feel, from German lenkgefühl, is a driver’s subjective sensation upon
steering a vehicle. This steering-feel derives from the perception and assessment of
steering behaviour and thus the drivability; it embodies the interaction between car
and driver. The drivability generally consists of a vehicle’s response to the driver’s
input, as well as external interferences, such as crosswind or uneven road surfaces.
The steering behaviour is part of the overall drivability, and describes vehicle
response to steering input as well as interferences. The optimization of the
steering-feel is one of the main tasks in the development of driving dynamics.
Quantitative assessments of handling, in particular the self-steering effect of
passenger cars, had already begun in the late 1930s (Olley 1938). Yet, steering-feel
was, and still is, almost always subjectively assessed and optimized exclusively by
experienced test drivers. This is mainly due to the fact that the drivability and
handling of a vehicle are so dependent on the steering-feel. The need for objective
parameters with which to measure steering-feel has become increasingly impor-
tant, especially with the growth of digital prototypes. Although some of these
parameters have already been compiled, conﬂict still arises on the subject; on one
hand, due to differences in philosophy concerning the construction and design, and
on the other, due to ambiguous boundaries between authentic and artiﬁcial
steering-feel, especially when considering driver-assist systems.

M. Harrer (&)
Dr. Ing. h.c. F. Porsche AG, Porscheplatz 1 70435 Stuttgart, Germany
e-mail: manfred.harrer@steeringhandbook.org

P. Pfeffer
Munich University of Applied Science, Munich, Germany
e-mail: peter.pfeffer@steeringhandbook.org

Hans-HermannBraess
Ehemals BMW AG, Munich, Germany

M. Harrer and P. Pfeffer (eds.), Steering Handbook, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-05449-0_7,
(cid:1) Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017

149

150

M. Harrer et al.

This chapter will discuss the essentials of steering-feel. The basic relationship
between command behaviours will also be explained. Furthermore, the speciﬁcs of a
subjective assessment of steering-feel and of objective measurements of steering
behaviour will be presented. Finally, parallels between the subjectively perceived
steering-feel and objectively measured steering behaviour will be depicted.

7.1 Steering Behaviour and Steering-Feel

Unlike the dynamic driving behaviour of a vehicle at or near limit, which few
drivers ever encounter, customers can easily experience steering-feel
in the
low-to-medium range of lateral acceleration every day. A chassis designed for
agility combined with a precise steering system is the foundation for providing an
intense driving experience. Good steering-feel requires the steering behaviour to
be inﬂuenced by a balanced interaction between the torque and angle of the
steering wheel, as well as the resulting degree of vehicle reaction.

Chassis development is vital to providing symbiotic drivability and steering
behaviour. It takes the collaboration of a large number of experts with the
knowledge and proper grasp of the driving experience to achieve a balanced
calibration. Detailed subjective assessments and adjustments are the main focus of
their work. Objective techniques for assessing the steering behaviour are used to
actively support the subjective adjustment process.

The character of a car is fundamentally inﬂuenced by the steering behaviour
and the corresponding steering-feel. The purpose is to develop a perfectly coor-
dinated steering behaviour, marked by the equilibrium of driving safety, comfort
and performance. Excellent driving ergonomics, intuitive handling and unam-
biguous response are also crucial.

A typical characteristic of the steering behaviour is a vehicle’s response to
cornering when inﬂuenced by lateral acceleration. This is where the driver can
experience vehicle dynamics most clearly and emotionally. Cornering can be
classiﬁed in three groups: The On-center area with initial steering input, a linear
area of the driving dynamic including the increase of steering angle, and ﬁnally,
the transition up to the limit. A linear function of steering angle and vehicle
response up to high lateral accelerations is desirable, as well as a gentle but
unmistakable indication when approaching the limit. The driver should be made
aware of the approaching limit through a reduction of vehicle response, requiring a
disproportional increase of steering angle input (understeer), as well as through a
drop in steering torque.

The range of longitudinal and lateral acceleration in everyday driving situations
is generally called the dynamic performance range, determined by driver, car and
road. Figure 7.1 represents the relative frequency of different lateral acceleration
values observed on different road types by a standard driver.

Note that during these standard driving conditions most lateral acceleration
values fall under 2 m/s2. Typical lateral acceleration values are lowest during

7 Steering-Feel, Interaction Between Driver and Car

151

Fig. 7.1 Lateral acceleration
parts (standard driver)

Fig. 7.2 Frequencies of
steering wheel angles
(standard driver)

highway driving, followed by city driving. The driver determines this dynamic
range, taking into account experience, risk, and demands for comfort, keeping in
mind that the chassis has a far greater stability range in dry road conditions. This
means that lateral acceleration ranges up to approx. 4 m/s2 are of particular interest
when applied to the objectiﬁcation of steering behaviour. This is the dynamic
range that inﬂuences lower range dynamics in standard, daily driving.

It is evident from Fig. 7.2 that the frequency of any steering angle on different
road surfaces lies far under 0.5 Hz. Extreme situations, such as sudden evasive
maneuvers or double lane changes, produce much higher frequencies. For this
reason, modern steering systems are designed and tested up to at least 3 Hz.

152

M. Harrer et al.

However, such high frequencies are rarely met in everyday situations of a standard
driver. It is evident from this that steering-feel becomes particularly important in
low frequency steering processes.

7.2 Steering-Feel

Steering-feel is a result of the direct interaction of driver and car through the
steering wheel. The steering system fulﬁls two functions; as an actuator that the
driver uses to initiate a change of direction, and as an important source of sensory
information on driving condition and vehicle response. Steering-feel is the driver’s
subjective sensation of steering control, vehicle response, and haptic feedback.
This also includes the driver’s perception of the dynamic performance of the
vehicle upon steering (steering behaviour). It can be deﬁned as follows:

Steering-feel is the complete optical, kinesthetic, and haptic sensations of the driver while
steering a car, resulting in a complex, subjective experience.

In many publications the concept of steering-feel is confused with steering
behaviour, drivability, or handling;
this will be avoided here. Nor can the
steering-feel be psychologically interpreted as an emotion such as fear or joy
(Wolf 2008). The course control from which the steering-feel develops can be
visualized as a closed control circuit, known as the driver/car control circuit
(Fig. 7.3), that describes this interaction. In order to optimize the stability and
agility of the control circuit, the car must be able to adapt to the driver’s skills. The
quality of the steering system, the chassis, and the tires is essential here. Con-
trolling the direction requires the driver to actively guide the car, taking into
account the feedback of the driving state.

Vehicle 
(control distance)

Steering wheel torque
Steering wheel angle

Driving course
(control factor) 

Road course 
ambient traffic

Vehicle 
feedback

Driver
(controller) 

optical 
haptic
acoustic
kinaesthetic

Wheel
(actuator) 

feedback

wheel input 
torque/angle 

Fig. 7.3 Driver/vehicle control circuit

7 Steering-Feel, Interaction Between Driver and Car

153

   Human
parameters

n
Driving task
Fahraufgabe

Steering feel, encompassing definition

Steering feel, specific definition

Chassis parameters

 Person
(driver) 

Hand-arm-
Hand-Arm-
   system
System

Steering 
Lenkrad
wheel

Engine
  (car)

Result
Ergebnis

Feedback Dynamic
        values

Fig. 7.4 Steering feel in a speciﬁc and in an encompassing deﬁnition, Wolf (2008)

7.2.1 Guidance Behaviour

A good guidance behaviour is deﬁned as the vehicle’s tracking and road holding
ability through an ideal steering effort from the driver. In other words, good
guidance behaviour means that a deliberate change of direction through steering
input must produce the expected result immediately, controllably, and regardless
of speed. Naturally, these qualities must also apply under all loading, road, and
weather conditions. The guidance behaviour and the resulting steering-feel may be
distinguished as steering-feel in a speciﬁc and in an encompassing deﬁnition
(Braess 2004) (Fig. 7.4).

In a narrow view, steering-feel predominantly concerns the given steering
angle, the perceptible steering torque, and the relationship of each to speed. The
main focus is on the haptic perception at the steering wheel.

A broader deﬁnition of Steering-feel considers not only the sensation through
the steering wheel itself, but the total dynamic reaction of the vehicle to steering
inputs. Besides the haptic feedback, the vehicle response is mostly perceived
optically and kinesthetically.

Steering angle, torque, and a reliable drivability at high speed are important to
achieve the desired steering behaviour and thus, the desired steering-feel over the
entire speed range. Furthermore, it is important to avoid any obvious non-linear
effects, for example around the steering midpoint, or a too narrow margin when
transitioning into the possibly unstable limit areas of the vehicle.

7.2.2 Response Behaviour

The response behaviour is the ability to transmit information on changes in steering
load, rolling resistance, or latitudinal and longitudinal forces through ﬂuctuations in
steering wheel torque. The response behaviour is divided into beneﬁcial and
interfering information, transmitted to the driver through the tire/wheel subsystems,
front axle, steering gear, and ultimately, the steering column.

154

M. Harrer et al.

Beneﬁcial information is, as the name suggests, beneﬁcial when trying to
implement a change in direction. One important example of this would be an
unambiguous indication of the front wheel friction limit. In this case, a jump of the
friction should alter the righting moment at the tire and inﬂuence the steering
torque through the steering wheel.

Interfering information, such as a change of resistance at the wheels as a result
of uneven road surfaces, produces an interfering torque about the steering axle,
which is subsequently passed on to the driver via the steering column. These
effects are desirable up to a certain level (by frequency and amplitude) to maintain
some connection between driver and road. This behaviour should be more pro-
nounced in sport cars than in vehicles designed for comfort which should deliver
higher isolation from these interferences. Periodical interferences, like braking
power ﬂuctuations and wheel imbalance do not provide any useful information and
should be suppressed as much as possible, or completely isolated so that driving is
not affected (Groll 2006).

7.2.3 Requirements of Ideal Steering Behaviour

and Steering-Feel

Optimal steering behaviour and the resulting steering-feel implies that a car must
respond to steering input with an indiscernible delay and that the righting force at
the steering wheel should be precisely distinguishable from the central steering
position and rise steadily and noticeably to high lateral accelerations. A clearly
distinctive center point is required for precise, linear driving, as well as an auto-
matic steering return whose return speed adapts at the exit of the corner in order to
prevent oversteer. A high dynamics setting for fast maneuvers is also required in
combination with feedback on the driving and road conditions, without any
impacts or oscillations transmitted through the steering wheel. Low wheel torques
and angles are necessary for parking to fulﬁl the expectations of comfort.
These requirements can be summarized by the following prime targets:

• Steering precision by a distinctive center-feeling; instantaneous response to
steering input; synchronous behaviour of steering angle input, steering torque
increase, and vehicle response

• Steering comfort through steering wheel torque that is adapted to particular
driving situations; low steering angle required for parking, cornering, and han-
dling; automatic steering return with an adapted angular velocity of the steering
wheel

• Steering feedback of driving state and road information in a balanced rela-

tionship with possible interfering variables

• Steering dynamic sufﬁcient for quick maneuvering, for example, during a

sudden evasive maneuver

7 Steering-Feel, Interaction Between Driver and Car

155

To achieve the ideal steering behaviour, the quality and interaction of many
subsystems such as tires, axle and elastic kinematics, roll stabilization and body
rigidity, as well as the constraints, such as aerodynamics must all be considered.

7.3 Evaluation Methods for the Steering-Feel:

Objectiﬁcation

After this discussion of the requirements for an ideal steering-feel, possible
assessment techniques will be now described. These techniques allow the sub-
jective assessment results of steering-feel and the vehicle properties to be com-
bined (Schimmel and Heißing 2009). ‘Objectiﬁcation’ is understood as the
assessment technique which turns subjective driving perceptions into objectively
measurable characteristics or parameters.

Characteristics-Based Correlation Analysis

Characteristics-based correlation analysis is the most established technique and
is already used in many publications. This technique facilitates the extraction of
characteristics (objective parameters) from standardized maneuvers. Subjective
ratings are mostly gained by experienced test drivers during separate assessment
drives, using different rating systems. The recorded objective parameters are then
compared to the subjective ratings by means of a correlation analysis, utilizing the
experience of experts and publications. Typical results of this technique were
published by Norman (1984), Dettki (2005), Harrer (2007), Zschocke (2009).

The advantage of this technique is the transparency and the ability for vali-
dation. However, the extra effort of gathering high-quality data and subjective
ratings is a disadvantage.

Vehicle Model Based Objectiﬁcation

Like the characteristics-based correlation analysis, the vehicle model based
objectiﬁcation uses a correlation analysis to link objective parameters with sub-
jective ratings. However, the objective parameters are not gained from measure-
ments at the car but rather from a car model directly used for correlation with the
vehicle parameters. This car model is ﬁrst populated with data from several driving
maneuvers, which are also used to gain subjective ratings from the driver. Costly
car measurements are avoided. The identiﬁcation of the model requires more
effort, however. Additionally it needs to be checked whether or not the model
illustrates the drivability of the car extensively enough. This technique has been
used in the publications of Kobetz (2004), Meyer-Tuve (2008), Schimmel and
Heißing (2009).

156

M. Harrer et al.

Objectiﬁcation of a Standard Driver

Objectiﬁcation of a standard driver does not require the identiﬁcation of a car
model, but of a driver model. This technique assumes that the driver’s control
matches the vehicle properties, compensating for possible deﬁcits. The standard
driver’s identiﬁed parameters are then correlated with the subjective ratings from
actual drivers. These tests can therefore be carried out in driving simulators and
with non-standardized driving maneuvers as well, since the driver, rather than
vehicle behaviour, is modelled. Evaluations applying these techniques were pub-
lished by Henze (2004), Schimmel and Heißing (2009). According to Schimmel
and Heißing (2009), the human driving performance can be only vaguely repre-
sented, preventing a speciﬁc analysis of the drivability and, hence, the car.

Some useful objective parameters of drivability and steering-feel have been
obtained mostly with the help of the characteristics-based correlation analysis, in
spite of certain shortcomings.

7.4 Subjective Evaluation of the Steering-Feel

A subjective rating has been established in the car industry for the past decades,
and has remained one of the most powerful instruments for assessing and tuning
the drivability and steering behaviour of cars. However, the steering-feel is also
subjectively assessed to gain data for further correlation analysis of objectiﬁcation.
The driver assumes the task of guiding the car and of observing it. Psychologically,
a subjective rating always faces intraindividual (different conditions of one
assessor) and interindividual variation (different conditions of various assessors).
Constant driving conditions are, however, essential for a subjective rating of the
steering qualities of automobiles. The steering qualities should be primarily
assessed by experienced test engineers who have a distinctive feel for the
OEM-typical drivability and are able to carry out maneuvers and ratings in a
reproducible and reliable manner (Pfeffer and Schalz 2010).

Figure 7.7 shows essential rating criteria of the steering-feel. The previously
mentioned qualities of an ideal steering behaviour, such as precision, comfort,
feedback and dynamics, are represented by the individual rating criteria. The
rating criteria are assessed by means of a rating system, the ‘‘10-point scale’’, an
established standard in the car industry. The objective is reached when 8 points
were assigned to a rating criterion. 9 and 10 points are usually used only to assess
especially outstanding handling features, i.e. when a rating criterion of a car
clearly surpasses the established state-of-the-art, which generally is only achieved
through more complex axle designs or chassis control systems. Figure 7.5 shows
the described rating system.

A sufﬁcient distinction of the subjective ratings is achieved when they are
related to the vehicle class. It is understandable then, for example, that the highest
rating of the response behaviour will require a much different vehicle response

7 Steering-Feel, Interaction Between Driver and Car

157

Classification

Car corresponds
to industrial
standard

Car below
industrial
standard

n
o
i
t
a
u
l
a
v
e
 
f
o

 
t
r
a
t
S

Rating

outstanding
excellent
very good
good
satisfying
just enough

Not enough
customer complaint
stranded vehicle
safety hazard

BI

9,5
8,5
7,5
6,5
5,5

10
9
8
7
6
5

4
3
2
1

Fig. 7.5 Assessment plan—rating index (Heissing and Brandl 2002)

Steering response

too slow

optimum

too fast

Luxury saloon

-5

-6

-7

-8

9/10

+8

+7

+6

+5

Sport roadster

. . .

-5

-6

-7

-8

9/10

+8

+7

+6

Fig. 7.6 Divergent optimum of different car classes

from a sedan than from a sports car. Figure 7.6 speciﬁes the shift of the best rating
as a function of the car class.

The individual rating criteria from Fig. 7.7 are assessed by point rating and
critique, which provides additional information for every rating criterion as well as
reasoning behind potential drops below the best rating.

The rating criteria from Fig. 7.7 will be explained in more detail in the

following.

Steering Wheel Torque Level When Parking

A lower required steering wheel torque input is generally expected when
parking, providing more comfort (less effort for the driver). The steering wheel
torque should remain constant over the whole range of steering angles.

Steering Wheel Torque Curve When Parking

Here, it is assessed whether steering wheel torque oscillations are dependent on
steering wheel angle. This phenomenon, known as torque ripple, can be caused by
universal joint effects of the intermediate shaft.

158

M. Harrer et al.

Fig. 7.7 Questionnaire for the subjective steering assessment (Harrer 2007)

7 Steering-Feel, Interaction Between Driver and Car

159

Steering Wheel Torque at the Center

Steering angle input out of straight driving may vary as a function of speed. The
driving and holding force as a function of speed are rated for low lateral accel-
erations. A steering force is desired that has a tolerable level at any speed, giving
the driver the feeling that the steering will always automatically center.

Center Feeling—Centering

The centering of a straight driving car is rated. The car is stimulated by very
small steering angle inputs to observe at which steering angles and torques the car
will start to respond and whether the steering wheel (released) will fully right its
initial position (straight driving). A perfect centering is desired that leaves no
impression of backlash or hysteresis.

Steering Wheel Torque Curve

The steering wheel torque level is assessed when cornering or through sinu-
soidal and random steering angle input. The torque curve as a function of the angle
and the resulting vehicle response are rated. The steering wheel torque should
slowly but steadily increase as a function of the lateral acceleration, until
approaching the limit. An increasing torque as a function of speed supports the
driver with direction changes as well.

Steering Wheel Torque When Cornering

The steering wheel torque with constant-radius cornering is rated. The level of
the torque should adapt to speed and lateral acceleration. A clearly perceptible
anchor point that requires a noticeable increase of the steering wheel torque when
steering under lateral acceleration should be present.

Response Properties upon Straight Driving

Applying small steering wheel angles to straight driving serves to assess the
proper structuring of the vehicle movements (yawing and lateral). The ﬁrst period
after the articulation is of special interest when the vehicle response develops and
transitions into the semi-steady state driving. The angle inputs can be either
sinusoidal or random. The goal is an ideal structuring of the vehicle response as a
function of the steering wheel angle. No impression of elasticity, backlash, or large
hysteresis should develop.

Response Properties under Lateral Acceleration

When steadily cornering, the desired driving radius is widened or reduced by
overlapping another steering wheel angle (positive/negative). The timing function
of the subsequent vehicle response after application of steering angle and the
further gain or fade of vehicle response (lateral or yawing) are all assessed as well.
The ﬁrst period after applying a steering angle is again of particular interest,

160

M. Harrer et al.

i.e. when the vehicle response is changing. The goal is an un-delayed proportional
gain or fading of the vehicle response as a function of the steering wheel angle
input. No impression of elasticity, backlash, or large hysteresis should develop,
either.

Straight Driving

Directional stability, impact sensitivity and the standard effort to hold course
are assessed. Impact sensitivity refers to the impact of changing road resistance
and side forces, as well as axle effects and aerodynamic inﬂuences at high speed.
The objective is to develop high directional stability and, thus, course holding with
little effort.

Accuracy

The vehicle response, synchronous to the steering angle, and the effort to hold
course during cornering are assessed over the full speed range. The objective is
precise handling to follow the road easily and ﬂuently, with little corrective effort.

Feedback of Useful and Interfering Information

The communication of useful or interfering information through slight changes
of steering wheel torque and angle is assessed. This haptic information is more or
less pronounced depending on the car class (driver/road connection). Sports cars
should give the driver as much information about the driving and road condition as
possible. High-frequency oscillations of the steering wheel and impacts of all kind
that might restrict the driver’s control should be considered interfering information
and suppressed as much as possible.

Steering Wheel Angle Demand During Parking

The objective is to develop the lowest possible requirement for steering wheel
angle during parking. Full steering-lock should be achieved with as few steering
wheel rotations as possible.

Steering Wheel Angle Demand When Lane Changing

The required steering wheel angle to achieve medium lateral acceleration

should be low, according to car class.

Steering Return

When turning, proper righting speed, steady return of the steering wheel, and
small remaining angle (angular difference between central position and actual
position of the steering wheel) is required.

7 Steering-Feel, Interaction Between Driver and Car

161

Remaining Angle After Cornering

The angular difference (ﬁnal position after cornering and central position of the
steering wheel) at different speeds is assessed when the steering wheel is released
and cornering transitions into straight-line driving.

Steering Dynamics

Torque peaks of the steering wheel or discontinuities of the power-assistance
with sudden jerks of the wheel or sinusoidal steering are assessed. This effect is
called catch up. The objective is to achieve a very high steering dynamic while
maintaining constant power-assistance.

7.5 Objective Evaluation of the Steering Behaviour

Recent car development has seen an increasing demand for clear and reproducible
descriptions of drivability and steering behaviour of automobiles. The goal of
objective car testing is to describe the handling and steering qualities independent
of the driver and to gather parameters for objectiﬁcation. A very large number of
objective test processes have been published. Note that each of the mentioned
maneuvers represents the steering and handling qualities of a car only in a speciﬁc
driving condition. Only the inclusion of many different maneuvers will yield a
complete image of the steering behaviour.

7.5.1 Measuring Equipment

Measurements are established by applying deﬁned steering angles and determining
the motion of the vehicle. The steering angle may be applied either by a test driver
or, preferably, by a steering machine—in particular during Open-Loop maneuvers.
Important parameters include steering angle and torque that can be recorded by
the appropriate sensors in the steering wheel itself and/or the steering machine.
The response variables, such as yaw speed and lateral acceleration, are recorded on
a gyro-stabilized platform. In addition to the minimum extent of these measure-
ments, speciﬁc variables of the steering system as, for example, the rack stroke or
tie rod force are often determined as well. Table 7.1 gives an overview of the
measurement systems to objectively evaluate the steering qualities of a car. The
recommended accuracies are determined as well.

162

M. Harrer et al.

Table 7.1 Measurement systems to record steering qualities
Sensor

Measured variable

Measured wheel

Optical distance laser
DMS
Correvit

Wheel angle
Wheel torque
Rack path
Tie rod forces
Longitudinal speed
Lateral speed

Measuring accuracy
Measuring range
±0.1˚
−500˚ to ?500˚
−15 to ?15 Nm
±0.01 Nm
−100 to ?100 mm ±0.1 mm
−25 to ?25 kN
0–70 m/s
−20 to ?20 m/s
Gyro-stabilised platform Longitudinal acceleration −25 to ?25 m/s2
Lateral acceleration
Vertical acceleration
Rolling angle
Pitching angle
Yawing angle
Yaw speed

−90˚ to ?90˚
−90˚ to ?90˚
−180˚ to ?180˚
−300˚ to ?300˚/s

±1 %
±0.01 m/s
±0.01 m/s
±0.01 m/s2

±0.1˚
±0.1˚
±0.1˚
±0.1˚/s

7.5.2 Driving Maneuvers

Driving maneuvers for objectively measuring the steering behaviour may be
basically classiﬁed as Closed- and Open-Loop maneuvers. In a Closed-Loop
maneuver, as, for example, a lane change, the driver assumes the control and
observation of the car, operating and responding individually to fulﬁl the deﬁned
task. By contrast, during the Open-Loop maneuver, a steering angle is applied by
the test driver or the steering machine regardless of the vehicle response. This is
the only way to gain objective parameters that are independent of the driver. The
following overview (Fig. 7.8) lists the recommended Open-Loop maneuvers to
record the steering behaviour.

Weave Test

The weave test generates characteristics to assess the steering-feel and the
steering precision around the central position. During this test, the steering angle
oscillates sinusoidally with constant amplitude and frequency at a set vehicle
speed. The lateral acceleration and yaw speed response variables are of particular
interest, as well as steering torque and angle. A detailed test description is found in
the ISO 13674-1 standard. The use of a steering machine with constant amplitudes
and frequencies of the steering angle is recommended. The on-center steering
behaviour may best be characterized by amplitudes between 2.5˚ and 10˚ and
frequencies between 0.2 and 0.5 Hz.

Step Input Test

The step input test helps to characterize the transition from straight driving into
constant-radius cornering. When driving straight, the car is brought into a circular
path by applying a ramp-like input of the steering angle. The yaw speed and lateral

7 Steering-Feel, Interaction Between Driver and Car

163

Vehicle Tests
9 x Tests     52 Test configurations

40

30

20

10

0

-10

-20

-30

-40

25

20

15

10

5

0

50

40

30

20

10

0

-10

-20

-30

-40

-50

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

l

]
°
[
 
e
g
n
a
-
l
e
e
h
w
-
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

l

]
°
[
 
e
g
n
a
-
l
e
e
h
w
-
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

l

]
°
[
 
e
g
n
a
-
l
e
e
h
w
-
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

l

]
°
[
 
e
g
n
a
-
l
e
e
h
w
-
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

FREQUENCY RESPONSE

1000

2000

3000

5000

6000

7000

4000
Time

WEAVE TEST DURING CORNERING

1000

2000

3000

5000

6000

7000

8000

4000
Time

SINGLE SINE

500

1000

1500

2500

3000

3500

2000
Time

STEP INPUT

-5
700

750

800

850

900

950 1000 1050 1100 1150 1200
Time

Freq. Response

ISO 8726

Weave Test

ISO 13674

Single Sine

ISO 7401

Step Input

ISO 7401

Fig. 7.8 Objective vehicle tests

Test configuration:

(cid:129) vehicle speed

(cid:129) lateral acceleration

(cid:129) steering wheel angle input

(cid:129) steering frequency

(cid:129) ………

acceleration response variables, response times, and the achieved steady-state
values are used for analysis. For a detailed test description and the prime rating
criteria, see the ISO 7401 standard. According to these recommendations, the
steering angle may be varied to achieve different steady lateral accelerations.

Single Sine Test

The purpose of the single sine test is to describe the transient drivability of the
car by means of a sinusoidal steering angle input. This test is described in ISO/TR
8725. The steering angle input and the vehicle response of this test are based upon
double lane changes. During this test, the steering angle input and the vehicle
response variables are of special interest. The comparison of the highest absolute
values of the angle-to-torque ratio and the vehicle response yields other important
data to objectively describe the steering behaviour. As in the aforementioned tests,
the input angle may be varied.

Frequency Response Test

The frequency response is measured to describe the transient behaviour in the
frequency range. At a given speed, the car is prompted out of linear driving by a
sinusoidal steering angle input. The steering frequency is continuously increased
from approx. 0.1 Hz to approx. 3 Hz at constant amplitude. During this test,
magnitude of vehicle response and any phase development as well as yaw speed
and lateral acceleration as a function of the steering angle are of particular interest.

164

M. Harrer et al.

For the prime rating criteria, see ISO 7401. The steering angle may be varied to
achieve different lateral acceleration values.

7.5.3 Automated Data Processing

The goal of dynamic measurements is the objective comparison of different cars or
car conﬁgurations. Different maneuvers and variations of the test parameters such
as angle amplitude, steering frequency, and vehicle speed are required for a full
description of the drivability. In addition, each test must be measured several times
for results to be reproducible. Hence, a test series often means the analysis of a
massive set of measurements. For accurate evaluation of a measurement, various
delays in the measurement sequence and the sensor positions must be considered.
In addition, the data must be ﬁltered as needed to correct the offset. Automated
data processing is recommended on account of the massive amount and com-
plexity of the tasks.

Considering Delays

The signals in the various measured variables shift due to implemented
pre-ﬁlters as well as sensor and ampliﬁer periods in the measurement sequence. In
particular, the time difference between fast and slow measuring channels must be
taken into consideration. These differences, especially with high-frequency
steering angle inputs, must be considered to avoid distortion of the phase
response. If the measuring data is used to validate simulation models, correction of
the signal times is essential.

Conversion to a Reference Point

According to the ISO 15037-1 standard, the vehicle motion magnitudes should be
converted to a reference point, independent of loading. The standard suggests that
this reference point be centered in the wheelbase, at height of the center of gravity at
standard dry weight. Since the sensors cannot usually be placed at this point,
measurements are recorded at another measuring point. Conversion to the dedicated
or a selected reference point allows the comparison between different cars.

7.5.4 Objective Parameters

Objective parameters are characteristics taken or computed from the measured and
processed signals or simulations, such as amplitude values, gradients, delays, etc.
Finding objective parameters is described in the following by means of the weave
test. The adjustment of objective parameters in Open-Loop tests takes place in a
similar manner.

7 Steering-Feel, Interaction Between Driver and Car

165

Weave Test

xˆ2
Y

B
x          x

y

Surface A 1

1

X

yˆ2

2

1 Ordinates dead zone
2  Abscissae dead zone
B Marked surface

]

m
N

[
 
e
u
q
r
o
t
 
l
e
e
h
W

2.5

1.5

2

1

0

0.5

-0.5

-1

-1.5

-2

-2.5

Gradient

Ratio

Specific surface

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

Wheel angle [deg]

Fig. 7.9 Objective parameters—example weave test at 0.25 Hz and 80 km/h

For an objective description of the On-Center steering qualities, the weave test
is the most important. The goal is to achieve a steady-state driving condition
during the application of constant, sinusoidal steering angles. Pairs of various
measured variables are entered into a Cartesian coordinate system in order to
compute objective parameters from steering angle, steering torque, lateral accel-
eration, etc. data with respect to time. Each pair of variables generates corre-
sponding hysteresis curves from which objective parameters are derived (Fig. 7.9).
Many objective parameters of the weave test are described in the ISO 13674
standard.

A validation of the measurement results requires a minimum number of repe-
ated measurements to enable the assessment of the objective parameters with
respect to distribution and variation. The distribution of an objective parameter is
deﬁned as its standard deviation from a mean value in a measurement series at
identical conditions. The data is given in percent, where a small value of the
distribution allows conclusions to be drawn on reproducibly measured parameters.
Variable analysis helps to determine whether different test conﬁgurations differ
signiﬁcantly or only by accidental deviations. A variable analysis is essential for
the statistical reliability of the objective parameters.

7.6 Correlation and Regression Analysis

Statistical
techniques like correlation and regression analyses are needed to
establish a connection between subjective ratings and computed objective
parameters. The correlation analysis examines the connections between dependent
and independent variables. Dependent variables of dynamic analyses are always
subjective ratings. The independent variables are represented by objective
parameters. The resulting correlation coefﬁcient values show the statistical sig-
the connection between dependent and independent variables.
niﬁcance of

166

M. Harrer et al.

Regression analysis additionally determines the connection between both variables
by means of a mathematical function.

Easy correlation and regression analysis techniques have been useful to analyze
the steering behaviour of cars in the linear range of driving dynamics. Here, the
focus is on determining linear connections between subjective ratings and objec-
tive parameters. The requirements of a successful analysis are the compliance with
various mathematical constraints (e.g., normal distribution of the sample size).
Using the dummy variable technique,
the above-mentioned correlation and
regression methods can be extended to cover not only the analysis of single cars
within a car class, but also of different cars across various classes. These regression
models helped to establish that rating criteria relating to the steering torque level
are independent of the respective car class (Harrer 2007). This means that the
objective parameters concerned have nearly identical physical values for attaining
ideal ratings in every car class. However, a rating criterion to describe the vehicle
response on steering inputs is very much dependent on the respective car class.
Attaining an ideal steering behaviour therefore requires different physical values of
the objective parameters for each individual car segment.

7.7 Target Ranges for Ideal Steering Characteristics

Much effort has been invested into the objectiﬁcation of drivability and steering
behaviour. The weave test and the frequency response test are considered very
signiﬁcant for the objectiﬁcation of the steering behaviour.

Table 7.2 gives value ranges for typical ideal steering behaviour during the
weave test. The rating criteria and the proper objective parameters reveal a high
correspondence throughout the mentioned publications. The rating criteria are
explained in Sect. 7.4. The value ranges are distinct for sedans and sports cars, as
long as a distinction of the car segment is feasible.

The frequency response test helps to determine the transmission of the yaw
response on a corresponding steering angle input. This test primarily facilitates the
assessment of the rating criteria Response power and Response properties over
time at low-frequency steering angle inputs. An excerpt from the frequency
response test is the Weir and DiMarco diagram (1978). It depicts the stationary
yaw gain over the equivalent delay time. This delay time is computed by the
frequency at which the phase response between yaw rate and steering angle cor-
responds to a phase angle of 45˚. The following Weir and DiMarco diagram
(Fig. 7.10) gives value ranges for currently built models.

This chapter has shown that there are already various objective target value
ranges available to design steady or non-steady steering behaviour. Other qualities
when, for example, approaching the limits of the driving dynamics, or the dis-
tinction of useful and interfering information, have not yet been established,
however.

7 Steering-Feel, Interaction Between Driver and Car

167

Table 7.2 Weave test—collection of some value ranges for an ideal steering behaviour (Norman
1984; Dettki 2005; Harrer 2007; Zschocke 2009)
Rating criterion

Objective parameters

Value range for ideal
steering behaviour

Wheel torque around the

Wheel torque gradient at a wheel

From 0.3 to 0.5 Nm/˚

central position

angle = 0˚

Wheel torque at a lateral
acceleration of 1 m/s2

From 2.5 to 3.5 Nm

Centre point

Wheel torque gradient at a wheel

From 0.35 to 0.45 Nm/˚

angle = 0˚

Steering friction around the

Wheel torque gradient at a lateral

From 2.5 to 3 Nm/(m/s2)

central position

acceleration of 0 m/s2

Hysteresis amplitude wheel torque

From 0.5 to 1.5 Nm

Required steer-angle during
double lane change

at a wheel angle = 0˚

Yaw rate at a wheel angle = 20˚

Response (directness) from the

Yaw rate gradient at a wheel

central position

angle = 0˚

Saloon: 0.30–0.32˚/s
Sports cars: 0.25–0.28˚/s
Saloon: 0.20–0.30 1/s
Sports cars: 0.30–0.35 1/s

Weir-DiMarco

Sports cars

Straighter vehicle response

Delayed response
properties

Current models

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

]
s
/
1
[
 
n
i
a
g
 
w
a
y
 
y
r
a
n
o
i
t
a
t

S

0

0

0.1

0.2
Equivalent delay time [s]

0.3

0.4

Fig. 7.10 Weir and DiMarco diagram (modiﬁed)

8.1 Basic Design of a Steering System

Excellent driving and steering feel can be achieved only by a sufﬁciently precise
steering system. Therefore, on the one hand, the design of a steering system has to
be able to transfer high forces while on the other hand achieving little free travel,
few elasticities and low friction in the movable parts. In addition, the steering
system, supported by its power-assistance unit, should be able to realize sufﬁcient
steering dynamics. Adhering to these constraints is the only way to enable quick
and precise steering of a car. In the following chapters the basic functional design
of steering systems and the aspects of steering power and friction will be discussed
in more detail.

8.1.1 Rack Force

The steering rack forces occurring from parking are crucial for the dimensioning of
a steering system. The overall displacement force of the rack is the sum of the left
and right tie rod forces. Essential inﬂuences on the level of the rack force at
Parking force measurement

Fig. 8.2 Rack forces over vehicle class

parking are the axle kinematics, the front axle load, the size of the tyres, the air
pressure in the tyres and the friction value of the road surface.

Figure 8.1 shows the results of such a parking force measurement. In this
example, the highest rack force is 15 kN, achieved at the highest rack stroke or

8 Layout of Steering Systems

171

Fig. 8.3 Steering wheel torque when parking (undersized steering system)

steering wheel angle. The mentioned inﬂuencing factors demonstrate that the rack
forces rise with increasing car size or weight. For this reason Fig. 8.2 shows the
rack force ranges occurring among different vehicle classes.

8.1.2 Steering Wheel Torque

The steering wheel torque effort depends essentially on the design of the valve
characteristic (for hydraulic power steering) or the applied software parameters
(for electric power steering). The servo force of the steering actuator should be
high enough so that it is possible to produce the desired steering wheel torque
constantly over the entire steering wheel angle range when the car is at rest, taking
into account the highest occurring rack force.

The steering wheel torque level, depending on the integrated steering system

and its tuning, is located between 2.5 and 6.0 Nm in modern standard cars.

The servo force of an undersized steering system is not sufﬁcient to turn across
the full steering wheel angle range without demanding a higher effort from the
driver. These circumstances are depicted in Fig. 8.3. In this example, the driver
has to manually compensate a too low servo force by a higher steering wheel
torque beyond a steering wheel angle which is higher than, say, ±350˚.

172

S. Brunner et al.

8.1.3 Steering Dynamics

The displacement dynamics of the steering actuator, as a function of the applied
rack force, is crucial for a high steering wheel angular velocity (rate) that does not
display any notable increase of the steering wheel torque. If the steering system is
undersized, any quick manoeuvres will perceptibly raise the steering wheel torque.
It can be assumed in principle that the faster a manoeuvre is performed, the
higher the perceptible steering wheel forces and torques will be. It is easy to identify
the highest accessible steering wheel angular velocity, or rate limit, in a car at
standstill by applying a sinusoidal steering wheel angle with an amplitude of about
±60˚ while the steering wheel frequency is continuously raised up to 3 Hz. The
steering wheel angular velocity and wheel torque are then rising functions of the
steering wheel frequency. The rate limit is achieved when the steering wheel applied
torque is approximately 50 % above the original steering wheel torque (Fig. 8.4).
The dynamic limits of a steering system may rarely be reached in everyday
driving, yet sufﬁcient steering dynamics can be crucial in a critical situation, such
as in a sudden evasive manoeuvre. Therefore the required speciﬁcations of a
steering system always deﬁne a steering rate limit as a function of rack dis-
placement and force. Figure 8.5 shows a representative curve of the steering wheel
rate limit. The presented default is limited by certain constraints. For example, the
maximum permissible increase of the steering wheel torque upon reaching the
steering wheelrate limit needs to be deﬁned. For hydraulic power steering systems,

Fig. 8.4 Determining the steering wheel rate limit

8 Layout of Steering Systems

173

Fig. 8.5 Default steering wheel rate limit

a default value of the available oil transport volume at the corresponding pressure
is vital. For electric power steering systems, the system temperature and the
highest voltage and current values applied to the ECU is deﬁned.

8.1.4 Steering Power

The mechanical steering power can be computed from the required steering wheel
angular velocity or rack speed and the resultant rack force. Figure 8.6 shows the
power hyperbolas as a function of force and speed of the rack. Signiﬁcant oper-
ating points of a typical SUV are indicated as well. Electric power steering system
requirement speciﬁcations often use the mechanical steering power as a measure of
the displacement dynamics.

8.1.5 Steering Friction

The mechanical friction is an important factor in the design of steering systems.
Steering friction determines the driving and steering response of a car and, hence,
the subjective perception of steering feel. Rack-based steering system designs
cause a lot of Coulomb friction, originating from the sliding motion of the rack
relative to bearings and gaskets. The high number of rotating mechanical parts in
an electric power steering system generates a system friction which is higher than
that of an hydraulic power steering system. The effects of the gear friction may be
either negative or positive, depending on its nature and level.

174

S. Brunner et al.

Fig. 8.6 Mechanical steering power of an SUV (example)

8.1.5.1 Negative Features of Steering Friction

Ergonomic studies show that higher Coulomb friction in a control device reduces
the human ability to control the device. It is evident that friction then also affects
the precise dosage of steering movements, especially close to the centre point of a
steering system, when the hydraulic or electrical power-assistance is low. In
addition the so called stick-slip effect (transition from static to sliding friction),
resulting from too high system friction when steering out of the centre point,
should be avoided.

At low speeds, too much friction in the steering system will also reduce the cars
self-aligning ability after cornering. Furthermore, the feedback of the steering
system is affected by higher friction. Useful information about the current driving
situation and road condition is accordingly reduced by friction.

8.1.5.2 Positive Features of Steering Friction

Friction in the steering system produces a hysteresis-like response of the steering
wheel torque over the steering wheel angle. This hysteresis response is compulsory
for precise cornering of a car. In a steady cornering it will generate an operating point
with a notable rise of the torque when the steering wheel angle rises and a distinct
drop of the torque when the angle lessens. This enables the precise adjustment of the
steering wheel angle (Fig. 8.7). A high friction coefﬁcient in the steering system will

8 Layout of Steering Systems

175

Fig. 8.7 Hysteresis of
steering wheel torque over
angle (steady sinoidal
alternating steer)

e
u
q
r
o
t
 
l
e
e
h
w
 
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

articulation

runback

Steering wheel angle

also support the suppression of interferences. Bumps and periodic excitations like
wheel imbalances, ﬂuctuations of the braking forces, etc. are damped accordingly.
Any disturbances in the steering wheel can be reduced by higher friction.

There are two useful methods to determine the steering friction. The ﬁrst
method measures the displacement force of the rack, moving at a steady speed.
The input shaft of the gear is free. A curve of the force over the rack displacement
is the result. The amplitude of the displacement force increases as a function of the
displacement speed.

Electric power steering systems, when passive (servo unit is shut-off), display
higher displacement forces than hydraulic steering systems. At
low ambient
temperatures, the displacement force of an electric power steering systems is also
rising signiﬁcantly in comparison to that of a hydraulic power steering system.
Figure 8.8 shows the resulting modulating curve of the displacement force. This

Fig. 8.8 Displacement force measurement, EPS, 10 mm/s, before and after 80,000 km on the road

176

S. Brunner et al.

Fig. 8.9 LFTT measurement, EPS, before and after 80,000 km of continuous running on the road

effect is caused by unwinding the pinion on the steering rack with varying cog
engagements.

Another method to determine the steering system friction is to measure the
steering wheel torque along the complete steering range without any external
loads. In this case the input shaft of the gear is rotating at a steady speed and the
rack is free of any external loads. The measurement yields the load free turning
torque (LFTT) over the angle of rotation (Fig. 8.9). The same physical effects
occur as when measuring the displacement force. The friction of the gear and the
corresponding permissible limit values are usually speciﬁed when the car is new.
A signiﬁcant drop of the steering system friction during the cars lifetime cannot be
avoided, it is due to wear and the jigging in the steering system. After running for
300,000 km, a drop by half of the original value of the displacement force is not
uncommon. Nevertheless, after an initial phase of a few hundred kilometres, the
friction level should stabilise and be kept stable as long as possible.

8.2 Response Characteristics of Steering Systems

Response characteristics of steering systems can be distinguished by the conver-
sion of torques at the steering wheel into forces at the rack and the conversion of
forces at the rack into torques at the steering wheel. These two directions of
transmission are generally unequal, i.e. knowing about one direction does not
permit unequivocal deductions on the other direction, or its reconstruction. This
fact does not initially appear very signiﬁcant and it was marginalised in the past.

8 Layout of Steering Systems

177

Yet deeper theoretical discussion of this relationship may help the developer of
steering systems to answer many questions that can matter for their practical
development. The following sections are meant to sensitise the reader for the
subject by an introduction into the response characteristics of steering systems.
Particular attention is paid to the differences arising from the technological switch
from hydraulic to electrically assisted steering systems.

8.2.1 Steering Response (Guidance Response)

The driver’s tasks in driving a vehicle can be interpreted as controlling the lateral
and longitudinal dynamics of a car. Steering allows to focus on lateral guidance.
The driver is sensor, ﬁlter, controller and actuator at once.

A conventional control system is generally adhering to the following criteria:
stability, robustness, set point sequence and constraints to the available actuating
power. Any system needs at least one actuating variable and the proper sensors to
enable a suitable feedback which may serve to meet the controlling task. The set
value steering wheel angle is generated by the driver, based on available sensors,
for example: balance, eyes, ears, but also haptic perception of the steering wheel
torques and accelerations. When generating a set value, any person will auto-
matically avoid impossible actuation tasks, so that the controlling person, when
skilled enough, can push the car to its physical limits.

Driving errors—so to speak: instabilities—occur when the driver has misjudged
and transgresses the physical limits. The driver has misjudged when the mental
model of the vehicle dynamics is insufﬁcient or when the sensors for the mental
model are sending delayed or wrong signals to the computing brain.

In this comparison the steering system, as an HMI, is fulﬁlling two tasks. On the
one hand, it is the element that transmits the actuating variable, the steering wheel
angle, set by the driver, via the steering gear and axle kinematics to the tyres. On
the other hand, the steering system has to report haptic signals to the driver, e.g., to
make statements about the contact of the tyre with the road or the forces present
between tyre and road. As mentioned at the beginning, these two tasks of the
steering system adhere to different directions of transmission. Their requirements
can be deduced straight from our comparison. The transmission path steering
wheel-to-road should be supported by the steering system in such a way that the
actuating power provided by the human driver is sufﬁcient to cover even the
highest frequency range available. This bridges the gap to the steering wheel rate
limit, relevant in system design, and the underlying power requirements to the
system. In the transmission path from road to steering wheel or rather rack-force to
steering wheel torque any changes to the force have to be reported to the driver in
such a way that the useful content of this excitation can be fully exploited while
the interfering content is suitably suppressed. This case is called good steering
response.

178

S. Brunner et al.

8.2.2 Steering Feedback Response (Response behavior)

The preceding discussion shows that steering response may be interpreted as the
conversion of varying forces and therefore speed and acceleration at the rack into
variations of torque and therefore rotational velocity and acceleration at the
steering wheel.

A suitable measure to theoretically study the transmission qualities of different
steering systems is to deﬁne them within their free punch and to examine them
then for minor variations around their neutral position. Needlessly complicated
models of non-linear system qualities can thus be preliminarily avoided without
limiting the general validity of the resulting statement. Next, the identiﬁed con-
nections may be extended to non-linear systems, so that the reader may compre-
hensively examine the subject. A systematic procedure to evaluate the steering
response will be presented in the following, beginning with a model of an
hydraulic power steering system and continuing with a model of an electric power
steering system.

8.2.2.1 Steering Feedback Response of Hydraulic Power Steering

Systems

In general one has to distinguish between the feedback response of an active and a
passive power steering system. An active power-assist is present when the driver
initiates any steering process or is already continuing a quasi-stationary steering
process. The steering system is passive when the driver does not change the course
at the observed point of time. Which characteristic of the steering system is
prevailing at which given time depends on the kind of power-assist and the
respective system state. First, the passive feedback response of hydraulic power
steering systems will be discussed.

Figure 8.10 shows the basic parts of a hydraulic power steering system, sepa-
rated from the car. The design of axle kinematics and steering column is subject to
different prevalent requirements than the steering system itself. Hence, the steering
system will be discussed separately from steering column and axle kinematics.
A detailed description of the hydraulic power steering system will not be given
here, see the further chapters of this book. In the following, the steering system
should be assumed as clamped at the torsion bar. This leads to an oscillatory
system which can be well examined with the help of Bode’s diagram.

To derive Bode’s diagram for the oscillatory system steering, the equations of
motion for the signiﬁcantly simpliﬁed model are established. This yields the
generic equation:

m€x þ d _x þ cx ¼ FðtÞ

ð8:1Þ

Here, m is the mass of the rack and the hydraulic oil column. The damping of the
system is represented by d and the stiffness of the steering system by c. F(t) are the

8 Layout of Steering Systems

179

Steering wheel

Valve entrance shaft

Torsion bar

Valve sleeve

Load

+

-

Pinion

Return line

Steering valve
function

Pressure line

Rack

Cylinder

System limits

Fig. 8.10 Basic diagram of a hydraulic power steering

forces, varying over time and acting on the rack from the outside, x is the position
of the rack. Using the Laplace transform with the initial condition x(0) = 0, the
transfer function for this SISO (single input single output) system and its repre-
sentation in the Laplace area are at once derived:

G ¼

¼

X
F

1
ms2 þ ds þ c

ð8:2Þ

The analogy of the Laplace and the Fourier transforms allows to substitute the
Laplace variable s by the complex number jω. This yields a complex frequency
response that describes the response characteristics of the moving pinion as a
function of the excitation at the rack. Separating this complex transfer function
into its absolute value |G| and its phase ﮮG and plotting both over the frequency
results in a representation of absolute value and phase response of the examined
system. Logarithmic scaling of the abscissa and scaling of the absolute value
response at the ordinate in decibel (dB) yields Bode’s diagram.

The absolute value response of Bode’s diagram shows that for a given fre-
quency f, an excitation at the rack has to be multiplied with the factor |G|(f) to
receive the corresponding effect at the torsion bar. If the excitation at the rack is
normalised to the value 1, the effect on the torsion bar is equal to the value |G|
(f) for the frequency f. The frequency that allows to mark a drop of 3 dB in the
absolute value response is called the corner frequency ωE. In contrast, the phase
response signiﬁes at which angular deviation the result of an excitation at the rack
follows this actual excitation. This relationship is easy to explain using a pointer
diagram.

The pointer diagram in Fig. 8.11 shows a snapshot of the excitation-to-effect
ratio on the left side. The length of the pointer is ‘1’. This means that the absolute
value response of the frequency response has an ampliﬁcation of 1 at this point.

180

S. Brunner et al.

-40

-42

-44

-46

-48

-50
0

-30

-60

 
)

B
d
(
 
t
n
u
o
m
A

)
g
e
d
(
 
e
s
a
h
P

 

-90

10 -1

10 0

101

 Frequency (Hz)

10 2

Fig. 8.11 Bode’s diagram of the passive hydraulic power steering

Im
1

G

Im
1

G

Im
1

G

Re

Re

Re

Fig. 8.12 Pointer diagram of the response characteristics

The angle between pointer and abscissa of the ﬁrst quadrant is the phase angle
of this snapshot. The length of the pointer G and the phase angle between pointer
and abscissa are changing according to the frequency of the revolving pointer.

Bode’s diagram (Fig. 8.12) allows to see very quickly that higher frequencies
will lower the excitation-to-effect ampliﬁcation as the phase angle is growing (the
angle is measured in mathematically positive direction). The curve shown is also
called a low-pass ﬁlter. Studies of the human perception of steering torques have
revealed that
the sensory threshold for torque ﬂuctuations is at 0.5–0.8 Nm
(Burschardt 2003), depending on the actually applied steering wheel torque. This
information allows to individually detect a changing torque at the torsion bar for
any ﬂuctuation of the force at the rack that occurs at a given frequency.

8 Layout of Steering Systems

181

-30

-40

-50

-60

-70

-80

-90

-100

0

-45

-90

-135

)

B
d
(
 
t
n
u
o
m
A

)
g
e
d
(
 
e
s
a
h
P

-180

-1

10

Base
High mass 
High damping 

High stiffness

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

Frequency (Hz)

Fig. 8.13 Bode’s diagram of the hydraulic steering with modiﬁed parameters

The displayed frequency response is also called a 2nd-order lag element or a
PT2 element. The structure of such a frequency response permits making state-
ments about the meaning of the parameters in Eqs. 8.1 and 8.2. Consider that,
according to the theory of oscillations, the proper motion of a vibrating system can
be described by its damped natural frequency, being a function of the non damped
natural frequency and the damping ratio. The non damped natural frequency is a
function of system stiffness and mass, while the damping ratio is a function of
damping constant and mass. Figure 8.13 shows the same steering system for
different parameter settings. For reference purposes, the basic response charac-
teristics, without modiﬁed system parameters, is shown again by a continuous line.
The ﬁnely sketched curve of the frequency response shows that more mass m shifts
towards lower frequencies (reciprocal
the corner frequency towards the left,
connection between non damped natural frequency and mass). At the same time,
the damping ratio of the system drops (reciprocal connection between damping
value and mass). A higher damping constant d (depicted by the chain-line curve)
lowers the level of amplitude peaks at the resonance frequencies, shifting the
corner frequency towards the left, towards lower frequencies. A higher torsion bar
stiffness (approx. total stiffness) c, however, raises the corner frequency (coarsely
dashed curve).

182

S. Brunner et al.

The frequency content found in hydraulic power steering systems is usually
sufﬁcient to supply any useful data that the driver may need. Actually, it is more
likely that a hydraulic power steering system is perceived as too bumpy. This
means that the full content of useful data is present, but the amount of interfering
information is so high that the driver would perceive it as irritating.

The passive system response is prevalent, especially on a straight course, on
account of the slowly climbing characteristic curves of the assist power around the
centre point of the steering system. If some assisting power is already present, e.g.,
during a steady-state circular drive, the component of the assist unit will dominate
with increasing power-assist. Ignoring the lag response of the assist unit, the servo
power is diminishing the torque that the driver has to apply and, besides, has the
effect to stiffen the overall system. In other words, the general ampliﬁcation over
the observed frequency range is less and the corner frequency is shifted towards
higher frequencies.

8.2.2.2 Non-Linear Enhancement for the Description of Hydraulic

Power Steering Systems Feedback

The features discussed so far are based on the analysis of linearised systems. A real
steering system is subject to signiﬁcant non-linearities, though. On the one hand,
there is the inherent friction, on the other hand, there are effects from the variable
rack ratio or the non-linear valve characteristics. All non-linear qualities of a
steering system listed above are essential tuning parameters, relevant for the
steering feel. For example, when a variable rack ratio is used, the steering wheel
angle required to produce a corresponding steer angle at the wheels is higher
around the centre point of the steering than near the end stops. This design is
sensible because high-speed driving concurs preferably with small steer angles,
and a less direct rack ratio of the steering will make the vehicle respond less
nervously. Low-speed driving often requires high steer angles, though, e.g., for
parking. A more direct gear ratio is more advantageous here. The variable rack
ratio, hence, is designed so that the steering wheel torque build up as a function of
the rack travel will follow a degressive characteristic curve. This indicates for the
response characteristics of the steering system that big steer angles will impair the
stiffness of the overall system. This may not sound very plausible at ﬁrst, but it can
be explained as follows:

The stiffness resulting from the torsion bar and that from the power-assist unit
are acting in parallel, so that their effects on the overall system stiffness can be
examined separately. The torque at the torsion bar is set by the product of the
difference angles between pinion and steering column and of the torsion bar’s
rotational stiffness.

MDS ¼ cDS (cid:1) Dd ¼ cDS (cid:1) dLS (cid:3)

ð8:3Þ

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

2p
i

x

8 Layout of Steering Systems

183

MDS is the torque at the torsion bar, cDS is the rotational spring rate of the torsion
bar, δLS is the steering column angle, i is the variable ratio between pinion and rack
and x is the displacement of the rack. The stiffness of the examined system results
from the torque at the torsion bar, changing with the position of the rack. This can
be computed by:

dMDS
dx

¼ cDS (cid:1) (cid:3)

¼ cvar

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

2p
i

ð8:4Þ

cvar is here the variable stiffness of the system, shown as a function of the variable
rack ratio. Big steer-angles produce a high ratio, so that the system stiffness is
small, while small steer-angles concur with a small ratio, hence, the system
stiffness is high. There is a similar relationship for the generally progressive assist
power characteristic curves of the rotary disk valves. Here, however, the nonlin-
earity is found in the hydraulic power assist, progressively rising with the torsion
bar torque. Hence, the total stiffness of the system is higher when there is a higher
torque at the torsion bar. In any real steering system, both effects apply simulta-
neously and, depending on design, with different intensities. Only the superposi-
tion of these relationships can, therefore, be observed at a car or test bench.

Figure 8.14, top left, shows the response characteristics of a hydraulic power
steering system with rising assist power. The continuous line represents an
unassisted system. The assist power rises by the following sequence: ﬁnely dashed,
dashed-and-dotted, coarsely dashed. It is obvious that the corner frequency of the
frequency response will move to the right as the assist power rises, while the
absolute value will lessen. Only the changing absolute values are relevant, because
the corner frequency is far beyond the frequency range that is relevant for the
driver. Hence the conclusion is permissible that the driver’s resolution of excita-
tions at the rack will drop as the assist power rises. This relationship does not
substantially change in the frequency range that is relevant for drivers even if the
lag from the hydraulic power assist unit is included, see Fig. 8.14, top right.

The lower left diagram shows as well that the total stiffness of the system
lessens when the gear ratio becomes more direct, the corner frequency shifts
slightly towards the left and raises the absolute value of the transmission. The
lower right diagram shows a combined representation of variable rack ratio and
progressive assist power characteristic curve, including any lags of the actuators.
The steering gear friction is also very non-linear, producing the hysteresis
qualities of the steering system. It can be adjusted to some extent, to reduce the
steering’s sensitivity to the torque applied by the driver. Then the car will not
respond to any ever-so-slight change of torque by the driving hands, and the
steer-angle can be precisely set. The steering system friction is composed for a
major part of dry friction and for a lesser part of viscous friction. For the response
characteristics of the steering system, this means that the rack will not move before
its friction is overcome, thus the torque at the torsion bar will not change. Minor
ﬂuctuations of the forces at the rack cannot be resolved at all, before this detection

184

 
)

B
d
(
 
t
n
u
o
m
A

 

 
)

B
d
(
 
t
n
u
o
m
A

 

-35

-40

-45

-50

-55

-60

-65

-70

-35

-40

-45

-50

-55

-60

-65

-70

Variation of the assist power

Variation of the assistance 
power + lag

S. Brunner et al.

10-1

100

101

102

103

104

10 -1

10 0

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

Frequency (Hz)

Variable rack ratio

Frequency (Hz)

Variable rack ratio + lag

G_gain0

G_gain1d

G_gain5d

G_gain10d

G_gain0

G_srr1d

G_srr2d

G_gain0

G_gain1

G_gain5

G_gain10

G_gain0

G_srr1

G_srr2

 
)

B
d
(
 
t
n
u
o
m
A

 

 
)

B
d
(
 
t
n
u
o
m
A

 

-35

-40

-45

-50

-55

-60

-65

-70

-35

-40

-45

-50

-55

-60

-65

-70

10 -1

10 0

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 -1

10 0

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Fig. 8.14 Bode’s diagrams on different non-linear inﬂuences in the response characteristics

threshold is passed. This can be told from Bode’s diagram by a corresponding
reduction of the absolute values in the absolute value’s response.

The preceding discussion reveals that many parameters of a steering system
affect the response characteristics of useful and interfering data. In spite of the
huge number of, sometimes complex, parameters, it is still possible to describe the
response characteristics of a hydraulic power steering system in general without
loss of generality. The cut-off frequency of any relevant feedback to the driver is in
the range of 20–30 Hz (Brunn and Harrer 2004). This, together with the ﬁgures in
this subsection, permits concluding that any hydraulic power steering system can
be designed so that the maximum amount of useful data is available to the driver
intrinsically.

The philosophy of the individual steering system development engineer decides

how to set the parameters to permit the desired system response.

8 Layout of Steering Systems

185

8.2.2.3 Feedback Reponse of Electric Power Steering Systems

Feedback

Analogous to the hydraulic power steering system, the response characteristics of
an electric power steering system will be examined and discussed in this section.
A steering system with an axis parallel brushless DC motor is shown in Fig. 8.15
as one example of a possible electric power steering system to be used in the
following discussions.

As before, when the hydraulic power steering was discussed, the system
boundaries refer only to the main elements of the steering system, including the
pinion with torque sensor and torsion bar, the rack with its transmission gear and a
BLDC motor with ECU.

The electric power steering system can also be modeled as a mass oscillator, if

the torsion bar is assumed again as clamped tight.

To simplify the derivation of the frequency response, the same generic equation
of motion that was applied to the hydraulic power steering system (cf. 365 Eq. 8.1)
is used. Note that secondary elasticities in the steering gear are ignored, while the
rotational moment of inertia from the and the rotor shaft of the BLDC motor are
added to the translating mass of the rack. This is achieved, e.g., by deriving the
substitute mass for the moving rack from the energy equation of the overall
system. The kinetic energy of the (axis-parallel electric powert steering system)
APA-EPS is derived from:

TEPS ¼

mv2 þ

JKGT x2

KGT þ

JBLDCx2

BLDC

1
2

1
2

1
2

Now m is the mass of the rack and v is its velocity, JKGT and JBLDC are the
moments of inertia of the recirculating ball nut and the rotor shaft, their angular
velocities are ωKGT and ωBLDC. Using the transmission ratios for the velocities:

ð8:5Þ

ð8:6Þ

xKGT ¼

2p
iKGT

v

Fig. 8.15 Basic sketch of the
axially parallel electric power
steering (APA EPS)

Steering column 

 Torque sensor 

ECU

BLDC Motor

Ball nut 

Torsion bar 

 Rack

Pulley 

Pinion 

System limit 

186

S. Brunner et al.

Here, iKGT is the transmission ratio of the recirculating ball nut in m/rev and iR is
the dimensionless gear ratio. This yields the kinetic energy of the EPS as a
function of the rack velocity:
(cid:1)

(cid:3)

TEPS ¼

1
2

þ JBLDC

m þ JKGT
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
mTrans

4p2 (cid:1) i2
R
i2
KGT

4p2
i2
KGT

v2

ð8:7Þ

The substitute mass can be read from that as mTrans. Standard transmission
ratios are 0.006–0.010 m/rev for the ball nut and 2.0–3.5 for the belt drive. The
moment of inertia for the rotor is approx. 1e−4 kg m2 and for the recirculating ball
nut approx. 1e−3 kg m2. Ratios and moments of inertia of this magnitude yield
substitute masses of 900–1800 kg. This indicates a considerable inﬂuence on the
response characteristics of electric power steering systems, considering that the
mass of the rack is only 2.5–3.5 kg.

At this point, the frequency response, familiar from Eq. 8.2, can be used with
the computed substitute mass. Figure 8.16 shows the effects on the response

Hydraulic steering
EPS (low inertia)
EPS (high inertia)

-20

-30

-40

-50

-60

-70

0

-45

-90

)

B
d
(
 
t
n
u
o
m
A

)
g
e
d
(
 
e
s
a
h
P

-135

-180

10-1

100

101

Frequenz  (Hz)

102

Fig. 8.16 Bode’s diagram of a passive electromechanical power steering

8 Layout of Steering Systems

187

characteristics for a system with low (EPS-low inertia) and high (EPS-high inertia)
substitute masses in comparison to a hydraulic power steering system, using
Bode’s diagram for the passive systems.

It is easy to see that an electric power steering system has considerable
shortcomings in the passive response characteristics, compared with a hydraulic
power steering system. The corner frequency of both examined EPS versions is
much less than 10 Hz. Neither of the two systems provides the full frequency
content of useful information to the driver. The reason can be deduced from the
derivation of the frequency response. The inertia of the recirculating ball nut and
the rotor produce an additional mass at the rack that shifts the corner frequency so
much towards the lower frequency range that the developing mechanical low-pass
ﬁlter eliminates a signiﬁcant part of the response. Note, however, that some
manufacturers welcome this quality of electric power steering systems, because
interfering variables are suppressed by the same order of magnitude.

As in a hydraulic power steering system, the passive response characteristics
are usually prevalent in electric power steering systems, too, when driving straight.
The reason is that no power-assist is required when the car is not cornering. This
effect is welcome, because the switch from hydraulic to electric power steering
systems is not only motivated by more functionality but also by less energy
consumption. The power-on-demand principle provides assist power to the system
only when required. However, electric power steering systems often have active
steering functions, that can be active even when the driver gives no steering input.
This may be true, e.g., for a lane-keeping or a parking-assist system. Still, note that
the actual response of the steering system for these functions is subordinate or the
active intervention of the steering system is minor. Hence, it is still legitimate to
say that the passive system response to straight driving will in most cases dominate
the response characteristics of an electric power steering system.

This means in turn that the response behaviour of actively assisting electric
power steering systems, i.e. during a manoeuvre, will be substantially affected by
the assit power demand of the steering system. The assist power for the driver is
realised in these systems by a feedback control system or at least by an advanced
forward control approach. There are different approaches with different effects on
the response characteristics of the individual active systems. Whatever the control
strategy, the response of actively assisting systems depends a lot on the matching
application modules, i.e. the reference defaults of the respective system and the
parameters applied. One popular way is to provide application modules for the
general assistance, the centre point feeling, the hysteresis, additional damping and
an active steering return. Often, all these functions are in a more or less inter-
twining manner dependent on each other and the corresponding states of the
steering system and the car. One example is the general assistance of the steering
system as a function of the torsion bar torque, varying with the cars speed. This is
not the only reason why the assist power provided by the steering system is rather
non-linear. It should be obvious that it is not possible to make any really general
statements on the response characteristics of an actively assisting electric power
to improve the reader’s understanding of the present
steering system. Yet

188

S. Brunner et al.

dependences, it seems useful to focus on just one of the most common ways to
build an EPS.

One of the most frequent approaches to realize an electric power-assist is an

assist power that is provided proportionally to the torsion bar torque.

Figure 8.17 compares EPS and HPS response characteristics at different assist
rates, assuming a nearly perfect control with short time lags. The effect of this kind
of assist power default resembles the hydraulic power-assist very strongly.

This means that the assistance unit has the effect of an additional stiffness on the
system. The ﬁrst diagram of Fig. 8.17 compares an EPS and an HPS in passive
states. The subsequent diagrams 2–4 (2 = weak assist, 3 = medium assist,
4 = powerful assist) repeat the comparison for successively higher assist powers. It
is evident that, as already seen for hydraulic power steering systems, this kind of
electric assist power also features a corner frequency that is shifting towards higher
frequencies when the assistance rises, while the amount of forces at the rack
converted into torques at the torsion bar is diminished. Indeed, in an electric power
steering system, this process is based on a much lower corner frequency of the
passive system. It may be added without further discussion of the subject that
electric power steering systems per default suffer a higher friction than hydraulic
systems. Hence, what was said for the HPS is true here as well: the system friction

HPS (passive)
EPS (passive)

HPS (weak assist)
EPS (weak assist)

0

-20

-40

-60
0

-90

0

-20

-40

-60
0

-90

 
e
d
u
t
i
n
g
a
M

 
e
d
u
t
i
n
g
a
M

)

B
d
(

)
g
e
d
(
 
e
s
a
h
P

)

B
d
(

)
g
e
d
(
 
e
s
a
h
P

0

-20

-40

-60
0

-90

0

-20

-40

-60
0

-90

 
e
d
u
t
i
n
g
a
M

 
e
d
u
t
i
n
g
a
M

)

B
d
(

)
g
e
d
(
 
e
s
a
h
P

)

B
d
(

)
g
e
d
(
 
e
s
a
h
P

-180

10 -1

10 0
10 1
Frequency  (Hz)

10 2

-180

10-1

100
101
Frequency  (Hz)

102

HPS (medium assist)
EPS (medium assist)

HPS (high assist)
EPS (high assist)

-180

10 -1

10 1
10 0
Frequency  (Hz)

10 2

-180

10-1

101
100
Frequency  (Hz)

102

Fig. 8.17 Bode’s diagram of EPS and HPS for rising assist powers

8 Layout of Steering Systems

189

of the steering has to be overcome before the rack starts to move at all. This effect
is accompanied by a corresponding rise of the detection threshold at the rack. The
variable rack ratio reduces the system stiffness, slightly decreasing the corner
frequency, while the absolute value in the amplitude response is rising, as in
hydraulic systems.

To conclude, the discussed problem of an insufﬁcient passive response can be
avoided. Using advanced control approaches and matching application modules,
the lacking passive response may to some extent be substituted by an active
response. Approaches are still in the development phase, however, though close to
mass production. At best, the full frequency content can be provided to the driver
as useful data. If the response characteristics of such systems have to be deﬁned
more exactly, as in the discussed example, the applied control approach and the
to be known. Only then can a
matching application modules have
design-to-feedback approach help an electric power steering system to meet the
highest requirements for its feedback qualities and even supply the full scope of
active steering functions.
Steering Wheel

Markus Walters

9.1 Introduction

The driver perceives the steering wheel as one of the ﬁrst parts inside a car. It is
one of the most important interfaces between man and machine, because the
steering movements are initiated at the steering wheel and the driver receives a
direct response on the driving situation.

Because of its exposed position inside the car, the steering wheel has to meet
plenty of additional requirements. It is a part of the driver’s restraint system,
meaning that corresponding safety and legal regulations have to be met and ver-
iﬁed by slide and crash tests. Furthermore, the steering wheel has become a
designed element, merging into the general look of the interior and bearing, for
example, trade name or logo of the manufacturer.

The steering wheel has assumed a huge number of operation controls in recent
years, e.g., to control on-board computer and radio, navigation or gearbox func-
tions. Displays and function lights are implemented. Bus systems for the com-
munication between steering wheel and vehicle enter
the steering wheel
electronics on this behalf.

9.2 Subassemblies

Many customers, particularly in the premium segment, demand more individua-
tion, generating an ever greater variety. In addition, the various markets supplied
by the manufacturers require further differentiation. The steering wheel as well is

Fig. 9.1 Porsche sports
steering wheel with shift
paddles

M. Walters

much affected by this individuation. Often, a huge amount of supplemental
equipment is offered for the basic version that may be distinguished by technical
and stylistic requirements (Fig. 9.1).
Some technical versions are:

• Multi function switch (e.g., car computer or navigation controls)
• Gearbox operating switch (e.g., paddle switch)
• Steering wheel heating
• Displays (e.g., upshift recommendation, functional displays).

Stylistic differences are marked by:

• Colours
• Materials
• Decorations
• Varnished or electroplated surfaces.

The shown example of a version tree (Fig. 9.2) helps to clarify the differenti-
ation and variety of versions. 50 steering wheel versions develop in this example
from a number of colours, decorations and technical varieties, like multi function
or heating.

The basic structure, the foam body with the steering wheel rim, the horn
function and the airbag are within the basic scope of a steering wheel (Fig. 9.3).
This basic scope and additional elements, like switches or decorations, will be
discussed in the following.

9 Steering Wheel

193

Fig. 9.2 Version tree of steering wheels (example)

Fig. 9.3 Exploded view of a steering wheel
Left
structure-steering wheel corpus-steering wheel cover with horn function-airbag

(Porsche 997 II).

to right basic

9.2.1 Basic Structure

The basic structure is the fundamental scope of a steering wheel. It establishes the
supportive structure to meet the crash and operational safety requirements, it
manifests a connection to the steering column, it serves as a base for bolting
elements and generates the basic structure for corpus and rim, hence, of the
steering wheel design.

Steering wheels are safety parts, in a frontal crash, when the airbag is triggered,
they are exposed to high loads by the driver. In addition, the driver releases

194

M. Walters

steering and supporting forces into the basic structure that have to be endured
permanently.

The design of the basic structure can decisively impact the natural frequency

and the steering wheel’s mass moment of inertia.

Weight requires basic structures to be made from light metals, like aluminium
or magnesium (mainly die-cast). Magnesium is prevalent these days, due to the
beneﬁt of weight (Fig. 9.4).

Basic structure design has to include the above-mentioned aspects of crash,
operational safety and natural frequency. In the case of a crash, the steering wheel
should be able to absorb a high amount of energy, but it must not break. The
energy is absorbed mainly by distorting the lower rim area. This is realised by a
suitable design of the spokes and a connection to the hub ﬂoor. The lower spoke(s)
is/are weaker than the upper spokes, to achieve this effect.

An engine or steering wheel imbalance can produce interfering excitations at
rest or during a drive. The steering wheel needs to have a natural frequency of
[65 Hz, to meet the demand for a steering resonance (e.g., 40 Hz), essentially
combined from the natural frequencies of the frame, including the connections to
the car body, the steering column and the steering wheel. The design of the hub
ﬂoor and the connection of the spokes are essential for this design of the full
steering wheel. If the hub ﬂoor is not stiff enough, the idling vehicle may display a
shivering steering wheel. Additional metal sheet inserts may be molded in to
stiffen the hub ﬂoor. Another signiﬁcant way to obtain the natural frequency is the
connection of the airbag.

A steering wheel’s mass moment of inertia is commonly raised by imple-
menting additional weights as far away from the center of mass as possible. The
steering wheel rim of the basic structure is the natural choice. There are different
options to introduce the mass into the rim.

Fig. 9.4 Basic structure. Top
left tim, top right hub. Bottom
left hub ﬂoor, bottom right
spokes

9 Steering Wheel

195

Fig. 9.5 Basic structure compound and basic structure with rim insert. Left round tread-moulding
nodes-group basic structure. Right steel insert-basic structure with rim insert

One version has an U-shaped rim, into which the die-cast steel inserts are
implemented and crimped. The advantage of this option is that the casting does not
need additional effort and a multi-use mould can be used.

Another option is the immediate casting of tubes or round full treads (mainly
steel). The steel tread in the spoke areas is surrounded with the die-casting, so that
it leaves the mould as one part. This is called the basic structure compound.

Which option is chosen depends on the available manufacturing facilities and

the philosophy of the manufacturer (Fig. 9.5).

Most connections to the steering column are implemented either by internal
toothing or by a hex socket. The socket is implemented right into the tool, while a
toothing is produced either by clearing after casting or by an additional, already
cleared steel jack which is inserted into the die-casting tool and is cast-in, together
with the rest.

The kind of connection depends on the vehicle’s properties, such as steering

column, structure space and electronics modules.

9.2.2 Rim and Corpus

The layout of a steering wheel corpus is primarily determined by design, albeit
ergonomics and haptics matter when the rim is shaped. The geometry of the rim
often distinguishes between sporty and convenient steering wheels. Some of the
sporty attributes are a rim that is ﬂattened underneath or thumb supports. Every
vehicle manufacturer has its own philosophy with regard to cross sections and
diameters of a rim. The scope encompasses oval to circular and thin to thick rims.

196

M. Walters

Manufacturers in the Far Eastern and American markets prefer plastic back
covers for the corpus (die-cast parts) which are bolted onto the basic structure. The
steering wheel rim is previously made by foaming, separate from the corpus.

Foamed steering wheels are almost exclusively sold at the European market.
Corpus and rim are produced in a foaming process. The basic structure is laid into
a foaming mould and foamed in situ with water-driven polyurethane (PUR) inte-
gral foam. To make coloured steering wheels, the PUR integral foam is dyed.
A colour is introduced into the mould before foaming (in-mould covering) to
improve the surface quality and to maintain the stability against light. Different
grains are made in the foaming tool according to the manufacturer’s speciﬁcations.
This grain is introduced into the tool by etching. Foaming of the steering wheel
copies the grain to the surface.

9.2.3 Horn

Current requirements to a horn system include not only a warning against danger
but other factors as well, for example, the moderation of the horn forces, the
precise deﬁnition of the horn’s travel, the even shape of the joint between steering
wheel and airbag module, reliable operation for the whole service life and little
space ﬁlled by the parts of the horn.

Horn systems operated by an axial movement of the airbag module are pre-
ferred for automobiles. The airbag module is held in position by compression
springs. It has to be pressed against the spring tension until the contact in the
module support is closed (ﬂoating horn). Its advantage against horn buttons
integrated into the steering wheel is the central position of the airbag module and
the wider user surface. In dangerous situations and in any steering position, the
driver will intuitively locate the horn and use it safely.

State-of-the-art

The common feature of almost all the marketed ﬂoating horn systems is the tilting
of the airbag module when the horn is used. This tilt requires a wide gap between
the airbag cover and the steering wheel, contrary to the demand for lesser gap
widths. Several (usually 3–4) contact positions are needed to make sure that the
horn contact is closed all over the surface of the airbag when the horn is pressed.
The position of these contacts is quite vital, especially when the airbag module is
big and has long spoke bedding-ins. In this case, the contacts are placed very far
outward, so that the horn will not travel too much when it is operated near the edge
of the airbag. Moreover, with tilting airbag units, it is hard to achieve any even
horn actuating forces, because of the different lever ratios (pressure point vs.
contact position).

9 Steering Wheel

Fig. 9.6 Contactless horn
with linear guiding of the
airbag. (Source TRW).
Magnet-hall sensor-chip-horn
spring

197

Linearly guided horn system

Linear guiding excludes tilting the activated airbag module and presents a uni-
formly looking joint to the viewer. Furthermore, an even actuating force is
established across the whole cover by linear guiding, the position for detecting the
activation can be freely chosen, the horn travel tolerance is more controllable.

This kind of horn guidance suggests a contactless signalling by one single

transducer (Fig. 9.6).

The physical principle is based on detecting the travel of the airbag module and
evaluating it with a Hall sensor. The generated Hall sensor signal is processed by
the steering wheel ECU and transferred to the vehicle ECU by a LIN BUS.

One big advantage of a contactless horn, due to the Hall sensor, is the absence
of wear from the contact positions that otherwise would result from mechanic
abrasion and electrical discharge sparks. Nor will the contact positions be sooted
or oxidised, because the sensor is a closed system. This is also a great advantage
for the service life tests (e.g., coke test). The Hall sensor is proof against short
circuits, and this is another advantage against conventional horn buttons. Extra-
neous magnetic ﬁelds are eliminated by the system, preventing any external
release.

9.2.4 AirBag and Crash

Safety is gaining importance for the car industry, both due to the persistently
developing legal demands of different car markets (Europe, the USA, Asia) and
due to crash cases that are relevant for consumer protection. The protective effect
of the driver’s airbag has to be provided within 30 ms, to meet the different
requirements. The best possible restraining effect for passengers of any size has to
be achieved as well. A test series with different fastened dummies is needed, as, for
example, the 50 % dummy (average citizen), the 5 % dummy (light small woman)
and the 95 % dummy (big heavy man). Examine also any wrong, unbelted loading

198

M. Walters

Fig. 9.7 Airbag, exploded view (airbag not shown). Left to right bracket plate with bolt
connection-generator support-airbag bracket plate-emblem-gas generator-airbag cap

conditions, the OOP or Out of Position cases on-board. These OOP loading
conditions must not permit any danger to issue from the airbag system. These
requirements/functions of the airbag have to be guaranteed for 15 years, across the
whole temperature range of −35 to +85 ˚C, according to the manufacturer.
Figure 9.7 shows an exploded view of an airbag with the essential parts.

9.2.4.1 AirBag Cover

Other than meeting requirements of design, the airbag cover contributes a lot to the
restraining function of the airbag. If the airbag is ignited, e.g., by a frontal crash,
the airbag cover will release the airbag in a controlled manner. This controlled
opening/tearing of the airbag cover is due to tear lines on the inside cover, targeted
reduction of the material strength that have been determined and optimised in a
huge number of simulations and tests. A ﬂaw of reducing the material strength,
though, is that the tear lines may unintentionally show on the cover top, and that is
undesirable because of the exposed position of the steering wheel. Therefore, the
design of the airbag cover and the choice of the process parameters need particular
attention.

9.2.4.2 AirBag

Below the airbag cover is the airbag. The airbag consists of polyamide ﬁbres,
woven into a tissue, to be used either coated or uncoated. The ﬁrmness of the tissue

9 Steering Wheel

199

is inﬂuenced by the thread. Other versions are airbags with inner rebound tape or
tear seams. The rebound tapes reduce the unfolding travel and provide for the best
positioning of the airbag in front of the driver. The driver is ideally protected by
the airbag when it unfolds during a crash as quickly as possible and into the right
position in front of the driver. This is controlled by how the airbag is folded and
the way the airbag is stored into the cover, over the gas generator. When a crash
pushes the driver into the airbag, the air must be vented to reduce the impact
energy and to catch the passenger. A ﬂow-off exhaust in the airbag will do. The
volume of air escaping from the airbag can be set by position, size or number of
openings. This permits controlling the energy absorption. Upon specifying the size
of the openings, all relevant loading conditions and dummy sizes are considered.

9.2.4.3 Gas Generator

The gas generator has to inﬂate the airbag very quickly with the required amount
of gas. Chemical generators with solid propellants are chieﬂy used on the driver’s
side. The propellant is accommodated in tablets inside the gas generator. The gas
for ﬁlling the airbag is generated by a reaction of the propellant with the ambient
air. Azidous propellants were used until the 1990s. All generators are now oper-
ated with azide-free propellants, due to higher concerns for environmental
protection.

The bridge fuse is activated by the vehicle sensors, so that the ignition pill can
initiate the fuel combustion. The gas required to ﬁll the airbag is generated in the
sudden burning of the solid propellant. The combustion produces very high tem-
peratures in the furnace chamber (up to 1,000 ˚C, in some gas generators). The
generated gas ﬂows through the ﬁlter sieve of the generator nozzles, at high
pressure, to ﬁll the airbag. Its quick expansion and various diversions reduce the
temperature in the airbag to an unproblematic level. The gas can escape again by
the ﬂow-off exhaust in the airbag (Fig. 9.8).

2-stage gas generators are often used to adapt the performance. They allow
splitting the generator power, e.g., to assign 70 % of power to the ﬁrst stage and
30 % to the second stage. It is possible to ignite only the ﬁrst stage, both stages at
once or ﬁrst and second stage in succession, according to the severity of the
accident and the passenger’s position. For loading conditions fastened in position,

Fig. 9.8 Cross section of a gas generator

(left 1-stage, right 2-stage). (Source TRW)

200

M. Walters

the severity of the accident has a major part in the performance characteristics of
the airbag. In the OOP case, if the driver is too close to the steering wheel, the
power of the airbag can be reduced (ignite only the 1st stage) to lower the risk of
injury—the passenger’s position is thus accounted for. If only the ﬁrst layer was
ﬁred upon an accident, then the second layer has to be ﬁred after 100 or 200 ms as
well, by means of a discharging ignition, so that it will not pose any hazard to the
rescuing forces.

The mounting of the airbag module at the steering wheel may alternatively
apply a bolt connection or a snap-in. The snap-in system applies hooks at the
airbag module that grip into the immobile snap-in unit at the steering wheel,
establishing a connection between the parts. The snap-in connection facilitates the
assembly, because the airbag module is simply pressed into the steering wheel,
using little time for mounting. A bolt connection applies two bolts to immobilise
the airbag module at the steering wheel. The assembly of the bolt connection takes
more time than the snap-in solution. The slower mounting is outweighed by less
susceptibility to noises, e.g., by road excitation.

9.2.5 Multi Function

As indicated before, the steering wheel is accepting more and more electric
functions and elements. One of the most widespread elements that should be
mentioned is the multi function switch, e.g., for operating the car computer or the
navigation system/radio. Gearbox operation/manual selection of automatic or
double-clutching gearboxes is often relocated into the steering wheel. A few other
functions are cruise control operation, steering wheel heating and additional dis-
plays. The transmission of functions from the steering wheel to the car is playing
another role, according to the number of elements to be switched.

Switch elements

Upon operating the multi function switch (MFS), the driver receives primarily an
acoustic and haptic feedback that the desired function was triggered. The keys are
equipped with symbols and some are illuminated, to facilitate safe operation. The
contact system and, hence, the currents and voltages to be switched are selected
according to electric speciﬁcations,
taking service life and temperature into
account. The market supplies various micro switches that feature different haptic
criteria, such as silicone switch mats whose layout can follow haptic criteria.

An essential argument for the choice of a switch element is how the haptics of
the switch are speciﬁed. The haptics can be plotted in a force/displacement dia-
gram, to indicate how the switch of a caliper will feel. A switch system is designed
on account of such a force/displacement diagram (Fig. 9.9). The red line indicates
a succinct circuit which is the typical design for a short stroke caliper. The black

9 Steering Wheel

Fig. 9.9 Force/way diagram.
(Source TRW)

e
c
r
o
F

201

S

S
Switch point S

Displacement 

characteristic curve is a harmonious circuit which is commonly produced using
silicone switch mats.

The acoustics of a switch are usually not physically speciﬁed and have to be
optimised in close co-operation between vehicle manufacturer and switch/steering
wheel supplier. The switching operation should give a resounding and succinct
sound. Audible low noises from sound bodies, like hollow cavities, or metallic
secondary sounds, like the sounding of a spring, should be avoided. Different
materials are sometimes used to produce the caliper stops.

Three ways to mount translating switches are preferred for steering wheels: the
linearly controlled caliper, the unilaterally suspended caliper and the rocker caliper
(Table 9.1).

Transmission of functions steering wheel/vehicle

A clockspring is a swivelling contact transmission that establishes the electric
contact between the rigid cable harness in the steering column and the rotating
electronics in the steering wheel. The ﬂexible cables, rolled up into spirals, have to
follow the steering wheel in both directions. Higher demands for convenience
require more functions to be operated at the steering wheel. However, the number
of functions that can be possibly transferred by a clockspring is limited, due to the
limited space between steering wheel and column.

Table 9.1 Comparison of switch concepts

Advantages

Linearly controlled
caliper
∙ Steady switch
behaviour

∙ Little use of space
in X and Y
direction

Unilaterally suspended
caliper
∙ Controlled system
∙ Best solution for small

spaces

Rocker caliper

∙ Controlled system,
suitable for small
spaces

Disadvantages ∙ Costly guidance

tuning

∙ No possibility for operation
and lighting above the
axle

∙ Operation and lighting
above the axle is not
possible

∙ Big use of space in
Z direction

∙ Fixing the zero position is

difﬁcult

202

M. Walters

Steering wheel

Vehicle

W

Horn

Key 1

Key 2

Key 3

Key 4

Key 5

GND

Fig. 9.10 Voltage-coded transmission system block diagram. (Source TRW)

Two different techniques are used to transmit signals between steering wheel

and car: power coding and bus systems.
Voltage-coded signal transmission
Each caliper of a voltage-coded system connects the voltage to ground by a
resistance. Depending on which caliper is closed, the signal will be transferred by
the clockspring to the vehicle, with its own resistance value. This is also called
parallel data transfer (Fig. 9.10).
Transmission by bus systems
Speciﬁed data systems are generally applied in vehicles, e.g., CAN, FLEX-
RAY, MOST and LIN BUS. Master/slave systems are often used in sensor and
steering wheel applications, to establish the BUS performance within the ﬁnancial
budget. Taking these factors into account, the LIN BUS is often used for the
vehicle/convenience functions interface.

The LIN BUS transfers the complicated functions of the steering wheel con-
trols, for example, the multi function switches, the horn etc., to the steering shaft
switch module. The steering wheel functions are processed by a micro controller
(slave) and then sequentially transferred to the switch module (master) by only
three lines (LIN, VCC, GND; Fig. 9.11). The transmission systems are compared in
Table 9.2.

9 Steering Wheel

203

Vehicle

LIN-
Transceiver

µ C

LIN
VCC
GND

Clock
spring

Steering wheel
control unit

L

Horn

Key 1

Key 2

Key 3

Key 4

Key 5

GND

Fig. 9.11 Diagram LIN bus transmission system. (Source TRW)

Table 9.2 Comparison of transmission systems

Advantages

Voltage-coded signals
∙ Cheap version

Disadvantages

∙ Limited number of functions
∙ Susceptible to temperature
∙ Not capable of diagnostics

LIN BUS
∙ Bus voltage equal to car battery voltage
∙ Capable of diagnostics
∙ Indeﬁnite number of functions
∙ Higher expenditure for development
∙ More need of space

9.2.6 Foam, Leather and Decorations

A steering wheel made of polyurethane foam is often integrated into the basic
versions of lower or medium priced cars. A huge amount of extra equipment is
further offered for individuation, for example, leather or wooden rim surfaces.
A number of materials is available for the steering wheelskin (leathering):

• Grained steering wheel leather
• Smooth leather
• Perforated leather
• Alcantara
• Combinations of perforated and smooth leather
• Split leather
• Artiﬁcial leather.

204

M. Walters

Half machine stitch

cross stitch 

baseball stitch 

Tl stitch

Fig. 9.12 Kinds of stitch. (Source TRW)

And for the decorations:

• Wooden applications (burr walnut, ash, birch etc.)
• Carbon
• Aluminium optics
• Piano varnish
• Metal surfaces.

Cowhide is used as a steering wheelskin, adapted for application at the steering
wheel rim by special tanning procedures. The leather is 1.2–1.4 mm thick. Only
the back parts of the cowhide are suitable, because the neck and belly areas have
folds and the stretch values of the material are unsteady. After punching out the
unwound steering wheel strip, it is drawn by hand over the rim, ﬁxed with glue and
ﬁnally manually sewn. There are different stitches (e.g., half machine stitch, Tl
stitch, baseball stitch, cross stitch) to satisfy the customer’s taste. Alcantara is
applied in the same manner (Fig. 9.12).

Wooden decoration surfaces can be produced by different methods. The pre-
dominant materials are preformed GRP shells or die-cast plastic shells covered
with a wooden veneer of only a few tenth of a millimetre thickness. Both halves of
the shell are stuck together over the steering wheel rim and varnished several times
by spraying or hot dipping. Intermediate grounding may be useful between the
individual varnish layers, after the last layer, the varnish is polished if a high-gloss
effect is desired. The application of decorative wood or carbon surfaces is very
demanding and requires a lot of manual labour.

9.3 Requirements for Components and Assembly

The main requirements for a steering wheel are classiﬁed as design, technical
realisation and optics, haptics and ergonomics. As for design, there are important
features like the vehicle segment (e.g., sporty or luxurious), arrangement and
number of switch elements, steering wheel diameter, steering wheel height and
number of spokes. Free view on the dash and the vehicle segment are important for
the choice of the steering wheel diameter. Small diameters, e.g., 360–370 mm or
less, are mainly reserved to sporty vehicles, diameters of 380 mm and higher are

9 Steering Wheel

205

used for other segments. The number of spokes at a steering wheel may vary
between 1, 2, 3 or 4.

The technical layout of steering wheels has to consider three factors: energy
absorption upon impact, natural resonance to avoid unintentional vibrations and
the mass moment of inertia. These requirements may often conﬂict, so that the best
possible compromise has to be found. Very stiff steering wheels are ideal to meet
the speciﬁcations of the natural resonance, but they impair the ﬂexibility and,
hence, the energy absorption during a crash. The mass moment of inertia directly
affects the weight of the steering wheel and the natural resonance. The insertion of
a vibration absorber can then be necessary. It is accommodated in the steering
wheel or the gas generator of the airbag module is installed in a ﬂoating mount.
Mounting and fastening of the airbag module has further effects on the natural
resonance of the steering wheel. Bolt connections are then preferable against snap-
in solutions. The actuating force of the horn should stay the same over the whole
operating surface, and it should not be too high. The force is in a range of about
20–50 N, according to steering wheel and manufacturer. If the force is too high,
the convenient use suffers, if it is too low, the airbag may unintentionally produce
noise/rattle or honk on its own during driving.

The approx. 60 l airbag in its unit needs a suitable stacking space, and this can
again affect the height of the steering wheel or its whole package. If the airbag
clearly exceeds the rim, the OOP requirements may be hard to meet, that is why
the airbag cover should not rise more than, say, 10 mm above the steering wheel
rim.

9.4 Testing and Protection

Steering wheel and driver’s airbag are parts of the overall restraint system, hence,
they are also tested during slide and crash tests. Perform a test series at different
speeds and offsets. The market to be supplied (USA, ECE, other) is very crucial for
the scope of tests. Test any parts in advance, before a steering wheel/airbag enters
expensive slide or crash tests.

Simulations help to establish the ﬁrst basic design, before parts are mounted.
Operational safeties and ECE-R12 are simulated for the layout of the basic
structure, various puff-up and crash cases are computed for the airbag.

With the knowledge of the simulation and the design of the parts, the simulated
tests are veriﬁed on the real parts, then one advances to mass production. Many
different materials and surfaces are arranged inside the steering wheel in very little
space. They are checked for endurance, environmental impact and quality. The
ESD/EMV, long-term load and, if needed, the illumination of all electrical and
electronic components is tested, ﬁrst in the steering wheel and then on-board.

The steering wheel is in the driver’s sight and reach at all times, much attention
is therefore devoted to appearance and processing. In particular, the steering wheel
should give a harmonious picture in terms of colour. The colours of the various

206

M. Walters

surfaces (PUR foam, leather, varnished surfaces) should therefore match with each
other.

But the test on-board is as crucial.—How does the steering wheel feel when
driving, is its rim too thick or too thin, are there any irritating contours felt when
the steering wheel slips through the hand? How are pressure points of switches
arranged, especially gearbox calipers? How are the general ergonomics of the
steering wheel assessed, are switches within the driver’s reach or hard to access?

9.4.1 Airbag

To ensure the functioning of the airbag for more than 15 years, the following tests
are carried out.

9.4.1.1 General and Crash Requirements

Puff up/test at rest The effectiveness of an airbag module is shown in static
puff-up tests. No parts of the airbag may cause injury to the passenger during this
test. Neither may the airbag burst, blow or come loose of the mounted airbag,
either partially or completely. All airbag seams except for the tear lines must be
closed.

Electromagnetic
the
electromagnetic compatibility to prevent airbag ignition from high-frequency
electromagnetic ﬁelds.

compatibility/interference voltage

resistance Prove

Gas concentrations A chamber test serves to determine the gas concentration
after ignition of the airbag in the vehicle interior.

Crash requirements The steering wheel/airbag has to be compliant with the
following laws, among others:

• FMVSS 203
• FMVSS 208
• ECE-R 12
• EC 74/297
• ECE-R 94.

9.4.1.2 Environmental Simulation

The airbag should efﬁciently protect the passengers for at least 15 years. Envi-
ronmental simulations are executed to ensure this. Suitable test methods simulate
rapid ageing of the component. Table 9.3 gives an example of the scope of an
airbag test before release.

9 Steering Wheel

Table 9.3 Airbag tests
Serial number

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

207

Test programme for ambient simulation of the airbag module

Drop test
Mechanical shocking
Dust test
Vibration load with temperature
Climate change test
Salt spray test
Solar simulation
Thermal shock test
Puff-up behaviour at −35 ˚C, room temperature and 85 ˚C
Gas concentration
Tank test at −35 ˚C, room temperature and 85 ˚C
Airbag test
Reserve units

Drop test and mechanical shocking Airbag units can be exposed to high stress
already during transport, handling and assembly. Drop tests simulate an accidental
impact of the airbag during handling. They are carried out with mechanical
shocking, deﬁned impacts and hits. They mainly simulate the stress of transport,
loading and driving.

Dust test Dust gathering over service life can cause parts of a car to fail. Dust
loads are classiﬁed mainly by two causes of failure: the abrasion effect and the
dust’s ability to store humidity. To check these effects, the components are
exposed to a predeﬁned dust concentration in a chamber. This test is performed
after mechanical shocking and before the vibration test, so that esp. the abrasive
effect can be examined.

Vibration load with superimposed temperature Vibrations are transmitted by
the chassis into body, steering column and further into the steering wheel and the
driver’s airbag. Over service life, such vibration loads can damage some parts, for
example, by causing ﬁssures or ruptures. In addition, resonances can expose a part
to much higher loads. Therefore, the airbag is submitted to a vibration load. Cars
and their parts have to withstand a broad temperature range, therefore a temper-
ature is superimposed during this vibration test.

Climate change test Different coefﬁcients of expansion when different materials
are used can cause mechanical stress in a part. The climate change test helps to
detect these effects.

Salt spray test The results of thawing salt in winter or sea salt in coastal areas are
examined with the aid of the salt spray test. Salts can deposit at low temperature
and in dry air, rising temperatures and humid air cause it to penetrate through
openings, which may trigger chemical failures. The salt spray test is carried out as
the ﬁnal climatic test.

208

M. Walters

Solar simulation and thermal shock test The solar simulation serves to control
the ageing of plastic (polymer) airbag covers exposed to ultraviolet rays. The solar
simulation is followed by a thermal shock test, to detect any material changes or
ﬁssures that could prevent the airbag cover from proper tearing.

After the environment simulations (Table 9.3, serial numbers 1–8), the airbag
modules have to meet the following requirements: Puff-up behaviour, Gas concen-
tration, tank test, Airbag test and Reserve units. The appearance of the airbag cover
(visible tear lines) has to be in pristine condition (see Table 9.3, serial no. 9–13).

The integration of electronics like multi function switch, switch paddles,
steering wheel heating or displays forces the steering wheel to meet electromag-
netic compatibility (EMC) requirements. The interaction of electric devices by
electromagnetic ﬁelds and their technical and juridical background are stipulated
in ECE R-10 (=95/54/EC) and 95/56/EC.

9.4.2 Steering Wheel

9.4.2.1 Operational Safety

A number of operational safety requirements are deﬁned for the steering wheel that
vary for each manufacturer. The following tests shall give an overview of the most
current requirements. Some manufacturers may apply supplemental or divergent
tests, they will not be discussed here.

Static strength
The static strength is examined by pull, push and torsion tests. The pull/push
test is performed by determining the support forces. For this test, the steering
wheel is clamped tightly to the hub and a force is applied to the middle of the rim
segment at an angle of 60˚. First 500 N are applied to observe the beginning of
plastiﬁcation, then 700 N to observe the displacement. The elastic and plastic
deformation of both force levels are recorded as a percentage of the rim diameter,
any developing tears are a criterion for failure. The force is raised in an additional
parts test until the steering wheel ruptures or an overall distortion of 20 % occurs.
The permissible elastic and plastic deformation is deﬁned by the respective vehicle
manufacturer (Fig. 9.13).

The torsion resistance is examined when the rim is tightly clamped, a torque of
250 Nm is applied to the hub. The plastic deformation after discharge should
be \3˚, no tears or ﬁssures may develop.
Dynamic strength
By analogy to the static strength, a dynamic test of the support forces is performed
by testing the steering wheel against at the hub, a force is applied at 60˚ in the
middle of the rim segment. A pull of the steering wheel with 300 N (towards the
driver) and a push with 100 N is applied at a test frequency of 1–3 Hz. 180,000
changes of load with a survival probability of 50 % have to be achieved.

9 Steering Wheel

Fig. 9.13 Static strength

209

static support forces

±F

60º

Fig. 9.14 Dynamic strength

dynamic support forces 
−F

+F

60º

dynamic support forces
−F

dynamic
torsion

−F

+F

+F

Any tearing, loosening screws or a load ﬁgure of 360,000 changes are deﬁned as
criteria to pass the test (Fig. 9.14).

The load direction of the dynamic torsion test is tangential to the central line of
the rim, the point for applying the force is the middle of the rim segment. The
steering wheel is solidly clamped at the hub. A force of ±250 N is applied to the
steering wheel at a test frequency of 1–3 Hz, the same load ﬁgures and ﬁnishing
criteria apply as for the examination of the dynamic support forces.
Identiﬁcation of the natural frequency
The natural frequency was established before by the ﬁnite element method, and is
now veriﬁed by ﬁxing the steering wheel on a rigid mount as it would be in the car,
including the original steering column and screw connections. The mass of the
supporting table should be 20–50 times higher than that of the examined part. The
part is excited slightly with an impulse hammer. Free vibration develops. The two
signals are recorded, both by the impulse hammer and by an acceleration receiver

210

M. Walters

mounted at the part. The resonance frequency is then acquired. The measurement
is performed for all vehicle co-ordinates x, y and z.
Identiﬁcation of the mass moment of inertia
A steering wheel’s mass moment of inertia is determined at the middle of the hub
from the time cycle around the bearing point. To test the steering wheel, it is
mounted on a torsion rod and excited to vibrate. The time of the vibrations is
measured and converted into a mass moment of inertia.

9.4.2.2 ECE-R12

This regulation applies to the behaviour of automotive steering equipment, con-
cerning the protection of the driver in a frontal collision.

This law stipulates that two tests have to be carried out for the release and

least 24.1 km/h impacts

the steering wheel. The highest

registration of the steering wheel: the body block test and the head impact test.
Body block test
In a body block test, a sample (torso) with a deﬁned mass of 34–36 kg and a speed
of at
force
horizontal/parallel to the longitudinal axis may not exceed 11,110 N. The body
block test can be carried out on a simpliﬁed bench, if the test bench the steering
wheel is mounted on meets the same geometrical requirements and has a higher
fatigue strength than a vehicle front end, and if this is requested by the manu-
facturer and approved by the technical service. If the vehicle is equipped with an
airbag, the test is performed when the airbag is ﬁlled. If the car has an adjustable
steering column, the steering wheel is positioned according to the standard posi-
tion deﬁned by the vehicle manufacturer (usually the middle of the height and
length adjustment). The stiffest spoke and the most pliable part of the rim are
checked as impact points of the steering wheel. For any other positions, check with
the technical service.
Head impact test
In the head impact test, a hemisphere with a mass of 6.8 kg and a diameter of
165 mm is ﬂung at the steering wheel at a speed of 24.1 km/h. The deceleration
upon the sample’s impact on the steering wheel may not exceed 80 g accumulated
over 3 ms, or 120 g maximum force. The steering wheel has to be vertical to the
impact direction. As in the body block test, a simpliﬁed test bench may be used.
The following positions are tested: steering wheel centre, the contact point of the
stiffest or strongest reinforced spoke at the inner edge of the rim, the centre of the
shortest, not reinforced spokeless part of the rim upon touching the head form and,
on request of the permit authority, a point representing the worst case at the
steering wheel.

The above-mentioned forces of 11,110 N and the most powerful deceleration of
120 g are deﬁned as ﬁnishing criterion of either test. No sharp or rough edges may
develop nor any parts turned towards the driver that would increase the risk of
injury.

9 Steering Wheel

211

9.4.2.3 Environmental Simulation, Varnish Test, Electroplating Test

Environmental simulation

An environmental simulation is carried out to check materials, components or
subassemblies for resistance against environmental inﬂuences. A realistic test
would take 15 years to cover the whole vehicle life. The environmental simulation
helps to model accelerated ageing, applying suitable methods like higher tem-
peratures, higher energy input or superposed climate (dampness, heat).

A test series is performed on the semi-ﬁnished products, foam, leather or
decoration surface. One checks for foam hardness, leather thickness, abrasion
resistance of the leather or decoration, thermal resistance, ignition response and a
huge number of other criteria.

In addition, three essential tests are performed at the steering wheel: the climate

change test, the caloric storage and the solar simulation.

The climate change test covers 60 cycles of 12 h each, applying temperature
and humidity. The temperature shifts from −35 to 90 ˚C and the relative humidity
from 30 to 80 %.

The highest temperature reached at the on-board steering wheel is approx. 100 ˚C.
To check this temperature, caloric storage is used. For this test, the steering wheel is
stored at 105 ˚C in an air oven for 504 h.

Solar simulation means that the on-board steering wheel is exposed to an

irradiation of 830 ± 80 W/m2 for 240 h.
Varnish and electroplating test
If any varnished or electroplated parts are used in the steering wheel or at the
operating surfaces, these are checked according to the speciﬁcations.

Varnished surfaces require, for example:

• Varnish adhesion (grid cut)
• Scratch resistance
• Thermal resistance
• Climate change test
• Ageing under hot light
• Emission response
• Surface resistance against media
• Cream resistance
• Wear.

• Adhesion strength
• Scratch resistance
• Thermal resistance
• Thermal shock resistance
• Thermal change resistance
• Climate change test

Electroplated surfaces are checked for the following criteria:

212

M. Walters

• Corrosion resistance
• Surface resistance against media
• Cream resistance.

9.4.3 Controls/EE

EMC/ESD
Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) deﬁnes the technical and juridical basis of
the mutual inﬂuence of electric devices by their intrinsic electromagnetic ﬁelds.
Although the steering wheel does not really count as an electric component, the
implementation of multi function switches, gearbox operating switches, steering
wheel heatings or displays may turn it into a product which is subject to the EMC
directives. The legal requirement for vehicles and individual parts with regard to
their electromagnetic tolerance are regulated by ECE R-10 (=95/54/EC) and
95/56/EC.

Key endurance run and environmental impacts
To establish the reliability of operating keys for the entire vehicle life-time, key
endurance runs are performed at normal, freezing and hot temperatures. The
mechanical and electric functions are monitored and force/displacement mea-
surements are used to evaluate the haptics in comparison to the original state
before, during and after the test.

The switches are submitted to other tests, like electric stress (e.g., excess
voltage, short circuit or reverse polarity), mechanical stress (e.g., vibrations, shock,
free fall), climatic and thermal stress (e.g., humid heat, thermal shock), chemical
stress by liquids (e.g., cleaning agent, spirit) and dust. Key symbols are examined
for the positioning of colours and the intensity of lighting.

9.5 Modularisation, Trends of Development, the Future

Esp. vehicle manufacturers of the premium segment offer a high degree of indi-
viduation to their customers, generating a huge number of steering wheel versions.
Many versions can be realised simply by modularising the subassemblies.
Modularisation can be seen at the example of a Porsche steering wheel. Four
steering wheel covers, six foaming moulds and one additional display create a
huge number of versions to select from, since all these parts can be combined.

Driver’s airbag units are continuing to become smaller and more compact, with
the purpose to maintain an airbag size of approx. 60 l. Furthermore, the airbag
systems are more commonly adaptively designed, combined with one- or
two-stage gas generators. The signiﬁcant mass of the gas generator is used more
and more often as a vibration absorber (see also Chap. 6).

9 Steering Wheel

213

The advent of camera-based assistance systems on-board to recognise, e.g.,
trafﬁc signs or a departure from the lane, led to the more common use of vibration
cassettes (imbalance motors) in the steering wheel that actively excite the steering
wheel when the lane is left, to warn the driver (LDW—Lane Departure Warning).
Various warnings or speeds can be indicated by the steering wheel, e.g., in the rim.
The inclination towards on-board individuation is growing, requiring individual
material concepts for the steering wheels (e.g., electroplating, PVD coating, car-
bon, decorations, stone, open spokes with visible basic structure) and additional
switches, e.g., for chassis settings or warning displays.

Chapter 10
Steering Column and Intermediate
Steering Shaft

Jörg Hauhoff and Ralf Sedlmeier

10.1 Introduction

The basic function of steering column and intermediate steering shaft is to establish
the mechanical link between steering wheel and steering gear. The steering wheel
and the torsion bar of the steering gear are linked in such a way that any rotation
initiated at the steering wheel will be converted almost without loss or backlash.
Torques issued from the steering gear are likewise converted to the steering wheel.
The connecting elements, steering column and intermediate steering shaft, hence,
affect the driveability and the perceptible contact with the road. Beside this basic
mechanical function, there are now various other demands to both subassemblies.
Among the components discussed here, from the driver to the front axle, the
steering column primarily assumes the role of supporting the upper steering shaft. It
consists of a shaft that interfaces with the steering wheel, which is composed of one
or more parts, and of the intermediate steering shaft. This design is called a rigid
steering column, it transfers merely the steering function but does not allow
adapting the position of the steering wheel. Such systems have become rare and
limited to very few segments, on account of their considerable deﬁcits. Racing cars
are an exception, because performance is more important than convenience here.
In the next stage of development, the steering column also permits positioning
the
and
vertical/longitudinal adjustment. Both mechanisms can be implemented either
separately or combined, the latter being the more common method. For example,
gate systems of manually adjustable steering columns enable a combined relative

to the driver. One distinguishes

steering wheel

relative

tilt

JörgHauhoff (&) (cid:1) R. Sedlmeier
Willi Elbe Gelenkwellen GmbH & Co. KG, Tamm, Germany
e-mail: joerg.hauhoff@steeringhandbook.org

R. Sedlmeier
e-mail: ralf.sedlmeier@steeringhandbook.org

M. Harrer and P. Pfeffer (eds.), Steering Handbook, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-05449-0_10,
(cid:1) Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017

215

216

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

movement between the vehicle-ﬁxed case and the jacket
tube. Electrically
adjustable steering columns are driven by one or two motors and use independent
mechanisms to generate both shifting movements. Parallel use of the drives adjusts
tilt and length simultaneously, so that any points within the shifting range can be
accessed by a nearly straight motion. The challenge is to provide a great shifting
range of the steering wheel, while using little space for the column.

Once the driver has set the best ergonomic position, the movable part of the
adjustment has to be reliably locked with the stationary casing. Manual steering
columns can be locked by positive or non-positive systems, sometimes even by
combined systems. It is important that the locking mechanism has to lock and
unlock smoothly while generating high clamping forces. Electrically adjustable
steering columns lock as a rule by autolocking drive systems.

Steering columns can also make a considerable contribution to safe driving.
They are then called safety steering columns, and if the car crashes and the driver
is hitting the airbag, they give way in a predeﬁned manner. Beyond a speciﬁc,
mechanically adjustable force level, a mechanism is triggered which permits
moving those parts of column and steering wheel that enter the passenger area
towards the front end of the car. Together with safety belt and airbag, they are
systems that may generate space important for survival. The level of the
force/travel characteristic curve in particular, the tolerance width of the charac-
teristics and the response of the mechanism deﬁne the effectiveness of this system.
The trigger can be either passive or active. A passive trigger is activated by the
impact of the driver, overload elements like mole pins will usually break. An
active trigger is operated at need by an ECU evaluating sensor signals. Pyrotechnic
triggers are most often used in this case, because of their high-speed response.

Other functions of the steering columns are:

• to accept mechanical or electric locks for theft protection,
• to mount steering shaft switches (indicators, windshield wipers, multi function

switches),

• to position clocksprings (airbag) and/or rotary angle sensors,
• to integrate torsion dampers or friction bearings to dampen vibrations,
• to accept superimposing gearboxes, see Chap. 16.

One distinct challenge in the technical layout of the steering column is the
requirement for space, stiffness and weight. There are perceptible elasticities
which can become apparent, e.g., when the driver enters or leaves the car, and
there are very high requirements to the 1st natural frequency of these systems,
being a measure of the ability to transmit and possibly to amplify vibrations from
external excitation. Exciters may be the engine, auxiliary units or the road. Chapter
6 is exploring this in more detail.

Intermediate steering shafts represent the link between steering column and
steering gear. The most basic conﬁguration is a one-piece cardan shaft with two
universal joints. Modern systems have a high density of performance to transfer
high static or dynamic forces, even in very limited space. Intermediate steering
shafts are adjustable, i.e. they dispose of a length compensation in which the shaft

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

217

can be separated, if necessary, so that it will not penetrate into the engine com-
partment when the drive unit is assembled. This compensation also serves to even
out any tolerances or elastic distortions from dynamic stress or to compensate the
movement along the steering column. Joints and compensation have no backlash
and little friction. Prestretch the bearings of the universal joints in a deﬁned
manner and provide them with precise ﬁts. The length compensation may be
achieved by implementing splined shaft treads, using dividing layers that can
easily slide. Other kinds of implementation are:

• Constant-velocity joints
• Drivelines with up to four joints and corresponding intermediate bearings
• Bearings and gaskets for cowl breakthroughs
• Length compensation with crash function.

10.2 Subassemblies

Steering column and intermediate steering shaft can be conﬁgured either as one
common module or as separate parts. The column consists of the driveline carrying
the torque (upper steering shaft) and the adjustable unit. There are two kinds of
implementation, distinguished by the operation mode of the adjustable unit:

• Manually adjustable steering column
• Electrically adjustable steering column.

The intermediate steering shaft is linked to the steering column and establishes

the connection with the steering gear.

Figure 10.1 shows the most basic implementation of a modular system for
manually and electrically adjustable steering columns and shafts. Both column
types can be conﬁgured by combining them with a manually or electrically
adjustable unit, beginning with the upper steering shaft.

The variety is considerably increased by different drivelines (e.g., with or
without lock) or special implementations of the adjustable units. If the corre-
sponding shaft is part of the scope of delivery, the variety multiplies with every
type. Typical shaft versions are separate implementations for e.g., right-hand,
left-hand steering or four-wheel-drive vehicles.

10.2.1 Upper Steering Shaft

The upper steering shaft in Fig. 10.2 is connected to the steering wheel and the
intermediate shaft. The interfaces are positive connections which are preloaded by
screwing. Some available standard connections are splines, double or multiple
corner connections, they are made in such a way that the possible assembly is
unequivocal. This design ensures that steering wheel and shaft are aligned in a

+

+

218

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

Steering shaft carrying torque

Manual adjustable unit

Electric adjustable unit

=

=

Manually adjustable steering column

Electrically adjustable steering column

Intermediate steering shaft

Fig. 10.1 Modular structure of steering column and intermediate steering shaft

Bearing

Locking sleeve

Shaft

Bearing

+

+

Fig. 10.2 Upper steering shaft, Porsche 911

pre-deﬁned position. The driveline is mounted without backlash on preloaded
supports in the jacket tube.

The shaft of the steering driveline may be either hollow or full. Additional

functions are:

• Integration of the upper crash element and length compensation
• Fixation of the indicator reset cam
• Fastening of the locking sleeve to adjust the steering lock.

10.2.2 Manually Adjustable Steering Column

The representation in Fig. 10.3 shows different types of manually adjustable
systems. The left system (BMW 5) has a conventional gate duct in both main
directions, the right system (Porsche 911) is lifted and tilted by a wing and a slider.

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

219

Height adjustment

Height adjustment

Length adjustment

Length adjustment

Adjusting area

Adjusting area

Fig. 10.3 Manual steering column adjustment (left BMW 5, right Porsche 911) with adjusting area

The length is adjusted by moving the jacket tube. Although both systems clearly
differ by kinematics, the shifting range is quite comparable, featuring 40–44 mm of
travel in either direction. On account of the lever ratios, the change of tilt can be
neglected for these systems. These adjustable units have in common that vertical
and longitudinal adjustments are positively locked by interlocking elements.

10.2.3 Electrically Adjustable Steering Column

For these adjustable units, kinematics that are modiﬁed from the manual adjustable
unit are used, see Fig. 10.4. The length is adjusted by an axial movement of the
jacket tube, similar to the manual adjustment, but height and tilt are shifted by the

220

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

Height adjustment

Length adjustment

Fig. 10.4 Electric steering column adjustment (BMW 5) with adjusting area

Adjusting area

tilting movement of a wing. This is necessary because of the active direction of the
electrical drives. The requirements for shifting range and steering wheel tilt are the
same as for the manual adjustment.

10.2.4 Intermediate Steering Shafts

The intermediate steering shafts of Fig. 10.5 are speciﬁcally conﬁgured parts which
can differ a lot even within the same vehicle series, depending on the vehicle’s
conﬁguration (e.g., right-hand driver, left-hand driver or four-wheel-drive vehi-
cles). According to the arrangement of the steering shaft, constant-velocity joints, i.
e. centred double joints, can be used instead of normal universal joints for
right-hand drivers. Advantages of this conﬁguration are the higher permissible
working angle,[45˚, the nearly suppressed asymmetry and the known gimbal error.
The implementation of the length compensation has to distinguish the following

requirements:

• Length compensation to compensate tolerances of the shell or assembly
• Length compensation to adjust the length of the steering column, for columns

with a one-piece shaft without length compensation

• Length compensation with deﬁned crash response.

The steering shaft with corrugated tube shown is part of a separate intermediate
steering shaft. Separate shafts are often used to provide space for assembling the
engine. The steering shaft with corrugated tube consists of transformed cross
sections of different wall thickness, this creates a deﬁned displacement response
for discrete force levels in the range of moulded shafts.

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

221

Intermediate steering shaft with 2 universal joints + length compensation

Intermediate steering shaft with 2 centred double joints + length compensation

Steering coupling with corrugated tube

Fig. 10.5 Intermediate steering shafts

More piece I-shaft with top mount

The multipart intermediate shaft consists of three joints and a top mount, fas-
tened at the cowl. A sliding ﬁt (orange), fastened above the top mount, bears the
cowl gasket. In addition, this shaft has a tube-shaped torsion absorber (blue).

According to the kinematics of the front end, it may be necessary to use
combinations of the conﬁgurations shown here. These also consist of shafts with
combinations of single and double joints.

The state-of-the-art of intermediate shafts is to make them from non-corroding
aluminium alloys or from steel. Extreme requirements to the permissible operation
temperature, especially when met with high stakes for corrosion prevention, may
suggest the use of stainless steel shafts.

10.2.4.1 Gimbal Error and Centre Point

When a simple, bent universal joint is used, the gimbal error or degree of uni-
formity becomes relevant. Kinematics requires the output angle to follow the input
angle asynchronously. It deviates in a sinoid curve, progressively with the
diffraction angle α. The ratio of the derived angular velocities jitters around the
gimbal error Δi. The power balance P = M ω has to be fulﬁlled at the input and
output side of the almost losslessly rotating universal joints, hence, the ratio of rate
and torque can be computed from the rotary angle φ of the universal joint acc. to
Eq. 10.1. A sinoidal conversion of the rotation of rev and torque with twice the
frequency of the joint (2nd order) is the result.

222

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

γ

β

α
2

ϕ
2

e   2

n

o i n t  p l a

J

e   1

n

o i n t  p l a

J

α
1

ϕ
1

Fig. 10.6 Shaft of a 2-piece joint chain, arranged in space

i ¼

xOutput
xInput

¼

MInput
MOutput

¼

2 (cid:1) cosðaÞ
(cid:4)
(cid:1)
2 (cid:3) sinðaÞ2 1 þ cos 2 (cid:1) /Input

(cid:3)

(cid:5)

ð10:1Þ

Another result of the power balance is that the overall ratio of a chain of several
joints is derived for every rotational angle from the multiplication of the individual
ratios. The relative angular positions of the joints, called offset angles, produce
different curves of the overall ratio from that, and they may differ signiﬁcantly in
phase and level of the gimbal error.

Assuming that the torque at the steering gear MOutput for turning the tyres will
remain steady, the gimbal error in Eq. 10.1 corresponds exactly to the jitter of the
steering wheel torque which the driver feels at his or her hands.

Two joints with equal working angles allow to fully compensate the gimbal
error. Mounting space will most often prevent such an arrangement. Hence, in the
usual case of two or several joints that are not bent in the same plane, an attempt is
made to adjust the freely eligible offset angles γ in such a way that there is as little
asymmetry left as possible, taking easy mounting into account. A chain of two
joints bent in space, typical for steering shafts, is shown in Fig. 10.6.

The transmission ratio i of a steering with two joints is a function of the
working angles α1 and α2, the angle between the joint planes β and the offset angle
γ. The plane of each joint is stretched along the axes of rotation of the accom-
panying drive shaft and driven shaft. Duditza describes the mathematical rela-
tionship of the ratio of the rotational angles φ1 and φ2 by Eq. 10.2.

tan u2ð

Þ ¼

Þ tan(u1Þ
ð
Þ (cid:3) sin2a2 (cid:1) tan c (cid:3) b
cosa1 1 þ cos2a2 (cid:1) tan2 c (cid:3) b
ð
Þ

cosa2 1 þ tan2 c (cid:3) b
Þ

ð

ð

ð

Þ (cid:1) tan(u1Þ

ð10:2Þ

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

223

Fig. 10.7 Gimbal error and
centre point

10%

5%

0%

-5%

-10%

r
o
r
r
e
 
l
a
b
m
G

i

-180°

-90°

0°

90°

180°

Steering wheel angle

The transmission ratio is lowest if γ = β. In this case:

tan u2ð

tan(u1Þ

Þ ¼ cosa2
cosa1
If α1 = α2, then the movements are synchronous, hence φ1 = φ2. For any α1 ≠ α2,
the remaining asymmetry is used to improve the driveability. The minimum of the
gear ratio (centre point) is then set on straight driving, so that an additional
centring develops around the zero position. Symmetrical, slightly higher torques
are then required for steering. At the same time, the ratio of steering wheel angle to
steer-angle of the steering wheels is highest.

ð10:3Þ

Figure 10.7 shows the joint degree of uniformity for a steering shaft of two
phase-shifted joints, represented by thin lines. They overlay to create the full
asymmetry, plotted in blue, so that the gimbal error is lowest and the centre point
is found at the straight position of the tyres. The position of the centre point is
indicated by a yellow dot.

A phase shift of the centre point by 90˚ would mean that straight driving was
less stable. The torque would symmetrically drop from the zero position. An offset
of 45˚ has a similarly negative impact, because the steerability to the left or right
would be markedly different. On account of these relationships, the kinematics are
analysed very carefully, because the driveability is signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the
arrangement of the joints. Target values of the asymmetry are less than 3 %.

10.2.5 Parts of the Subassemblies

10.2.5.1 Adjustable Units

The adjustable units enable the driver to change the position of the steering wheel
relative to the driver’s seat and, hence, to assume an ergonomic position. The
adjusting can be driven either by hand or servo motors which can be activated by a
switch. Two-way adjustable units are becoming prevalent even in small vehicles,

224

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

while the more complex and more expensive electrically adjustable columns so far
are a standard equipment only in the upper middle class and higher.

Manual Locking

The mobile part of the adjustable unit is locked at the stationary housing by the
driver’s hand moving a swivelling or pushable lever. Hence, the shifting travel
required and the level of the actuating force are important parameters for conve-
nience. The operating force should be steady and very low, while undesired
loosening from vibrations or motions of the car has to be avoided. A perceptible
snap-in point should give a feedback to the driver that the system is locked. High
locking forces are welcome to prevent the steering wheel from slipping in a crash.
Predominantly, a rotation of the lever is converted by a ramp into an axial
movement of a clamp piston, bracing the jacket tube with the stationary housing.
The discrepancy between comfortable shifting and safety requirements is tenta-
tively solved by variable ramp inclinations that become ﬂatter with higher lock
angles. Low friction at the ramp increases efﬁciency and clamp force, friction-type
materials, grease or rolling elements are used for this reason. Non-positive and
positive locking mechanisms are used, as in Fig. 10.8.

The non-positive locking mechanisms build up the hold forces by friction,
depending on the clamp force. Their main advantage compared to positive locking
mechanisms is that they can be continuously shifted. They often have a rib
package whose hold force increases with each additional interstice. However, the
rib packages raise the system cost and the needed space. They also make high
demands to evenness and ﬁnish of the rib surfaces. Hence, they are sensitive to dirt
and corrosion that deteriorate the surface.

In positive locking mechanisms, splined segments interlock to transfer high
hold forces, regardless of the clamp force. Their main advantage is that they need
less space. The splines can be shifted only by an integer multiple of the cog
division, hence, only deﬁned steering wheel positions can be set. Smaller splines at
lower distances permit a ﬁner division, but they transfer smaller hold forces. Too
slightly inclined splines are no longer retained by self-retention. The greater and

Form-fitted lock

Force-fitted lock

Fig. 10.8 Positive and non-positive locking mechanisms

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

225

pointier the splines are made, the more stroke is required to separate the cog
segments. The steep ramps needed increase the lock forces. The possibility of
head/head positions of the splines is typical, preventing their mating. These appear
more frequently, the biffer the ratio of cog head radius to cog division is designed.
In this case, the lever cannot be locked until the driver has changed the steering
wheel position. In spite of a huge number of concepts, no mechanism could prevail
at the market which would efﬁciently prevent the splines from blocking.

Thus the speciﬁc advantages and disadvantages of positive and non-positive
locking mechanisms suggest an individual choice for each vehicle. Both
non-positive and positive locking mechanisms are widespread today.

Electric Drive Unit

Mechanically commuting permanent-magnet DC motors with internal rotors are
used to drive electrically adjustable steering columns, providing high economic
efﬁciency and reliable technology. The motors are operated by an ECU and can be
equipped with sensors to detect the shifting, usually measured without physical
contact by using the Hall effect. Measuring the travel avoids touching the end stops
that could produce noise and load peaks—even the risk that the friction-retained
spindle drives might block.

There are either two motors to drive either movement axes, or one engine is
operated by a switch gear. In this case, the two driving axes cannot operate
simultaneously, and this results in longer driving times. A step-up gear changes the
motor rotation into an axial translation. The parts of the shifting mechanism may
not give way under the high loads of a crash and, hence, must be retained by
friction. Worm gears are common, see Fig. 10.9. In this application (BMW 5), the
drive is an engine with a switchable gearbox. The spindles can be either rigid or
ﬂexible to realise the necessary kinematics.

The adjusting movements are either initiated at the driver’s will or controlled
by convenience electronics. The memory function, for example, returns on ignition

Switch gear 

Height adjustment

Electric motor 

Length adjustment

Fig. 10.9 Drive unit of an electrically adjustable steering column (BMW 5)

226

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

Structure - borne
 sound receiver

Fig. 10.10 Noise test in the production line

to its last position when the driver has changed, or the Easy Entry function will
move the steering wheel into a limit position to ease climbing into the car. Thus
adjusting is regular and compelling, even at very low temperatures, and this makes
particular demands on the design. The requirements for service life and qualities at
extreme temperatures are higher than those for mechanical shifting equipment.

One major challenge is the meeting of the noise requirements. The motors are
inevitably close to the driver and well audible, particularly as the vehicles of the
relevant classes are becoming less noisy. Interfering noise has to be avoided and
the sound level limited, the sound pattern has to appeal as well and should not
change under changing operating conditions. The steering wheel load is either
stressing or relieving, according to the direction of the motor, the two shifting
directions in most cases need different transmission ratios and temperature effects
are inevitable. Therefore, the uncontrolled motors are running at different revs and
can sound differently. Serial scattering can excite resonances in the car which are
perceived as interfering noise.

The use of RPM controlled engines is uneconomical,

the manufacturers
therefore try to maintain the noise quality by decoupling the motors and measuring
throughout the series. The drives in the power ﬂow cannot be linked too softly,
because of the requirements for crash and stiffness. Complex tests are therefore
common. Subjective tests by listening are accompanied by measurements of the
noise at the motors and the shifting equipment. Structure-borne sound receivers
record spectra to be analysed, so that resonance positions of the vehicle can be
considered, too. Figure 10.10 shows the noise test accompanying the full series.

10.2.5.2 Upper Steering Shaft Including Jacket Tube

The jacket tube, in which the spindle is mounted swivelling in its bearings, is
positioned by the adjustable units. The jacket tube of modern steering columns is

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

227

not tube-shaped any more, but it is an aluminium or magnesium die-cast part of
complicated shape, including parts of the locking mechanism, the steering lock or
the crash function.

are

The

spindle bearings

specially developed, maintenance-free

and
low-friction roller bearings without clearance, due to preliminary tension; most
often they are needle, four-point ball or angular contact ball bearings. Rev and
bearing loads from steering are low. Development is therefore focussing on iso-
lating noises, optimising the structure space, sealing and easy assembly, not to
mention reducing costs.

Optionally, special friction bearings may be used to dampen rotary oscillations
of the steering wheel, see Fig. 10.11. They are non-standard axial needle bearings,
having crossed rolling elements that do not roll precisely but slide in addition. The
friction moment required to achieve the desired damping is adjusted by a prede-
ﬁned axial tension which is applied, for example, by a corrugated spring.

The spindle often has a length compensation which permits a linear expansion
for axial shifting and retraction of the steering column in a crash case. This most
often concerns synthetic-coated cog shafts, because the steering torque has to be
converted by the length compensation.

In the case of an overloaded steering wheel, a safety steering column, together
with the part of the shaft that is near the steering wheel, moves away from the
driver. This possibility has to be taken into account during the concept phase as an
integral part of the adjustable unit. The legal requirements for driver’s safety
cannot be met without a safety steering column, all new vehicles in the great
industrial nations are therefore equipped with them. Seat belts are not obligatory
everywhere, and legal requirements for crashes have to be observed even if the
driver is not buckled up. The energy-absorbing effect of the seat belt is lost then,
hence, the interaction of airbag and safety steering column is most important.
Common systems have parts of an adjustable unit that are retreating on sliders or
outer tubes retreating into a jacket tube. Figure 10.12 shows the plan of the BMW
5. This system has lower accelerated masses and does not need more space.

A snap-on element may be found on the steering shaft that can be engaged by a
locking cam to prevent theft. The locking mechanism is integrated into the jacket
tube. Electrically operated locking mechanisms are replacing the conventional

Fig. 10.11 Fundamental
roller bearing orientation of a
friction bearing

Cage

Rolling
 element

Pressure
plate

228

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

Jacket tube

Sliding tube

completely retreated

Lever

Sliding tube in initial position

Sliding 
   tube

Fig. 10.12 Collapse system of the safety steering column BMW 5

mechanical steering locks. The increasing electriﬁcation of vehicles permits
realising a cheaper theft prevention by electronic locks. These systems will dis-
place the locking mechanisms from the steering columns.

10.2.5.3 Crash Elements

All safety steering columns have a crash element that upon retreating generates a
deﬁned force opposing the airbag. Without this opposing force, the airbag could
not unfold its protective effect. All passive safety parts, like airbags, seat belt, seat
belt limiter and crash element, are precisely tuned to low backing values for the
driver. Hence, the safety steering columns have to meet highest requirements for
functions and their reproduction. The crash function may be required only once,
but it must be reliably available, even after many years of operation.

Different force/displacement characteristic curves of the crash element are
possible, see Fig. 10.13. Long absorption paths are basically favourable. In the
closely occupied compartment, though, the space required by the retreating parts
often cannot be kept available as desired. Steady or progressive characteristic
curves with force levels between 1 and 10 kN and an absorption path of 60–120
mm are common. Demands for good reproduction enforce very low scattering of
the force/displacement characteristic curves. Hence, concepts prevail that apply a
material which is deformed or torn. High energy density at low costs is achieved
this way.

Deforming crash elements exploit the low scattering range of the elastic module
of metals. Their shapes are manifold. Wires and metal sheet strips of different
cross sections are known which are either unwound or bent by rolls. Their
cross-sections can extend or shrink along the absorption path to alter the force.
Figure 10.14 shows some typical designs.

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

229

degressive

constant

pro gressiv e

e
c
r
o
F

Fig. 10.13 Qualitative characteristic curve of an absorber

Displacement

Displacement

e
c
r
o
F

Initial state

Final state

Displacement

Fig. 10.14 Metal crash elements (wire and metal sheet strip)

Deforming crash elements show wider scattering when the force is high,
because friction effects are unavoidable. The production process may include
batches of varying material parameters that require a calibration of the sizes and
extensive quality-protecting measures.

Crash absorbers exploiting reproduceable rupture processes occur in many
shapes as well. There are metal bodies with rupture lines of less sturdy material that
act like the seals of cans, but there are also tube-shaped GRP (glass ﬁbre reinforced
plastic) or CFRP (carbon ﬁbre reinforced plastic) parts which are very light. The
impact of friction and variations of the material batches is here much lower.

Figure 10.15 shows a GRP tube that was torn into strips by a ring with a deﬁned
contour. The characteristic curve is created by a variable number of internal tissue
layers. The curves of GRP parts scatter very little, see Fig. 10.16. They are
resistant to ageing and corrosion and need no additional space, because they
disintegrate.

The alternate use of several crash elements for different crash scenarios is still
rare. On ignition they can be selected by the crash sensors to take account of the

230

Fig. 10.15 GRP absorber
after crash

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

Fig. 10.16 Scatter range of a
GRP absorber

]

N
k
[
 
e
c
r
o
F

10

8

6

4

2

0

0

20

40
Displacement [mm]

60

80

driver’s stature, or by pyrotechnic switches that are triggered by the crash situa-
tion. They raise the price of the steering column adjustment considerably and
assume parts to detect a crash, hence, up to now, they are used only if adhering to
legal crash regulations is impossible without these adaptive parts. Indeed, stricter
legal requirements may promote their spreading in the future.

A huge number of other concepts has been patented that supply adaptive
functions and in addition use the complex qualities of special materials like
shearing silicones or magnetisable ﬂuids. They could not prevail, because of the
high production costs.

10.2.5.4 Joints

Modern steering shafts in cars are virtually exclusively equipped with universal
joints. The versions shown in Fig. 10.17 are classiﬁed as universal joints or centred
double joints, used as a constant-velocity joint with least degree of uniformity.

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

231

Universal joint

Centred double joint

Fig. 10.17 Joints for intermediate steering shafts

Double joints without centring are sometimes also used, but with an additional
external top mount. All universal joints have a high power density and a very good
efﬁciency of [99 %. Moreover, economic production is important. The particular
kinematic effects of the dissimilar transmission can support the steering behaviour
to a certain extent. Steering drivelines consist of various combinations of universal
and double joints.

The use of sphere-controlled constant-velocity joints is kinematically possible,

but not favoured for passenger cars, for reasons mentioned above.

Universal Joints

The universal joint in Fig. 10.18 consists of a cross-pin set and yokes, shown in
red.

The basic construction of the cross-pin set contains a case-hardened cross-pin
with processed treads on the trunnion and the four bushings. The bushings are
needle bearings with a board on either side. Tune the diameters of the treads,
bushings and ﬂanges in narrow tolerance zones ≤IT7, so that the steering move-
ment is transmitted without backlash. The bushings are chosen according to
application, with different strength, surface coatings or grease.

Added static seals, mounted tightly to the cross, protect the bearings against
contamination with impurities and against leakage of grease. Standard sealing
materials are NBR, HNBR and silicone. The bushings are preloaded by squeezing
them into the yokes, axially to the cross-pin. Force and displacement are controlled
during assembly. According to the design of the cross-pin set, a sliding ﬁt is
implemented between the axial contact surfaces of cross-pin and bushing. This
reduces friction and pretension. The standard area of application of universal joints
is a working angle of up to 35˚.

232

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

Bearing bush

Journal spider

Slide bearing

Fig. 10.18 Universal joint

Centred Double Joint

Sealing ring

The centred double joint in Fig. 10.19 consists of two universal joints whose phase is
shifted by 90˚. The centre bearing makes sure that within a deﬁned area, the working
angle at the simple joints is equal, guaranteeing their synchronisation. The guides of
the centre bearing are positively and non-positively attached to the ﬂanges, so that
the centre ball is axially arranged and guided on the centring pin. The centre bearing
is exposed to high loads and can generate typical vibrations and noises, because of
the 2nd order bearing load. Therefore, use and arrangement are adapted to each
vehicle. These joints can be used up to a working angle of approx. 45˚.

10.2.5.5 Length Compensation of the Intermediate Steering Shaft

The following designs of the length compensation are known:

• Length compensation with slip joint
• Length compensation with crash function.

The length compensation with slip joint allows adjusting the length of the shaft
at a very low and steady force level, Fig. 10.20. The quality of the toothing is so
precise that the longitudinal movement has a deﬁned force of approx. 20 N. For
example, aluminium or steel splined shaft treads compliant with DIN 5480 may be
coated with modiﬁed plastic and ﬁtted to the hub by means of suitable processes.
Tread length and extent of the compensation are selected so that level and scat-
tering of the displacement force across the displacement travel can be kept very
low. Approx. 10 % of the peak displacement force may be achieved. The treads are
smooth and without backlash.

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

233

Flange ring

Centring unit

Cardan joint unit pack

Fig. 10.19 Centred double joint

Female spline tube

Plastic coating

Male spline shaft

Blocking notch
(Poka-yoke)

Fig. 10.20 Length compensation for tolerance offset/longitudinal adjustment

Backlash and dogleg are not permissible. According to the tribological pairing
and the application, these systems may be lubricated for a lifetime. A temperature
range of −40 to +250 ˚C can be covered by a suitable choice of materials.
Optionally, the systems are additionally sealed with bellows or lip seals.

234

Fig. 10.21 Length
compensation for crash
function

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

Corrugated tube

Collapse system

The tread, including for example a block cog, is aligned for unequivocal
assembly and for the rotatory adjustment of shaft and hub or the corresponding
joints. Some applications require a limit stop to ensure that shaft and hub cannot be
separated. This principle of length compensation is also used in the upper steering
driveline.

The length compensation with crash function in Fig. 10.21 cannot be moved
during standard use. The deformation of the front end by a collision with an
obstacle can push the steering wheel through the steering shaft into the passenger
compartment. This movement can directly endanger the driver or complicate the
interaction of safety parts, due to the malpositioned steering wheel. To avoid this
danger, the spindles of safety steering columns have parts that slip or fold under
high load. They are mostly placed near the front axle. Corrugated tubes and
telescoping collapse systems prevail on the market.

A corrugated structure serves to achieve a high transferable torsion torque with
a small folding force. Aluminium and steels with high yield strength and elon-
gation are used to avoid brittle cessation of the corrugated tube under extreme
load. If the corrugated tube would break, the vehicle could not be steered any
more. The wall thickness of the corrugated areas is approx. 1.2 mm.

Collapse systems have tear elements that shear beyond a deﬁned force
threshold. After a break, the shaft retreats with low force into the hub. These
systems need less space for distortion. Torque transmission and distorting force
can be adjusted virtually independent from each other. The energy absorption is
lower than with corrugated systems.

10.2.5.6 Dampers

Steering column and intermediate steering shaft transfer torsional and longitudinal
vibrations of the front axle to the steering wheel. For adjusting deﬁned transfer
functions and decoupling, suitable dampers are integrated into the upper steering
shaft or into the intermediate steering shaft. Typical implementations are represented
in Fig. 10.22: pipe-shaped tube-in-tube absorbers (left) or ﬂexible couplings (right).
Tube-in-tube systems have an elastic absorber between internal and external
yoke. The characteristic curve is essentially determined by geometrical and

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

235

Elastic 
absorber

Elastic 
absorber

Fig. 10.22 Torsion damper (tube in tube/ﬂexible coupling)

material parameters. The torque transmission is stabilised by the internal contour
striking an end stop after a deﬁned rotary angle. These absorbers are very compact,
showing good decoupling performance under axial stress.

Flexible couplings consist of an elastomer and ﬁbre alloy. Different charac-
teristic curves can be combined by choosing suitable elastomers and ﬁbres. The
ﬁbres are arranged in loops to support the elastomer, they successively assume the
transmission at higher loads. For some application proﬁles, ﬂexible couplings may
also be provided with mechanical stop units. At low working angles, they assume
the function of joints. The transmission ability is here supported at need by internal
centre bearings.

Some selectable damping materials can withstand temperatures as high as 175 ˚C.
The characteristic curves of these systems are very progressive. The requirements to
stiffness, damping and transfer function are absolutely speciﬁc for each car and have
to be tuned individually.

The following quasi-static characteristics are typical for torsion dampers:

• Torsional stiffness 2–4 Nm/˚ at ±5 Nm
• Torsional stiffness 5–8 Nm/˚ at ±50 Nm.

10.3 Testing Steering Column and Intermediate Steering

Shaft

To recognise faults of a steering column early on and to exclude any danger of the
vehicle passengers before the start of the series production, the demanded features
of the steering column are described in the speciﬁcations and the scope of tests is
deﬁned that is necessary for their veriﬁcation. The check of the endurance strength
and the assessment of features relevant for the customer have the highest priority.
In spite of huge progress in numerical simulations, not all the acting physical
effects can be modelled precisely enough, so that the test of the steering column is
demanded by car manufacturers and will remain obligatory.

The engineering strength of the adjustable units is proven on the one hand by
static load tests. There are tests under operation load which have to be endured
without malfunctions, and there are tests under extreme and abusive loads which

236

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

must not reveal any defects that would impair the safety. On the other hand,
durability tests are carried out with a substitute mass for the steering wheel. For
electrically adjustable steering columns, they include tests under extreme tem-
peratures and humidity, performed in climatic exposure test cabinets. These tests
cannot be cut short substantially, because of the possible warming of the parts. The
electric parts are not designed for a 100 % active period either, they need time to
cool down. Hence, durability tests take several weeks and cause high costs.

Essential requirements like crash resistance or noise quality can be checked
on-board, so that the test has to be performed in co-operation with the vehicle
manufacturer.

10.3.1 Transmission Capability

Steering shafts are safety parts, because any failure renders the vehicle uncon-
trollable. Therefore, high standards are applied to maintain the ability to transmit
the steering torque. This ability is monitored by comprehensive tests in the
development stage and by regular checks in series. The engineering strength is
veriﬁed by continuous testing under equivalent dynamic loads, while the part
qualities under extreme loads are evaluated in quasi-static tests.

10.3.1.1 Static Strength

Trying to steer when the steering wheel is blocked by the kerb can apply much
higher torques at the steering column than driving. The steering column is also
loaded with high forces and torques from misuse if the steering lock is broken
open. Though damage from such misuse is permissible, the vehicle must remain
controllable.

The steering columns are turned without radial force and with a blocked
steering wheel to assess these extreme situations. The criteria of Table 10.1 apply.

Table 10.1 Criteria to proof the static strength
Operation load 150 Nm

Misuse load 250 Nm

Rupture behaviour

No functional interferences
No plastic deformations
No drop of the preload of the screws
No cracks or ruptures
No functional interferences relevant for safety
No plastic deformations relevant for safety
No inadmissible drop of the preload of the screws
No cracks or ruptures
No rupture without deformation
Test cancelled at 350 Nm without rupture

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

237

(a)

100%

e
u
q
r
o
T

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

(b)

100

]

m
N

[
 
e
u
q
r
o
T

80

60

40

20

0

100

400

500

200
300
Angle [°]

0

0

100

200
400
300
Cycles [1000]

500

600

Fig. 10.23 Static and dynamic transmission ability

10.3.1.2 Dynamic Strength

The dynamic engineering strength test examines the fatigue response of the
steering columns. The test is made on oscillating test benches in stretched position
or circulating in situ.

The circulation test provides a rotary angle, initiated at the steering wheel
attachment with a deﬁned torque, while a suitable counter torque is applied at the
gearbox attachment to load the steering driveline. Each manufacturer provides
different load-cycles for this test, featuring limit loads of 40–80 Nm, the higher
load is applied to simulate usages like steering at rest without engine. A statisti-
cally qualiﬁed excess of a required number of load-cycles is demanded, no cracks
or loosened screws may occur.

Figure 10.23 shows typical characteristic curves of the static and dynamic
strength. The static curve plots the typically distinct ﬂowing line until rupture. The
right ﬁgure shows an example of a load group for the dynamic test. The service life
test is cancelled when the necessary number of cycles is achieved, because these
tests will often take several weeks, and the usage of the complex test facilities is
expensive.

10.3.2 Stiffness

A highly torsion-resistant steering column is desirable for direct response and good
feedback of the steering. Unfortunately, negative effects like the unﬁltered trans-
mission of interfering impulses to the steering wheel are then ampliﬁed, and they
have to be suppressed by integrated torsion dampers, as described in Sect. 10.2.5.6.
Free travel in the steering is undesirable, because it evokes an indifferent
steering feel, esp. around the central position of the steering. Free travel is easily
recognizable from horizontal curves in the torque/rotary angle diagrams.

The stiffness is measured analogously to the static strength test. The same test
facilities may be used. Special test facilities with more sensitive sensors are often
used as well, because the load torques are lower during the stiffness measurement,

238

Fig. 10.24 Stiffness curves
of a column with torsion
damper, joint and
intermediate shaft

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

- Intermediate shaft
- Joint
- Steering column with

torsion damper

]

m
N

[
 
e
u
q
r
o
T

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

Angle [°]

-1.5

-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

at approx. 6 Nm. The stiffness of the driveline may be measured in stretched
position or in mounted position.

The joints—and the torsion damper—are the least stiff parts in the steering
driveline. The stiffness of the joint is primarily marked by the yielding of the
cross-pin. It cannot be arbitrarily increased without widening the required con-
struction space. Figure 10.24 shows the characteristic curve of the parts and the
steering driveline.

10.3.3 Durability Tests for Adjustable Units of Steering

Columns

In the durability test, the limits of the shifting range are cyclically approached as
often as a vehicle service life of approx. 15 years may require. For manually
adjustable steering columns, hydraulically or pneumatically operated test facilities
are used, for electrically adjustable steering columns, the motors are actuated.
Higher loads are applied at the end stops. A typical part of the shifting cycles is
carried out under extreme climatic conditions in climatic exposure test cabinets, to
simulate the inﬂuence of
the seasons. Figure 10.25 shows the schematic
construction.

For every cycle, the locking mechanism of manually adjustable steering col-
umns is operated. Optionally, the blocked steering column is loaded with a force to
improve safety. For electrically adjustable steering columns, extreme situations of
the electrical drive are simulated. Malfunctions can be detected after a drop of
power or a breakdown by short circuit currents, when the drive is blocked.

The inevitable wear modiﬁes the qualities of the steering column. However, no
ruptures, cracks or other inadmissible losses of the introduction force may appear
after the test. The steering column must operate and be without backlash. Changes
of the operating forces or the noise response have to stay within the tolerance
margins.

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

239

2

3

1

4

Fig. 10.25 Experimental set-up of the durability test

10.3.4 Dynamics

Very stiff steering columns and high natural frequencies are demanded to improve
comfort. Better steering feel and crash qualities are paired with preventing
vibrations of the steering wheel. Vibrations can not only be caused by the driven
wheels, but the air-conditioning, auxiliary units and the idle running of the engine
can trigger bending self-oscillations of the steering shaft, as well. This demand for
high stiffness causes a problem, because thick walls oppose the demand for low
weight, compact size and small operating forces.

10.3.4.1 Requirements of the Steering Column

The position of the lowest bending natural frequency of the on-board steering
column is vital. It is measured by stimulating the steering wheel with an accel-
eration sensor. The stiffness of the contact areas, the weight of the steering wheel
and the shaft and the qualities of the steering column are the main variables,
described overall in Chap. 6. Raw bodies or steering wheels are not available
during the early development stage, hence, the lowest value of a rigidly mounted
adjustment is speciﬁed in the technical requirements and measured with a solid
substitute mass instead of the steering wheel. Different steering column concepts
for different vehicles can be better compared this way. Changed lever ratios
modify the frequency values when adjusted, therefore the adjustable unit has to be
shifted into the least favourable position. Most of the time this is the lower
extended steering wheel position.

The soft screwing on-board lowers the natural frequencies; the values measured
at the rigid mount are therefore always higher. Requirements for different vehicles
and manufacturers may vary. Different directional stiffness can also mean that the
requirements for the vertical and horizontal vibration direction will deviate from
each other. Values [45 Hz are typically demanded for the natural frequencies in a
rigid mounting.

240

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

10.3.4.2 Analytic Identiﬁcation/Measurement of the Dynamics

The natural frequencies can be computed by the ﬁnite element method during the
conceptual phase. Figure 10.26 shows the model of a mechanical steering column
adjustment. While the part stiffness is represented precisely enough by the ele-
menting, suitable modelling of the contact points between the individual parts is
crucial for the quality of the model. If any possible degree of freedom is too
limited, the model is too stiff and the computed values are too high.

Figure 10.27 shows the ﬁrst computed natural mode. The natural modes can be
analysed beside the natural frequencies. Critical areas with big distortions can be
made less critical by structural measures like ribbing or thickening.

The computed results can easily be checked by measurements if the stiff
screwing points of the model are suitably represented. There is no ‘rigid mount’ in
reality, though, therefore the mounting has to be very stiff. Solid mounting in steel
is used. The measurements are carried out with an acceleration sensor as in
Fig. 10.28.

Fig. 10.26 Finite elements model of a mechanical steering column adjustment

Fig. 10.27 The ﬁrst natural bending mode of a mechanical steering column adjustment

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

241

Modal rig

Steering wheel
substitute mass

Adjustment

Impulse hammer
for excitation

Acceleration sensors

Fig. 10.28 Test equipment for measuring natural modes

The vibration is commonly excited by an impulse hammer by whose help the
excitation force can be measured. This makes sense in particular for steering
columns that feature preloaded sliding guides, taking off at a speciﬁc force level.
The loss of stiffness makes the measured natural frequency a function of the
excitation force. This would not be true for strictly linear systems.

Faulty measurements may occur in reality when the test equipment has a natural
frequency which is close to the measured frequency. This phenomenon is also
present when the mass of the base is many times higher than the steering column.
Hence, the bases are mounted ﬂoatingly, and their natural frequencies are far
below the ﬁrst measured frequency. A correlation between calculation and mea-
surement allows validating the FEM model without knowing the characteristics of
other vehicle parts. Then the validated model can be used by the vehicle manu-
facturer for insertion into the full vehicle model.

10.3.4.3 Parameters of Inﬂuence

The stiffness of the adjustable equipment is determined by design, geometry of the
parts and material qualities. The stiffness of the steering column bearings and the
steering spindle at which the steering wheel is mounted is playing an essential role.
A simpliﬁed model may be found in Fig. 10.29. The bearing stiffness and the
yielding of the spindle are summarised by the stiffness coefﬁcients k1 and k2.

An evaluation of the lowest natural frequency f0 for the simpliﬁed model results
from the energy method acc. to H. G. Hahn: Technische Mechanik, 2nd edition,
Hanser 1992, p. 283 ff./33

242

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

Fig. 10.29 Simpliﬁed model
of a steering spindle
suspension

k2

mSpindle

mSteering

k1

a

b

c

l

s

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
k1 a2 þ k2 c2
mSpindle b2 þ mSteering l2

1
2 p

f0 ¼

ð10:4Þ

The denominator contains a dominant mass of the steering wheel with higher
weight and bigger rocker arm; it lowers the natural frequency. The inﬂuence of the
spindle’s mass is ten times lower. Only high stiffness can compensate the inﬂuence
of the steering wheel. This impairs the use of a light metal spindle, because the low
elastic module lets the stiffness drop for the same size of the spindle. Reducing
weight by using high-strength steels with low wall thickness affects the natural
frequencies negatively, too, because their elastic module is not higher.

Clearance, which can appear at contact areas where relative movements occur
upon shifting, is a critical problem. Even the smallest gap can cause a signiﬁcant
drop of the frequency values, therefore the absence of clearance has to be guar-
anteed. High pressure or a large contact ration factor is not possible, because of the
high operating forces involved. Therefore it was tried to spring-load sliding con-
tacts, to prevent the sliding partners from taking off.

10.3.5 Crash Characteristics

10.3.5.1 Steering Spindle

As described in Sect. 10.2.5.2, corrugated tubes and telescoping collapse systems
are prevalent crash systems. They transfer the necessary steering torque and permit
wide displacement during a crash. Both systems considerably differ in their crash
qualities, although they serve the same purpose.

Figure 10.30 shows a buckled corrugated tube after the buckling test on a
pull/push test bench. Cracks or ruptures are undesirable test results, even if the
corrugated tube is buckled by 90˚. Such buckling experiments are carried out for
purposes of quality control.

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

243

Fig. 10.30 Corrugated tube (before and after the buckling test)

Table 10.2 Qualities of corrugated tube and collapse systems

Corrugated tube Collapse system

Radial
Buckling direction
Higher
Force when breaking off
Heavier
Adapting the force threshold
Lower
Radial force inﬂuence
Lower
Torsional stiffness
Cost
Low
Inﬂuence of the steering wheel torque on the buckling force Low
High
Energy absorption

Axial
Lower
Lighter
Higher
Higher
High
High
Low

Tough materials with distinctive ﬂow behaviour are used. Steels do no display
any distinctive hardening under high distorting speed, so that a pressure test at
distorting speeds above 100 mm/min. will yield meaningful results.

A telescoping steering spindle does not buckle, but retreats instead. A deﬁned
force has to be exceeded before it is lower than that of the corrugated tubes. When
tuning the crash qualities, demands for easy retraction and high transferable tor-
ques are causing trouble.

Table 10.2 compares the qualities, typical characteristic curves may be com-

pared in Fig. 10.31.

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

244

Fig. 10.31 Qualitative
characteristic curves of
corrugated tube and collapse
system

]

N
k
[
 
e
c
r
o
F

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Corrugated tube

Collapse system

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Displacement [mm]

10.3.5.2 Steering Column

Crash qualities of safety steering columns are tested in sled or vehicle tests under
real conditions. Damage to vehicles or subassemblies with crash-relevant parts is
recorded on these complicated test benches, and the crash performance is evalu-
ated, based on retention values, measured on crash dummies. In a vehicle crash
taking about 200 ms, the steering column is strongly loaded for a short time. There
are other failure mechanisms than in static load tests, especially for brittle mate-
rials. These tests are not suitable for development and quality assurance testing
because of long lead times, high technical complexity and high costs. Since the
entire restraint system is evaluated, inferring on a single component such as the
steering column adjustment is difﬁcult.

The assessment of the steering column properties is carried out by the Willi

Elbe company in a substituted test at a drop tower, see Fig. 10.32.

A drop mass falls onto a spring-loaded mass, simulating the airbag, which is
located between the drop mass and the test sample. A friction spring with
absorbing properties is used. A heavy load roller is mounted on the steering wheel
attachment so that the steering shaft can roll upon retraction. The adjustment is
based on a hinged device to receive the reaction forces at the measuring plate with
three triaxial piezoelectric force members. The test parameters (weights, angles of
inclination, spring/damping characteristics) help to control the kinetics of the
retraction and to approach nominal values.

One proceeds as follows:

• Validate the numerical simulation model of the steering column, using ﬁrst drop
tower results, under given conditions. A validated simulation model was
developed for the test equipment.

• Identify the crash loads and the distance in the vehicle simulation and/or an
on-board measurement. The validated model of the steering column is used for
the simulation.

• Identify the drop tower parameters with the drop tower simulation model in such

a way that the real loads and distance are very closely represented.

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

245

Fig. 10.32 Drop tower for
module test

Scaffolding

Drop mass

Stop
device

Springy
mass

Test part

Swivel-mounted

clamping device

Tri-axial
measurement plate

• Validate these parameters in the drop test and deﬁne the parameters for the

quality control.

The drop test does not precisely illustrate the on-board dynamics. Other than a
quality control during manufacturing, layout and test of the parts for strength and
displacement are already possible in the development stage.

10.3.6 Displacement Forces to Adjust the Steering Column

These are the forces to move the steering column and the intermediate steering
shaft. In an electric drive unit, displacement forces are indirectly felt by noise or
the service life of the electric drives.

The mechanical drive unit on the other hand, sends a direct response to the
driver. The displacement forces merge from the adjustment unit’s force and the
length offset in the upper steering driveline. The displacement force in the upper
steering driveline can be transferred by analogy to the length offset of the inter-
mediate steering shaft. Essential parameters are

246

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

• force and
• uniformity of the displacement force.

Other than straight selected matings of the sliding ﬁts and, if necessary, their
grease, stick slip effects are of particular importance, because they can generate
creaking noise and jerking motion sequences. Stick slip appears most frequently in
areas of mixed friction at low speed. Based on lab measurements, the position of
the system on the Stribeck curve can be found and favourably inﬂuenced—towards
liquid friction—by using suitable lubricants.

Figure 10.33 shows the curve of the displacement force using a length com-
pensation with an easy-going splined shaft tread. Symmetry of moving in and out
and the scattering during a cycle reveal a well tuned system.

10.3.7 Temperature

Steering parts in the passenger and engine compartments can be exposed to
extreme temperatures of −40 to 250 ˚C. Beside the mentioned corrosion effects,
the following effects have to be controlled:

• Inﬂuence of relaxation and retardation when using plastic parts
• Avoiding noise and/or clearance by different coefﬁcients of expansion
• Temperature inﬂuence on static and dynamic strength, esp. for aluminium,

stainless steel and plastic

• Suitability of lubricants in roller bearings of the cross-pins and the length offset.

By analogy to the corrosion test, the temperature groups are used as shown in
Fig. 10.34. They illustrate the operating temperatures and the heating phases at
rest. Torsional durability and wear tests are also checked under temperature and
humidity to verify the structure.

Fig. 10.33 Displacement
forces length compensation

t
n
e
m
e
c
a
l
p
s
i
D

-25

-15

15

25

-5

5
Force [N]

10 Steering Column and Intermediate Steering Shaft

247

Fig. 10.34 Climate test cycle

]

C
°
[
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

150
130
110
90
70
50
30
10
- 10
- 30
- 50

0

100

200

300

400

500

Time [min.]

10.3.8 Corrosion

Steering columns and intermediate steering shafts are exposed to very diverse
conditions, on account of their installation on-board. While the steering column in
the interior primarily has to withstand temperature and humidity, the intermediate
steering shaft suffers from much higher exposure. The exposed position in the
engine compartment may cause extreme loads:

• High peak temperatures
• Wide temperature ranges, heating and quenching by foam
• High air humidity till saturation/condensation
• Contamination with salted water and abrasive media
• Petrol, diesel, oils, polyurea etc.

These effects can cause corrosion. Convenience may be lost by heavy moving
of the length offset or, e.g., wear of the bearings, but corrosion including structural
damage of the torque-transferring parts has to be avoided as well.

The resistance against corrosion is examined with standardised tests, like the
salt spray test (e.g., 720 h) and the climate change test, or with test cycles that are
speciﬁcally designed for the vehicle. Recording the speciﬁc effects in advance is
tricky, in spite of comprehensive attempts to standardise, therefore, dynamic
corrosion tests that subject whole vehicles or areas to dynamic tests in climate
chambers are often used. This test is made with accelerated cycles to gain a useful
statement on the corrosion resistance after approx. 6 weeks of testing.

Intermediate steering shafts are often made of corrosion-proof 6-aluminium
alloys, to avoid corrosion. Higher long-term temperatures of approx. 150 ˚C force
the use coated steel systems or stainless steel solutions, due to a recrystallisation of
the aluminium which reduces the strength. One needs to ensure that the coatings
have a very good adhesion, high ductility and low thickness. The range of the used
coatings covers wax and multi-layer protection systems.

In addition, mechanical protection systems, such as bellows, protective caps

and renderers/seals are used.

248

10.4 The Future

Jörg Hauhoff and R. Sedlmeier

Steering columns in vehicles of the higher compact category and up have set a
high standard for ergonomics and safety by their basic technical qualities and
safety features. With regard to these criteria, there will of course be more advanced
requirements in the future, e.g., for the extension of the adjusting range. Con-
cerning vehicle safety, one essential contribution will be the tuning of the overall
system of vehicle, airbag and safety belt with tensioner even more sensitively.
A comparison of available crash systems still reveals distinct differences in
responding properties and controllable characteristic curves, as well as in the
tolerance range of absorber characteristic curves. As in almost any other segment,
weight will assume essential meaning, and these requirements have to be
cost-efﬁcient. Basically, it is to be assumed that the steering column will be
integrated even further into the weight-bearing structure of the vehicle, rather than
being added onto the support tube as an additional part. Steering column and pedal
mount will probably be integrated with the cowl and the support tube.

The requirements of intermediate steering shafts for the deﬁned qualities of
joints and length compensations will be even more precisely speciﬁed in the
future. Characteristics of stiffness in the zero passage and hysteresis widths are
more frequently described as distinct parameters, requiring higher effort of pro-
duction and quality control. Temperature and corrosion resistance have achieved a
technological maturity that can no longer be economically improved. A future
target will be the logical
taking into account
high-strength alloys resistant to temperature. Also, the requirements for crash
systems between the joints will increase. The tendency that was already discussed
for the steering column will basically repeat here.

insertion of aluminium parts,

The authors believe that there will be conventional steering columns as well as
intermediate shafts in the next vehicle generations. Compensation with By-Wire
systems is not yet feasible, even though technically possible.

Chapter 11
Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

Johannes Hullmann, David James, Alois Seewald,
Eduard Span and Alexander Wiertz

11.1 Deﬁnition of Rack-and-Pinion Gears

The family of steering equipment covers hydrostatic steering systems, recircu-
lating ball-with-nut gears, manual rack-and-pinion steering and rack power
steering. The ﬁnal steering system mentioned has a rack-and-pinion gear which
transforms the rotation of the steering wheel into the translation of the rack and
again into the steering movement of the tyres.

Table 11.1 shows a classiﬁcation of steering system designs. The classifying
features of the various models chosen are active principle, drive, primary gear,
force introduction and integration. The naming of the steering and the corre-
sponding abbreviation complete the presentation.

In a manual rack-and-pinion steering the parameters are the wheel angle and the
wheel torque, which is initiated at the steering wheel and transformed by the
dovetailing components, pinion and rack, into rack force and rack shift. Beyond
these mechanical variables, no further energy is supplied to the manual
rack-and-pinion steering to move the rack.

J. Hullmann (&) (cid:1) A. Seewald (cid:1) E. Span (cid:1) A. Wiertz
TRW Automotive, Livonia, MI, USA
e-mail: johannes.hullmann@steeringhandbook.org

A. Seewald
e-mail: alois.seewald@steeringhandbook.org

E. Span
e-mail: eduard.span@steeringhandbook.org

A. Wiertz
e-mail: alexander.wiertz@steeringhandbook.org

D. James
Tohop Steering Technology GmbH, Indianapolis, IN, USA
e-mail: james.david@steeringhandbook.org

M. Harrer and P. Pfeffer (eds.), Steering Handbook, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-05449-0_11,
(cid:1) Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017

249

250

J. Hullmann et al.

t
c
e
r
i

D

e
v
i
r
d

e
v
i
r
d

 
t
l

e
B

 
l
e
v
e
B

r
a
e
g

r
a
e
g
 
m
r
o
W

t
c
e
r
i

D

 
e
v
i
r
d

e
v
i
r
d
 
t
l
e
B

 

r
a
e
G
g
n
i
r
e
e
S

t

 
t

 

u
N
d
n
a
 
l
l

a
B
 
g
n
i
t
a
u
c
r
i
c
e
R

l

i

i

n
o
n
p
 
e
b
u
o
D

l

i

i

n
o
n
p
 
e
g
n
S

l

i

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

n
m
u
o
c

l

c

i
l

u
a
r
d
y
H

p
m
u
p

c

i
l

u
a
r
d
y
H

p
m
u
p

y
r
a
m

i
r

P

r
a
e
g

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
o
r
t
n

i

 
r
e
w
o
P

d
e
r
t
n
e
c
k
c
a
R

l

e

l
l

a
r
a
p

i

 
s
x
A

t
e
s
f
f
o
 
s
x
A

i

i

i

n
o
n
p
 
e
b
u
o
D

l

 

S
P
E

S
P
E

S
P
E

S
P
E

S
P
E
 
n
o
n
P

i

i

S
P
E
 
n
m
u
o
C

l

i

 
t
s
s
s
a
 
c

i
l

u
a
r
d
y
h

 
r
e
w
o
p

i

 
t
s
s
s
a

g
n
i
r
e
e

t
s

g
n
i
r
e
e

t
s

o
r
t
c
e
E

l

 
c

i
l

u
a
r
d
y
H

 
l
a
u
n
a
M

 
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

l

e
r
u
t
a
c
n
e
m
o
N

e
v
i
r
d

 
l

l

a
c
i
r
t
c
e
e
 
d
e
t
a
r
g
e
t
n
i
 
h
t
i

w

 
r
a
e
g
 
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
S

i

 
l
a
c
n
a
h
c
e
M

r
a
e
g

i

 
l
a
c
n
a
h
c
e
M

 
.
r
d
y
h
 
r
a
e
g

i

t
s
s
s
a

i

 
l
a
c
n
a
h
c
e
M

 
.
r
d
y
h
 
r
a
e
g

i

t
s
s
s
a

.
h
c
e
M

k
c
a
R

 
n
o
i
t
a
r
g
e
t
n
I

S
P
E
R
C

-

S
P
E
B

-

S
P
E
C
R

-

S
P
E
P
D

-

S
P
E
P

-

S
P
E
C

-

S
P
H
E

S
P
H

G
S
M

.
r
b
b
A

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s
 
d
e
t
s
s
s
a
-
r
e
w
o
P

i

y

l
l

i

a
c
n
a
h
c
e
m
o
r
t
c
e
E

l

-
c
i
r
t
c
e
E

l

y

l
l

a
c

i
l

u
a
r
d
y
h

y

l
l

a
c

i
l

u
a
r
d
y
H

y

l
l

i

a
c
n
a
h
c
e
M

e
v
i
t
c
A

i

l

e
p
c
n
i
r
p

 
l
a
u
n
a
M

 
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

s
n
g
i
s
e
d

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
c
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
C

1
.
1
1

e
l
b
a
T

r
o
t
o
m
E

 

r
o
t
o
m
E

 

i

e
n
g
n
E

l

a
u
n
a
M

e
v
i
r

D

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

251

The rack power steering works essentially by the same principle, but an ‘as-
sistant’ supports the driver’s steering activities. This assistant can be either
hydraulic, electric-hydraulic or electromechanical.
In an electromechanical
rack-and-pinion steering, for example, the assistant moving the rack is an electric
motor which allows contributing a suitable energy supply by means of an addi-
tional power-assist gearbox. A hydraulic assistant is a pump, powered by the
internal combustion engine, that supplies the steering system. In contrast to both,
the steering system of the electric-hydraulic version is decoupled from the internal
combustion engine, and the hydraulic pump is driven by an electric motor. The
structures these power steerings have in common, is that the existing wheel torque
is exploited to control the assistant. The base for receiving the wheel torque is
usually a torsion bar which allows activating the steering valve of hydraulic and
electric-hydraulic steering, or a suitable twisting angle in the torque sensor of the
electromechanical steering. The manual steering has no torsion bar.

This chapter will ﬁrst discuss the mechanical rack-and-pinion gears, either
driven by hand or by the above-mentioned power-assist gearbox, separated from
the mechanical rack-and-pinion gear.

11.2 Applicability/Pros and Cons

Manual rack-and-pinion steering and rack power steering are almost exclusively
used in vehicles with independent suspensions at the front axle. These are pas-
senger cars of almost any vehicle class, as well as light commercial vehicles.

A direct comparison of the recirculation ball with nut gears that had once been
widespread in these vehicle classes, too, shows the pros (+) and cons (−) in
Table 11.2. Rack-and-pinion steering has replaced the recirculating ball gear in

Table 11.2 Comparison between rack-and-pinion steerings and recirculating ball gears
Assessment criterion

Rack-and-pinion steering Recirculating ball gear
?
?

–
?
?

Freedom of action
Efﬁciency
Bumpiness
Steering elasticity
Stroke limitation
Tie rods—radial forces
–
Usability with rigid axles
–
Drop of the full ratio over the wheel angle –
?
Complex structure
?
Space required
?
Production costs
?
Weight including steering linkages

–
–
?

–
–
?
?
?

–
–
–
–

252

J. Hullmann et al.

almost any vehicle with independent suspensions of the front axle, because of the
lower steering elasticity, less need for space, less weight of the full steering system
and lower production costs. The cons of the rack-and-pinion steering—less damping
of externally excited power pulses (bumpiness), the curve of the steering ratio and
the lateral forces from the tie rods—are compensated by constructive measures.

11.3 Kinematic Differentiating Features of Gears

The ﬁrst basic criterion for the kinematic distinction of the gears is the on-board
position of the wheel, distinguishing left-hand or right-hand driving. To supply all
the markets, both versions are developed and offered for most vehicles in Europe.
In the easiest case, if the structure of the vehicle permits it (package), the gear of
either version is laid out symmetrically to the longitudinal axis.

In addition, there are special versions of sports or racing cars that feature a

central steering wheel. They will not be discussed here any further.

11.3.1 Position of the Gear in Relation to the Front Axle

The on-board positioning of a gear in relation to the front axle provides four basic
options, depending on whether the rack axis of a gear (gear axis) and the steering
triangle of steering arm and tie rod are in front of or behind the front axle (see
Figs. 4.19, 4.22, 4.23 and 4.24).

Most cars with front-wheel drive and laterally arranged engine/gearbox unit
feature both gear and triangle behind the front axle. This arrangement enables easy
integration of the steering column into the vehicle package. On the other hand, an
unfavourably high thermal load will often accompany this arrangement, because
the exhaust system is close to the gear.

Standard-driven vehicles preferably have both gear and steering triangle in
front of the front axle. This avoids conﬂicts in the package between the longitu-
dinal drive unit and the lateral gear, and the steering column can be easily guided
past the engine.

Gears and steering triangles are rarely arranged at different positions (e.g., gear
behind the front axle and steering triangle in front of the front axle; see Chap. 4,
segment 4).

The position of the steering triangle gives ultimately the direction of the rack’s
motion upon steering, therefore it is essential for the dovetailing design, deﬁning
the way the pinion dovetailing is inclined.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

253

11.3.2 On-board Gear Interfaces

The majority of vehicles has a steering mounted on a separate subframe that is in
turn mounted to the body. Since the wheel suspension at the chassis is at least
partially joined to this subframe, there is a stiff connection between steering and
front tyres. This creates a basis for precise steering, even under the inﬂuence of
high lateral forces in the wheels. Furthermore,
the subframe is acoustically
decoupled from the car, so that less chassis noise is transmitted by the gear into the
body.

In addition, there are vehicles whose steering is separated from the front axle
and directly joined to the body. This mounting is often given by the package, for
example, in cars with front-wheel drive and longitudinal engine in front of the
front axle (example: any Audi A6 older than 2011). Sometimes the steering is
directly mounted at the engine bulkhead, i.e. the separation between engine and
passenger compartment, this is a very cost-efﬁcient solution. If any acoustic set-
backs of this arrangement cannot be accepted, they are compensate by additional
measures, such as damped tie rods and elastic mounting of the gear at the engine
bulkhead.

The mounting points can be either rigid or ﬂexible, i.e. by means of silent
blocks or rubber mountings. A rigid arrangement provides highest stiffness of the
steering system, but it has setbacks in acoustics and bumpiness. Rubber mountings
offer the chance to tune the response and damping characteristics of the steering
and to achieve the best compromise for the vehicle in question.

A rubber (metal) mounting consists in principle of a jack, usually made of steel,
that is vulcanised into a rubber body. It acts like a progressive spring and provides
the kind of damping that is native to rubber. Lateral and axial stiffness, as are
necessary for the respective application, and the desired damping parameters are
identiﬁed by means of vehicle simulations and road tests. Figure 11.1 shows
typical one-piece and two-piece versions of rubber mountings.

The number of fastening points can vary from at least two, used to precisely
adjust the on-board gear, up to four or more, which enables precise, controlled
elastokinematics, together with the properly tuned rubber mountings.

Fig. 11.1 Typical rubber
mountings as one-piece and
two-piece edition

Rubber 

Steel jack 

254

J. Hullmann et al.

11.3.3 Adjustment of the Gear Case

The co-ordinates of the main points of a rack-and-pinion gear—more precisely: the
points of the axial joints at the tie rods, the lower universal joint of the steering
column and the junction point of the rack and pinion axis—are given by the
package of the full vehicle, as shown in Fig. 11.2. Therefore the pinion case can be
turned outward or inward from the car’s central plane. An inward orientation of the
pinion case, vertical to the rack axis, would be unusual, though. It is chieﬂy found
in racing vehicles.

11.3.4 Tie Rod Interfaces

Depending on how the two tie rods are connected with the rack, there is a dis-
tinction between a rack-and-pinion steering with central tap and others with end
tap at one or both sides. A rack-and-pinion steering with end tap at both sides has
the inner joints of the tie rods (axial joints) screwed directly onto both ends of the
rack. This conﬁguration is the current state-of-the-art, Fig. 11.3.

It merges high stiffness with low weight, because the rack axis is passing
through the points of both axial joints. Torsion torques in the rack develop only
from lateral forces from the tie rods which are a function of the tie rod angle (see
also Fig. 11.2). The rack of a mechanical gear for standard strokes can be short, so

Pinion axis

γ

c

Rack axis

y

Axial joint

Universal joint

Outside joint

d

a

Tie rod

Fig. 11.2 Typical outlines of a rack-and-pinion gear

z

b

Fig. 11.3 Mechanical gear with end tap on both sides (Renault Scenic 3)

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

255

usually there is enough space for it in the package. Rather long tie rods can be used
which display low torsion angles even at full deﬂection and rebound of the front
axle, so that low lateral forces are applied to the rack. A rack-and-pinion steering
with central tap has only one mounting point for both tie rods, and it is in the
centre of the car, if the steering is set on straight driving. This steering model is
rarely used in new applications, on account of the weight and the required space
(see also Sect. 11.9.1). Short gears with end taps on one side are not used any
more, either. They had been very compact, so that they could be mounted on the
driver’s side. By analogy with a gear with central tap, the tie rods were mounted at
one end of the rack, while the other side remained free. This construction was
suitable for purely manual steering with correspondingly low tie rod peak forces.

11.3.5 Kind of Gear Ratio

the pinion),

The stroke of the rack during one turn of the pinion is called the gear ratio of a
rack-and-pinion gear. This means that for a higher gear ratio (more stroke per turn
of
the whole steering ratio on-board will drop (wheel-angle-
to-steer-angle ratio). A high gear ratio means that there is less effort for a wheel
angle, for example on curvy roads or when cornering in the city. On the other
hand, a high gear ratio complicates the exact adjusting of very small steer-angles,
for example, when slight corrections of the straight course should be carried out at
high speed. Moreover, a high gear ratio produces high steering forces in a manual
steering and high power-assist torques in electromechanical steering systems.

The majority of gears produced has a steady gear ratio. If it changes as a
function of the wheel angle or the rack stroke, this is called a variable gear ratio.
This variability can be either constant, rising or falling with increasing wheel angle
on different sections. This suggests a solution of the above-mentioned problems.
The gear ratio curves of manual and mechanical rack-and-pinion gears are drop-
ping with rising steer-angles, to counteract the kinematic rise of the wheel torques.
There are also M-shaped (rising–falling) versions which merge this quality with a
low gear ratio during straight driving. Typical steering ratios of different versions
are compared in Fig. 11.20. For relevant differences, resulting gear ratio curves,
layout criteria and ways to produce a variable gear, see Sect. 11.5.

11.4 Design and Main Components of a Mechanical

Rack-and-Pinion Gear

Some essential components of a mechanical rack-and-pinion gear that are
important for the steering are shown in Figs. 11.4 and 11.5:

256

J. Hullmann et al.

10

8

1

3

2

8

5

4

11

Fig. 11.4 Cut of a mechanical rack-and-pinion gear

9

7

2

4

6

Fig. 11.5 Cut of the pinion case of a mechanical rack-and-pinion gear

1: gear case
2: pinion
3:
rack
4:
rack yoke elements, including spring and adjuster bolt of the free travel
5:
rack bushing
6: upper and lower roller bearings of the pinion
7: upper pinion screw to secure the axial mounting of the pinion
8:
joining elements to receive and mount the gear case on-board
9: gear case gasket towards vehicle interior, near the junction of the pinion to the

column (use depends on the on-board implementation of the gear)
10:
tie rods (inside and outside joint)
11: gaiters including coupling clamps.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

257

11.4.1 Gear Case

The gear case receives and joins all the components of the gear. It is either rigidly
or elastically mounted at the vehicle by rubber mountings (see Fig. 11.1). The case
has the additional task to accept any steering forces present, transmitted as wheel
torques, and any forces acting from the tyres on the rack via the tie rods. Other
functions are the limitation of the stroke and the reception of the end stop forces.
One-piece and two-piece gear cases are the most common designs. They are

described in more detail in the following.

11.4.1.1 One-Piece Gear Case

The one-piece type is the most common one. For an example, see Fig. 11.6. This
version of a gear case consists of die-cast aluminium and offers the following
beneﬁts: The ﬂanges to mount the gear case in the car are made right in the casting
process. This technique also allows adding holders and mounts. The die-cast
aluminium case is light and requires no costly welding or additional surface cover,
unlike steel parts.

A few typical die-cast aluminium materials for gear cases are GD AlSi9Cu3
and GD AlSi12Cu. A listing of proper characteristics is shown in Table 11.3. The
sand-cast G-AlSi7Mg0.3 and its mechanical qualities are also given in the table, as
it is often used in prototype building and for small numbers of pieces.

11.4.1.2 Two-Piece Gear Case in Composite Design

The two-piece version has a pinion case of aluminium and a rack case made of a
steel pipe, see Fig. 11.7. The parts of the case are connected by grouting both
components or by casting around the steel pipe during the die-casting process. The
ﬂange at the pinion case that mounts the gear case to the vehicle is shaped during
the casting process. At the steel pipe, the case is joined either with a holder welded
to the pipe or with an aluminium ﬂange that is cast around the pipe. A very cheap
way to mount a two-piece case to the vehicle can be realised with a separate
securing clip and a rubber insert at the steel pipe.

Fig. 11.6 One-piece gear case from aluminium die-casting

258

J. Hullmann et al.

Table 11.3 Typical aluminium die-cast and sand-cast materials and their mechanical parameters
G Al Si 7 mg 0.3
Sand casting (T6)

GD Al Si 9 Cu 3
Die casting

GD Al Si 12 Cu
Die casting

Tensile strength (N/mm2)
Yield strength (0.2 %) (N/mm2)
Stretch (%)
Brinell hardness (250 kg, 5 mm)

240–310
140–240
0.5–3
80–120 HB

220–300
140–200
1–3
60–100 HB

230–310
190–240
2–5
75–110 HB

Pinion case

Rack case

Fig. 11.7 Two-piece gear case in composite structure

One advantage of this two-piece implementation, compared with the one-piece
aluminium case, is less space needed for the steel pipe, on account of the lower
thickness of the wall. Nevertheless, the steel pipe needs a separate galvanic or
varnished surface protection.

11.4.2 Steering Pinion

The pinion is connected to column and wheel by the intermediate steering shaft,
and it is dovetailing with the rack. Therefore the main task of the steering pinion is
to transform the rotation of the steering wheel into a translation of the rack.

11.4.2.1 Pinion Bearing

One common arrangement of the pinion bearing of mechanical rack-and-pinion
gears is a lower needle bearing, which is ﬂoating, combined with an upper deep
groove ball bearing, which is ﬁxed, that is axially mounted with the pinion,
Fig. 11.8. The upper ball bearing and the pinion are again mounted in the gear case
by the upper pinion screw, without axial free travel. The bearing therefore supports
the axial dovetailing forces which develop from the usual diagonal dovetailing of

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

259

Input shaft

Locking screw

Pinion

Rack

Rack yoke

Upper deep groove ball bearing

Lower needle bearing

Fig. 11.8 Pinion bearing arrangement with deep groove ball bearing (top) and needle bearing
(bottom)

pinion and rack. It also bears the radial dovetailing forces and those forces which
act from the tie rods about the rack on the pinion, together with the lower needle
bearing.

This typical pinion support by means of deep groove ball and needle bearing is
complemented by the less common variety with two angular contact ball bearings,
see Fig. 11.9. In this case, an angular contact ball bearing is arranged both above
and below the pinion dovetailing. The two bearings receive axial and radial forces
synchronously. This version of a pinion bearing has not prevailed, because the
costs of the parts are higher.

Rack yoke

Rack

Pinion

Locking screw

Input shaft

Angular contact ball bearing

Fig. 11.9 Pinion bearing arrangement with two angular contact ball bearings

260

J. Hullmann et al.

11.4.2.2 Implementation of the Pinion Dovetailing

The steering pinion is usually toothed askew to achieve more dovetailing coverage
when interacting with the rack dovetailing. This ensures that more than just one
cog is dovetailing and that even dovetailing and uniform torque transmission
between pinion and rack is maintained. Mechanical gears are basically designed
with big dovetailing modules, so that the cogs are ﬁrm enough, on account of the
high steering torques to be transferred.

Common manufacturing methods for the pinion dovetailing are the most often
applied hobbing and the less common gear-tooth forming. There are high
requirements for the run-out deviation of the pinion dovetailing (up to 40 µm) to
achieve a steady frictional curve over the rack stroke with low free travel of the
rack yoke.

11.4.3 Rack and Rack Guide

The rack has the task to convert a rotation, given by the steering wheel on the
pinion, into a translation of the rack and the attached tie rods about the dovetailing
between pinion and rack. The rack has to transfer the highest applying steering
forces and tie rod forces in axial and radial direction. Diameter and material of the
rack belong therefore to the main layout criteria of a rack-and-pinion gear. Pri-
marily, the rack should be sufﬁciently resilient against bending to resist the high
lateral forces that the tie rods may issue. Typical materials of racks and their
mechanical qualities are shown in Table 11.4.

The rack is generally made of a round-bar steel. The dovetailing is made either
by forming or by machining. To optimise the weight, it is partially or entirely
hollowed out. There are also versions of racks for which a pipe is transformed
according to Sect. 5.5. The making of racks is described there in more detail.

11.4.3.1 Rack Guide

The translation of the rack is enabled by two bearings. Opposite the steering pinion
is the rack passing into a plain bearing bush (see Fig. 11.4) that receives the lateral
forces of the rack in radial direction.

Table 11.4 Typical rack materials and their mechanical qualities

Tensile strength (N/mm2)
Yield strength (0.2 %) (N/mm2)
Stretch (%)

SAE 1040
C40-C43

640
440
19

EN8C

695
495
17

37CrS4
41CrS4

775
620
13

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

261

Dovetailing dividing force

Lateral rack radial force

Friction force

Rack yoke spring tension

Fig. 11.10 Forces acting on the rack yoke and the axial free travel

    Axial free travel
(From 50 to 100   m)µ

Gliding foil Rack yoke Compression

spring

Adjuster bolt

Rack yoke free 
travel drain plug

Fig. 11.11 Construction of the rack yoke assembly in the gear case

The rack is guided on the side of the dovetails between the pinion and a
spring-loaded rack yoke, see Figs. 11.4, 11.8 and 11.9. The rack yoke almost
completely surrounds the diameter of the rack on the side that is turned away from
the pinion (looking at the cross section) and presses the rack dovetailing against
the pinion dovetailing by means of a compression spring, without free travel, if
possible. The rack yoke is guided in a case drilling without free travel. Thus the
bearing also enables the reception of the lateral rack forces in radial direction.
Figure 11.10 shows the forces acting on the rack yoke, combined of the dovetailing
dividing force, the lateral rack force and the rack yoke spring tension. Reliable
functioning of the rack support is commonly ascertained by an axial free travel of
the rack yoke between 50 and 100 µm. The structure of the rack yoke and its
components is shown in Fig. 11.11.

This bearing constellation reduces the movement of the rack to two degrees of
freedom: the desired translation and a possible undesirable roll of the rack around
its longitudinal axle. The contact area between the dovetailing of pinion and rack

262

J. Hullmann et al.

along the pinion’s axis is rather long, so that a rolling movement will push the rack
away from the pinion. First, the spring pretension has to be overcome, then, the
rack yoke spring has to be compressed, until the rack yoke touches the adjuster
bolt. Consequently, the possible rolling movements are limited to a range which
does not affect the function of the gear.

11.4.3.2 Rack Yoke

The rack yoke has to perform the following functions during gear operation:

• Establish a plain bearing of axial rack strokes without free travel
• Establish a dovetailing between pinion and rack without free travel or noise
• Support radial and axial dovetailing dividing forces between pinion and rack
• Support tie rod forces at the pinion
• Compensate dovetailing tolerances between pinion and rack from manufacturing
• Tune steering qualities by varying the frictional mating between rack and rack

yoke

• Suppress mechanical noise.

Construction of the rack yoke

To meet the requirements, the following construction of the rack yoke assembly is
prevailing in reality. The rack yoke is a rounded plain bearing element which is
axially moving in an appropriately sized gear case drilling. The depiction of the
rack yoke in Fig. 11.11 shows that there is a plain foil at the rack which is ﬁxed at
the rack yoke and allows a low-friction movement of the rack. To achieve radial
damping of the rack yoke, one or two O-rings can be integrated, they are ﬁtted into
corresponding grooves. The compression spring and the adjuster bolt enable a safe
support of the rack. The drilled hole, made into the adjuster bolt to directly observe
the free travel of the rack yoke, can be sealed with the drain plug after measurement.
Figure 11.12 shows potential noise sources in the system of the rack support by
the rack yoke. This constellation can produce rattle under certain loads, like
varying tie rod forces (for example, in a journey over uneven cobblestones) or

Fig. 11.12 Potential noise
sources in the dovetailing and
rack yoke area

Dovetailing noise

Abrupt sliding noise

Rack yoke rattle noise

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

263

when movement of the rack reverses (‘reverse knock’). This noise should be fully
prevented by suitable measures.

To avoid noises of the rack yoke, one aims at as little radial and axial free travel

of the rack yoke in the case drilling as possible.

The radial bearing clearance results mainly from the accessible tolerance
margins for the outer diameter of the rack yoke and the inner diameter of its
drilling. It depends on the chosen way these diameters are processed and on the
mating of materials, because different thermal expansions require measures to
prevent the rack yoke from blocking.

The axial bearing clearance is given by the adjuster bolt for the rack yoke
clearance that ultimately represents a stop unit for the rack yoke, preventing
further movement. Here again, the free travel should be as low as possible. Still,
note that an insufﬁcient rack yoke clearance entails a powerful rise of the friction
in the rack, which the driver will perceive as very unpleasant and may interpret as
a blocked rack. Hence, the rack yoke clearance has to be adjusted in such a way
that it can also compensate the permissible deviations of the cog treads of the rack
and the pinion, the run-out deviation of the pinion and the permissible static sag of
the rack, beside the already mentioned tolerance and stretch differences. The
permissible tolerance of the mentioned parts are therefore integrated into the
deﬁnition of the rack yoke clearance. A clearance of up to 100 µm is generally
common. It is measured during the adjustment of the bolt straight through a
drilling in its centre. After setting the clearance, the drilling is sealed in the bolt
with the drain plug.

Optionally, an integrated O ring can be added to the adjuster bolt in the contact
zone to the rack yoke, so that the noise in this area is further damped, if the
operation of the steering should cause the rack yoke to strike on the adjuster bolt.
Possible rack yoke materials are aluminium, zinc-aluminium alloys, sintered
metal or plastic. The friction contact surface of metal rack yokes to the rack
consists of an additional foil of plastic or composite metal with bronze and PTFE
support. The different sliding materials, combined with the pretension of the rack
yoke spring, enable a tuning of the friction at the desired level. In general, one
aims at very low friction to provide a good steering feel to the driver. At the same
time, the steering has to damp any disturbances and vibrations acting from the
outside; a deﬁned friction is contributing to this. However, all sliding materials
have in common that the difference between sliding friction and static friction
should be as low as possible, this avoids stick-slip effects and resulting noise or
abrupt movements of the rack during small steering corrections.

The friction contact surfaces of the rack yoke are adapted to the rack according
to its geometry in the dovetailing area, i.e. semicircular, Y or V (see Sect. 11.5.5).
Using Y or V rack yokes prevents the rolling of the rack due to the dovetailing for
the most part.

264

Rack yoke tuning

J. Hullmann et al.

Altogether, the rack yoke and its parts allow tuning the steering qualities, damping
mechanical noise and rack vibrations and optimising the steering response.
Structural factors are the level of the rack yoke spring tension,
the sliding
parameters of the contact surface of rack yoke and rack, or their friction coefﬁ-
cient, the free travel of the rack yoke bearing and the insertion of O-rings in the
perimeter. These factors affect response, damping and noise of a mechanical gear
and can within limits inﬂuence the steering qualities.

Changes in the area of the rack yoke are often used in practice to damp noises
and vibrations which are recognised only late in the process of development,
without having to essentially modify the gear.

11.4.3.3 Rack Bushing

The rack bushing—the second rack bearing of a mechanical gear, beside the rack
yoke with pinion—is a sliding ﬁt which supports the lateral forces from the tie rods
in the rack and ensures that the translation of the rack is low-friction and free of
noise. In some applications, the rack bushing also assumes the function of the end
stop, limiting the rack stroke.

Mechanical rack gears and gears for pinion EPS most often feature plastic
sliding ﬁts, versions of sintered metal are less common. By analogy with the
contact area of rack and rack yoke, the desired friction can be adjusted by choosing
the material mating. To counteract rattling noises, two O rings are sometimes
applied at the outer diameter of the rack bushing of plastic sliding ﬁts. This
facilitates good noise damping. With the help of these O rings, some further
damping of axial rack movements can be achieved for small stroke movements as
well. In addition, sudden radial load impulses are damped by this kind of bearing.
An example of a plastic rack bushing with two O rings is shown in Fig. 11.13.

O ring 

Plastic rack bushing

Fig. 11.13 Rack bushing with two O rings

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

265

11.5 Dovetailing and Gear Ratio

The purpose of the dovetailing design is to include different limiting criteria, like
high load-carrying capacity, high efﬁciency, low noise and high bending strength
of the rack. Some of the individual measures generate opposing effects, demanding
a compromise. For any given rack diameter, one tries to achieve the highest
possible overlapping of proﬁle and jump. The remaining cross section may not be
weakened too much, otherwise the bending strength of the rack will be impaired.
Constant and variable gear ratio are distinguished.

11.5.1 Constant Gear Ratio

The use of gears with constant gear ratio (CGR) is widespread in the car industry,
where customary steering is concerned. The historical reason is the easier pro-
duction by broaching. Broaching is acknowledged as an established manufacturing
method for ‘common’ rack dovetailing, and it is most often applied; sanding and
milling the dovetailing belong to the less widespread processes.

The full ratio of a consistently translated gear is computed from the centre gear
ratio and the steering axis geometry of the vehicle. Consequently, the choice of a
suitable gear ratio is a compromise between the preferred ratio in the centre area
(or ‘straight ahead’ position), the desired manoeuvrability of the vehicle and the
full number of steering wheel rotations, stop unit to stop unit.

The possibility to individually adapt the steering qualities by a variable gear
ratio is a comfortable solution to ﬁnd the best compromise for layout and adap-
tation of a steering system.

With regard to rules for the dovetailing design, the CGR is a special case of the
variable gear ratio, so that the layout criteria discussed in the following sections
also apply to CGR dovetailing.

11.5.2 Variable Gear Ratio

The above-mentioned manufacturing methods are not applicable for variable
dovetailing with a ﬂank geometry changing over the stroke. Hence, racks with
variable dovetailing in mass production are either hot or cold transformed.

Dovetailing with variable gear ratio (VGR) uses a helical pinion, just like the
CGR versions. The ﬂanks of the rack cogs are bent, so that the same angles of the
engaging cogs are present at any time of engagement. The left side of Fig. 11.14
shows the front cut through rack and pinion dovetailing. In the distance of the pitch
circle diameter d1, the cogs of the rack have a frontal division pt1 (normal division
to the pinion axis) and a related engagement angle. If the engagement angle rises,

266

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.14 The different pressure angles of the pinion for different pitch circle diameters

the contact lines are shifted towards the head of the respective pinion cog. The
right side of Fig. 11.14 shows a rise of the engagement angle in the front cut.
Accordingly, the contact lines between pinion and rack cogs are separated by the
pitch circle diameter near the cog heads of the pinion. The chamfer angle βz2 of
the rack dovetailing turns into d2 when the pitch circle diameter is large, because
the chamfer angle of the pinion cogs rises with the diameter.

Figure 11.15 shows the different chamfer angles of the pinion for different pitch
circle diameters. Under the inﬂuence of a small engagement angle and assuming
an ‘installation angle’ γ of the gear, the axial division p of the rack cogs is:
(cid:1)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

p1 ¼ pt1 (cid:3) cos c þ bz2

(cid:1)
=cos bz1

ð11:1Þ

The gear rack travel Sy per steering wheel rotation (‘slope’ or ‘C factor’) is,

using the number of the pinion cogs n:

sy ¼ p1 (cid:3) n

ð11:2Þ

As a result of the variation of the engagement angle (in the normal cut) of the
the chamfer angle βz and the module m are non-constant (cf.

rack cogs,
Fig. 11.15).

Fig. 11.15 Different chamfer
angles with different pitch
circle diameters of the pinion

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

267

11.5.2.1 History of the Development

Variable gear ratios (VGR) are in use for sphere circulation gear since 1963. The
development of the gear rack with variable dovetailing has lasted substantially
longer. Although the ﬁrst patents were submitted already in 1955, the actual
development began with the patent of Henry Merritt in 1964. With Merritts
implementation a spur gear pinion was mounted in 90˚ angles to the gear rack.
This kind of variable gear ratio offered only a very small rise of the gear ratio of
approx. 8 % in comparison to the basic gear ratio.

After different other patents for variable dovetailing and suitable advancements,
Arthur Bishop introduced the modern variable gear ratio of a gear rack by means
of his patented diagonal-interlocked evolving pinion. This kind of gear ratio was
ﬁrst applied within the scope of a mechanical gear for the Isuzu Piazza which came
onto the Japanese market in 1981. The gear was produced in Japan by the gear
manufacturer Jidosha Kiki Company (JKC). At this time, ZF also began with the
use of variable gear ratios in the Opel Ascona, Ford Sierra, in the BMW 3 series
(E30) and in the Fiat Daily 1985.

The initial areas of application were mostly limited to the reduction of the
steering expenditure close to the steering stop unit. In the 90 s the variable gear
ratio was used increasingly in the area of hydraulic steering. The ﬁrst-time use of
variable transmission ratios in connection with electrically powered steering col-
umn systems occurred in 2001 from TRW in the Fiat Stilo and from Koyo-Seiko
with the Saturn Vue.

11.5.3 Applications

Gear racks with variable gear ratio became popular to master the conﬂicts in the
gear ratio layout and to open new possibilities. Although the ﬁrst applications were
focussed on supplying enough gear rack force without exceeding too much
inﬂuence on the manoeuvrability, later solutions concentrated upon the need for
improved dynamic qualities and ergonomic advantages.

11.5.3.1 Applications for the Steering System

The ﬁrst applications of the variable gear ratio concentrated primarily upon the
mechanical advantage for the steering system. The whole ratio of a VGR steering
system drops when the front wheel angle rises towards the stop unit. This phe-
nomenon is a result of the actual steering arm radius rL which decreases by
rotation of the front wheels from the straight ahead position to the full steer-angle.
The gear ratio at increasing steer-angles can be reduced by the variable imple-
mentation while retaining a high whole steering ratio.

268

J. Hullmann et al.

Mechanical gear—diminished torque

A basic challenge for the engineers of steering systems was to ﬁnd a compromise
for the steering ratio in the centre area of mechanical gears. It should limit the
increase of the steering loads when the greatest steer-angle was approached and
reduce the number of wheel turns to a satisfactory level. This task is complicated
by rising axle and steering loads, caused by the chassis geometry.

Reducing the gear ratio for partially offsetting the higher loads during parking
allows maintaining a higher gear ratio in the central position. This leads to a lower
number of steering wheel rotations in comparison to a CGR system. Using a VGR
in classical mechanical gears became less common during the past years. The
latest application of a rack with variable dovetailing for a mechanical gear was
found in the Smart, the MRR Roadster. The gear ratio course of the mechanical
steering in this vehicle is shown in Fig. 11.16.

In contrast

to hydraulic and gear rack-supported electromechanical gears,
mechanical gears can be build smaller, however, on average they suffer higher
pinion moments and load cycles. This results in increased forces in the dovetailing
which can lead to wear problems. In this case, special attention needs to be paid to
the cog sag and the contact tensions in the dovetailing.

Power-assisted gear—reduced power consumption

Power-assisted CGR systems often do not have enough power to move the rack
into the stop position with the required steering angular velocity. High weight of
the front axle, high steering loads or limited power of the power-assistance can be
blamed.

A limited power supply can also be ascertained for some column- and
pinion-supported EP systems. These systems are integrated into most vehicles with
smaller front axle loads, when space and costs are crucial.

Fig. 11.16 Gear ratio course of the mechanical gear in the Smart Roadster. (Source Daimler)

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

269

The kind of variable dovetailing which is used for

and
pinion-supported EP systems resembles the gear ratio used in manual gears. They
correspond to each other by a gear ratio that is lower farther away from the centre.
The same favourably reduced pinion torque is achieved by this measure as in the
manual gear. The loads on the dovetailing are, as expected, still higher in this kind
of gears than in other models, because the whole driver and power-assist torque
acts on the dovetailing of rack and pinion.

column-

One purpose of the design of hydraulic or electric-mechanical rack systems is to
limit the rack in its movement to the stop unit position. This reduces the power
consumption and keeps it within the speciﬁed effective output of the power-assist
system.

In all cases, the demands to the variable gear ratio can be plotted as a function
of the steering geometry. The power and torque consumption of the power-assist
system is thereby limited.

11.5.3.2 Driver Application

Power-assisted systems together with a VGR simplify car driving by suitable
tuning. Advantages like easier parking, less high-speed nervousness or improved
dynamic response of the vehicle are some of the characteristic features.

Ergonomics

In contrast to the reduction of the gear ratio with increasing steer-angle discussed
above, a rise of the gear ratio is also conceivable, if the power-assistance is
sufﬁcient. The popularity of power-assisted systems allowed using the mechanical
VGR for increasing the rack gain beyond the ratio desired at the central position
towards the stop unit. The number of wheel turns, end stop to end stop, could be
signiﬁcantly reduced by that. This facilitates low-speed manoeuvres and parking.
At the same time, there is less response to low corrections at the wheel during
high-speed straight driving.

The change of the gear ratio increase usually began at a pinion or wheel angle
between 30˚ and 90˚ and ended at a highest gear ratio at the angular range of 180˚–
270˚. The driver can hardly discern this change of the rise, but its beneﬁt is that the
number of whole wheel turns, end stop to end stop, can be reduced to three or less.
This prevented untimely tiring when driving in the city or on bendy roads, and it
signiﬁcantly promoted safe driving by the better manoeuvrability of the vehicle in
such situations.

The ﬁrst time this kind of variable dovetailing was applied was in the Ford
Sierra in 1985. The use of this kind of gear spread only slowly during the 1990s,
but it is common among higher-class vehicles of the 21st century. This solution
also prevails among SUVs, because these cars have a rather high rolling axis, so

270

J. Hullmann et al.

that a direct, concentric gear ratio could produce instabilities (cf. Baxter and
Heathershaw 2002).

Till the end of the 90s, the number of suitable processes to manufacture
high-precision VGRs rose, so that these systems are now commercially accessible
to all manufacturers of gears.

Vehicle dynamics

The development of the CGR had progressed till the beginning of the 21st century,
and further beneﬁts could be used. The economic VGR was made purely with the
driver’s needs in mind. The demand for a much higher rack gain within a shorter
travel of the rack was rising. This enabled improving the vehicle’s dynamic
driveability.

The introduction of the Active Front Steering (AFS) by BMW in the series 5 of
2003 has shown that a change of the steering ratio improves the yaw rate response
at low to medium speed clearly, even though the costs are high. The AFS system
uses a mechatronical steer-angle superposing system to provide a VGR depending
on speed. The angle-sensitive VGR can be called a not quite comparable, but
cheaper alternative, according to Heathershaw (2004).

A relation between speed and the limits of the corresponding steer-angle change
was ﬁrst examined in the middle of the 1950s by Arthur E. Bishop at a conven-
tional vehicle. On this basis, taking into account the typically generated lateral
acceleration of 0.2–0.5 g, an angle-sensitive VGR could be made that had almost
approached the characteristic curve of the yaw rate found for vehicles with a
speed-sensitive VGR system. Since such a system is not speed-sensitive, it is very
important that the gear ratio in the ‘straight ahead’ position is accordingly indirect,
so that the high-speed steering feel is as expected.

The purpose of this measure is to make the change of the steering ratio dis-
cernible by the driver. This approach deviates from the principles of an ‘er-
gonomic’ VGR. A rack gain of 25–50 % over the medium VGR and, typically,
between 90˚ and 120˚ of the ﬁrst wheel turn is achieved by this principle. The quite
large changes of the rack gain produce a high curvature of the rack cogs and their
ﬂanks, putting high demands to the accuracy of their shape.

The described kind of VGR was ﬁrst used by Daimler in 2008, in the SL, SLK
and CLC series within the scope of the Daimler “Direct Steering”. Proper
implementations of the gear ratio, the whole gear ratio and the variable dovetailing
are shown in Figs. 11.17, 11.18 and 11.19.

11.5.3.3 Special Applications

VGR gears can be used as well for combined requirements, for special gear ratio
purposes or for the correction of asymmetries in the steering geometry.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

271

Fig. 11.17 Gear ratio of a standard VGR steering (blue) in comparison to Daimler’s ‘direct
steering’ (green) in the Mercedes 2009 ML class. (Source Daimler)

Fig. 11.18 Whole steering ratio of a standard steering with VGR (blue) in comparison to
Daimler ‘direct steering’ (green) in the Mercedes 2009 ML class. (Source Daimler)

Combined applications

There are applications which demand a combination of driver- and system-related
requirements for a VGR. The introduction of a driver-related VGR can be used for

272

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.19 Bishop VGR—dovetailing of the Daimler ‘direct steering’ in the Mercedes 2009 ML
class. (Source Daimler)

a rack gain between central area and highest steer-angle (stop unit position). As
discussed before, this produces a too high power consumption of the power-assist
system. An overloading of the power-assistance can then only be remedied by
reducing the gain until the end stop position.

To meet these sometimes opposing requirements, some manufacturing pro-
cesses enable two or more gear ratio changes within a dovetailing. The restrictions
to construction and production of a variable dovetailing set the highest and lowest
gear ratio level for a dovetailing. The highest gear ratio is selected for the area
beyond the centre. The lowest ratio is either in the centre position or in the area of
the end stop position (or in both of these areas, if the ratios are equal).

An example for three ratios in one VGR is the M-curve VGR of the Opel Corsa
of 2006. Its name is derived from the M-like shape of the gear ratio curve.
Renamed the ‘Progressively variable steering’, the M-curve VGR was used for the
sports models of the Opel Corsa 2006. Proper M-curves of the steering ratio and
gear ratio are shown in Figs. 11.20 and 11.21. In addition, Fig. 11.20 compares the
characteristic curves of a CGR and a VGR.
Asymmetrical and special steering ratio purposes
The VGR can be used to solve problems related to the steering geometry as well.
One particular challenge is the occasional deviation of the steering ratio from the

Fig. 11.20 Steering ratios in the Opel Corsa: CGR for petrol car, VGR for diesel and ‘M-curve’
VGR for ‘progressively variable steering’. (Source IKA-RWTH)

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

273

Fig. 11.21 Gear ratio of the Opel Corsa M-curve VGR for the progressively variable steering.
(Source IKA-RWTH)

desired curve. A VGR that adapts to a nominal curve can be developed based on
the central gear ratio and the steering geometry, within the mechanical limits of the
system.

Some steering geometries are distinctly asymmetric, despite the use of a CGR
or a symmetrical VGR. This produces an asymmetrical steering ratio curve. In this
case, an asymmetrical VGR is used to offset the asymmetries, so that a quite
symmetrical steering response can be achieved.

11.5.4 Technical Limits

A variable steering ratio is achieved by changing the standard engagement angle of
the engaging rack and pinion cogs. The theoretical least and peak gear ratios are
deﬁned for a speciﬁc pinion module when the least and peak values of the
engagement angle are set in the normal cut as upper and lower limits.

A conventional CGR version has a dovetailing optimised for contact engage-
ment, stability, friction, tooth root stress and ﬁrmness. This task is more compli-
cated for a VGR, because a satisfactory design has to be found for any normal
engagement angle used in the VGR’s pinion geometry.

11.5.4.1 Size of the Rack Gain

The absolute limits for a rack gain are deﬁned by the production process. Nev-
ertheless, some limits are also due to the product development which deﬁnes the

274

J. Hullmann et al.

‘constraints’. Early developments intended a least engagement angle of only 14˚.
These low angles have two shortcomings, though: One is a trend to wedge under
load, i.e. the dovetailing of the pinion wedges together with the cogs of the rack,
and this can cause excessive friction and high wear. The other is the higher
accuracy of the cog ﬂank surfaces required when the engagement angle is reduced,
to achieve the same accuracy in vertical engaging. Concerning the rack gain and
the cog engagement, the vertical portion has to be controllable in any case of
deviation, because vertical deviations of the surfaces have a considerable impact.
The horizontal component contributing to the rack gain is less important. Reducing
the engagement angle entails higher requirements for accuracy but limits a further
gain of the rack ratio. As a result, a lower limit of the normal engagement angle of
20˚ is used in reality.

transversal and vertical vectors. Accordingly,

The upper limit of the engagement angle is deﬁned by the gear application. The
helical pinion transfers forces on the cogs of the rack which can be divided into
axial,
the general purpose in
designing a rack-and-pinion steering is to maximise the axial component of this
force, in particular for CGRs. Figure 11.22 compares pinion force vectors with low
and high dovetailing engagement angles.

Variable dovetailing always sees deviations occurring at the cogs of the rack
with regard to these force vectors. One tries to minimise the vertical force vector
when higher pinion loads shall be transferred. A high vertical force component
will also see high forces acting on the rack support and the rack yoke, provoking
high friction loads. Due to these considerations, rack yoke contact surfaces with
low friction coefﬁcients are used for rack-and-pinion systems with high vertical
force components (see Sect. 11.4.3.2).

11.5.4.2 Contact Lines

The engagement angle also inﬂuences the length of the contact lines between the
pinion and the rack cogs, a measure of the dovetailing quality. This is described by

Fig. 11.22 Pinion force vectors with low and high dovetailing engagement angle

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

275

the overall engagement εγ, the total of tread engagement εβ and jump engagement
εα, which results from the helical dovetailing. The whole engagement supplies the
average number of cogs in contact. The theory of dovetailing calculation for
involute gears is documented in DIN 3960.

A typical tread engagement decreases quite quickly when the normal engage-

ment angle rises, while the jump engagement rises only minimally.

Different full engagements are used as standards for different kinds of steering
systems. Concerning VGR design, it is ensured that these standards are observed.
Hence, a bigger gain of the gear ratio uses a bigger dovetailing area than a
constant gear ratio, to maintain adequate full engagement. Implementing the
desired rack gain may require compensating the reduced tread engagement by a
bigger jump engagement (due to a bigger dovetailing width), to receive a satis-
factory function.

11.5.4.3 Stability and Noise (NVH)

The power between pinion and rack dovetailing is transmitted along the contact
lines. Two or more cogs are usually in contact. If the pinion is turned and the rack
is driven, the contact lines move along the rack cogs. As long as there is always at
least one contact force vector of a contact line acting on each side of the rack
dovetailing’s axis of rotation, the rack is prevented from rolling. In this case, the
active torques of the contact force vectors have the same amplitude and opposite
directions. Figure 11.23 shows how the contact lines of adjoining cogs move when
the pinion is rotating. This rotation shifts the contact lines and their resultant
forces.

Pinion geometry, engagement angle, chamfer angle of the pinion cogs and the
distance of the rack dovetailing to the axis of rotation can cause conditions in
which all the contact forces generate parallel torques around the rack’s axis of
rotation. The rack is then in an unstable state and inclines to slight turns around its

Fig. 11.23 Contact line movement of adjoining cogs when the pinion rotates

276

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.24 Rotation of the rack by unstable contact line vectors and a shifting rack yoke (left),
stable contact line vectors (right) upon full pinion contact and rack yoke clearance

axis of rotation. The rack is supported in the gear case by a rack yoke pressing its
dovetailing against the pinion dovetailing. As was discussed in Sect. 11.4.3.2, the
rack yoke clearance enables the offset of the dovetailing tolerance and permits a
slight rolling of the rack under high loads.

Figure 11.24 (left) shows the ﬁeld line vectors that cause the instability and thus
the turning of the rack. The spring-loaded rack yoke is pressed against the adjuster
bolt attached in the gear case. When the pinion turns on, the next cog is engaged
and an offset torque is created around the rack axis (see Fig. 11.24 on the right).
The rack turns back into the initial position of the full engagement, restoring the
rack yoke clearance. Except for all the other forces that are acting on the rack in
this case, the movements described in this unstable state can contribute to a noise
in the gear [sic! Why “except” (mit Ausnahme)?]. The change of the torques in the
engagement kinematics can also produce transmission errors in the rack gain and
changes in the axial rack force.

A short engagement distance of rack cogs and pinion or rack cogs with a higher

axis of rotation are indicators for an unstable dovetailing engagement.

Figure 11.25 shows that the sliding friction between the surfaces of the rack and
pinion dovetailing affects the angle of the contact force vector. The pinion torque
(on the driver’s side) produces a greater vertical component of the contact force
vector (shown in blue), while the rack force from the tie rods generates a lesser
vertical component (shown in green). The result reveals a higher risk of unstable
engagement and, hence, expectable noise from excitations of the chassis. The
power ﬂow from the road, as for example upon road kickback, should be con-
sidered more critically than the power transmission from the driver.

Using a VGR means that the engagement geometry has to change. Therefore, it
is ensured that minima and maxima of the gear ratio curve do not make unstable
dovetailing engagement more likely.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

277

Fig. 11.25 Effect of the
friction on the contact line
vector forces (unstable
situation during recoils
[green])

11.5.5 Manufacturing Processes

Since VGR racks were introduced in 1981, many different processes have been
used in serial production. The main requirement for a suitable standard process is
to make a dovetailing with three-dimensionally curved, non-prismatic cogs. Ver-
tical and transversal curvatures should be possible. High curvatures of surfaces or
3D shapes require more accuracy and quality of the dovetailing.

The ﬁrst process, introduced by JKC, Japan, in 1981, was a combination of hot
forging, deburring and cold stamping. Although this process was used for lots with
few pieces for more than two decades, it suffered a signiﬁcant decarbonisation of
the cog surfaces as a result of the hot forging, and that interfered with the
wear-resistance. Low service life of the tools and the risk of imprecise adjustment
of the parts during calibration added to the disadvantages of this production mode.

Only three processes for making variable dovetailing are still in use.

11.5.5.1 Rotary Swaging

Rotary swaging was developed by a collaboration of ZF Friedrichshafen and
Heinrich Schmid AG in early 1980 and implemented in production after 1985.
A circular movement of the upper cog tools generates a gradual reshaping of the
material. This circling is limited to a swinging parallel to the rack axis, to produce
the rack dovetailing. The basic material is submitted to a special soft-annealing
process to achieve the desired reshaping without ﬁssures. At the same time, the
blank is covered with a graphite lubricant to extend the service life of the tool.

This kind of production leads to excessive displaced material gathering in burrs on
the ﬂanks of the dovetailing, that need to be removed in a subsequent step. If a
humpback rack (D-form rack) is made, material is machined away before reshaping,
to avoid any distortion of the rack during the swaging process. The cold solidiﬁcation
of the rack’s surface is exploited to compensate the low ﬁrmness of the raw material.
The described process can be used to make humpback racks or Y racks.
Figure 11.26 compares the cross sections of both rack backs as an example.

278

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.26 Typical swagged
rack cross sections. (Source
Heinrich Schmid AG)

An offset of the swinging of the upper cog tool has to be considered during the
construction of the tool. This limits the highest curvature of the cog ﬂanks that can
be achieved with this tool, a curvature needed nowadays for the dynamic imple-
mentation of a VGR.

11.5.5.2 Semi-hot Forging

To handle the decarbonisation problem, semi-hot forging was introduced by
James N. Kirby Ltd. and Bishop in 1982, though calibrating and cold stamping
were necessary parts of this process, too.

Bishop introduced a semi-hot forging process for Y racks in 1984; it did not
need calibration any more. In the following years, this approach was further
pursued, until at last a new process became available in 1994. The ﬁrst VGR rack
forged by this process, without burrs, was used in the mechanical steering of the
Fiat Punto series.

A single forging process is sufﬁcient to produce the VGR dovetailing at a
temperature of 700–800 ˚C. This manufacturing method now allows achieving a
high curvature of cogs and ﬂanks with the required accuracy. In comparison to
other processes, a good surface structure is achieved, internal tension is avoided
and decarbonisation of the cog ﬂanks is prevented. This process, which requires no
further treatment steps in the cog area, provides a high precision shaping of the
dovetailing, enabling the highest possible gear ratio range and the fastest possible
rack gain.

Bishop developed this process, and the ﬁrst variable dovetailing at a humpback
rack was forged in 2005. The new process allowed producing a bigger variety of
cross section shapes to widen the dovetailing, larger cross sections (in comparison
to the shaft area) and all kinds of D, Y or V rack backs in the dovetailing area.
Figure 11.27 presents typical semi-hot forged rack cross sections.

As described in Sect. 11.5.4.2, a signiﬁcant rack gain often requires bigger and
broader cogs to achieve a contact engagement which is favourable for the appli-
cation. Bishop’s semi-hot forging process enables the making of racks with
dovetailing widths of up to 115 % of the rack diameter.

Before the actual forging, the blank is heated, and after forging, it is cooled
down to produce the desired material properties. An exact monitoring of the
heating and cooling is essential. All common chemical compositions and states of

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

279

Fig. 11.27 Typical semi-hot forged rack cross sections. (Source Bishop Steering Technology
Limited)

Fig. 11.28 Examples of D
and Y ‘ActivRak™’ racks

delivery can be forged out of steel now, a fact which is very beneﬁcial with regard
to the currently more frequent EP systems. Figure 11.28 shows examples of recent
D and Y rack cross sections with variable dovetailing.

11.5.5.3 Pipe Reshaping

A different approach to making racks was pursued in Japan during the mid-1980s.
A reshaped pipe was taken as a blank to develop a lightweight version of a rack.
The material in the middle of conventional ‘solid’ racks, near the rack axis,
contributes to the rack’s weight, but little to its bending strength. Hence, this
material is in many cases removed by deep drilling to reduce the weight, at least in
the non-dovetailing area of the rack. Making racks from pipes is therefore an
elegant solution, weight and efﬁciency of use being the prime motivations.

In contrast to rotary swaging or semi-hot forging, as described above, pipe
reshaping is achieved by inserting spikes on the inside. The pipe is preformed to
increase the wall thickness in the cog area at some local places. Then the pipe is
ﬁxed between stamps, the desired cog form is contained in one half of the stamp.
Several cold spikes (up to 16) are pushed successively through the pipe, to press
the material gradually into the cog tools. Figure 11.29 shows a cutaway view with
the pipe rack in the dovetailing area.

280

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.29 Typical pipe rack
cross section, here of a
Mazda 6

The material necessary for pipe reshaping contains less carbon than most other
rack applications that commonly have a content of 0.30 %. The pipe is fully
hardened and tempered after shaping and treating, so that it receives the necessary
bending strength. However, the surface resistance is lower than that which com-
petitive processes and materials might achieve.

The pipe reshaping process was ﬁrst used for CGR gears in hydraulically driven
power steerings. But VGR dovetailing can also be made by this method. However,
the cog width is then much lower in comparison to the forging processes, because
the rack material the cogs are made from has to be pressed from the inside of the
pipe outward into the cog mould. Accordingly, bigger pipe diameters have to be
selected in order to achieve comparable widths and accuracy of the cog shape.

11.6 Requirements of a Mechanical Rack Gear

This chapter discusses the general requirements of function and ﬁrmness of
mechanical rack gears, proven by bench tests. Before the actual test, the gear is
submitted to a startup process, to anticipate any potential sagging effects and to
support the test results.

Tests checking essential functional aspects of the gear are already carried out as
soon as the gear is assembled in the production line. More extensive tests are
performed at typical, randomly selected parts from a batch of gears (auditing).
Firmness, wear and environmental tests on the other hand, are part of the devel-
opment programme. After the release for series production, they will only be
repeated at deﬁned time intervals (e.g., once per year) as accompanying tests.

11.6.1 Functional Requirements of Gears

All function tests are carried out at a gear without tie rods in built-in position at
room temperature (20˚ ± 5˚). Some vehicle manufacturers, upon deﬁning the

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

281

functional requirements, make a distinction between the comfort area, with a
steering wheel angle of ±180˚ or a rack path of ±25 mm around the central rack
position, and the remaining dovetailing area.

11.6.1.1 Rack Yoke Clearance

Although the limitation of the highest rack yoke clearance (e.g., 100 µm max.) is in
fact an indirect functional requirement, it is crucial for other functional require-
ments or the friction and noise response of a rack-and-pinion gear (see also
Sects. 11.4.3.2 and 11.5.4.3). The widest clearance is usually deﬁned at the central
position of the rack and measured by a suitable drilling in the adjuster bolt or the
yoke cover. A linear receiver records the relative movement of the rack yoke
against the gear case. The reference point for the rack yoke clearance is set by
driving the rack yoke into touch with the cover, a deﬂection torque of 5–10 Nm
without lateral forces around the longitudinal axle of the rack is applied. The
unloaded rack yoke then rebounds, and its relative movement is recorded by the
linear receiver, resulting in the value of the rack yoke clearance, see Fig. 11.30. This
clearance can also be recorded as a function of the rack’s position. If the values are
very small, then a rising friction at the rack is likely. If, by contrast, the upper limit
value of the clearance is surpassed, there is a risk of steering rattle in the car.

11.6.1.2 Steering Pinion Torque

To measure the steering pinion torque, a rotation without tension or free travel and
with constant rev is applied at the input shaft. There are no loading elements at the

Fig. 11.30 Identifying the rack yoke clearance by applying a deﬂection torque without lateral
forces to the rack

282

J. Hullmann et al.

TRW

dynamic pinion torque

DTR-3567-04

]

m
N

[
 
e
u
q
r
o
T

2

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8

-1

-1.2

-1.4

-1.6

-1.8

-2

<---  Start CW

range of characteristic CW values

maximum:

minimum:

average:

+/-  550°

+/-  300°

   1.12 Nm

   1.10 Nm

   0.81 Nm

   0.81 Nm

   0.99 Nm

   0.96 Nm

oscillation:

   0.31 Nm

   0.30 Nm

range of characteristic CW values

+/-  550°

+/-  300°

maximum:

   1.14 Nm

   1.11 Nm

minimum:

average:

   0.85 Nm

   0.85 Nm

   1.00 Nm

   0.98 Nm

oscillation:

   0.29 Nm

   0.26 Nm

-550 -500 -450 -400 -350 -300 -250 -200 -150 -100 -50

0

50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550

Ende CCW   --->

Datei:

1_000388--939092-081104-1522

tested steering

steering parameters:

VW PQ24 mech.

gear number:

000388

valve number:

steering type:

LHD

steering paths:

128 mm

rev:

steering paths/rev:

34.04 mm

rev:

tower angle:

hydraulic oil:

3.76

25 °

Angle [°]

symmetry around the averages

prescribed 
measurements:
13 1/

min

measured curve

limit curve

symmetry [-550° bis 550°]:

  -0.01 Nm

symmetry [-300°bis 300°]:

  -0.02 Nm

testing rack:

939092

valve in front of rack-and-pinion

date of 
measurement
date:

08.11.2004

08.11.2004

Fig. 11.31 Pinion torque of a mechanical rack-and-pinion steering

rack, so that it moves freely. The rotary angle and the torque at the input shaft are
recorded over a measuring cycle.

As the minimal and maximal values of the rotary torque and its oscillation over
the stroke are predeﬁned, the test is counted as failed if these values are surpassed.
A typical value of the pinion torque is in the range of 0.8–2.0 Nm, commonly
achieved when the pinion has a rev of 15 rpm. Figure 11.31 shows the result of a
measurement of the pinion torque, moving left or right and remaining inside the
speciﬁed range. The highest permissible pinion torque that the speciﬁcation of this
steering permits is accordingly marked in the image and should be less than
1.2 Nm in the comfort area while staying below 1.6 Nm beyond the comfort area.

11.6.1.3 Rack Displacement Force

A linear drive is attached to the rack strainlessly and without free travel. There are
no additional loads at the input shaft, so that the shaft moves freely when the rack
is shifted with a steady displacement speed of 5–10 mm/s, according to speciﬁ-
cation. Rack forces of 150–350 N are permissible. The rack travel and the rack
force is recorded over the measuring cycle. If the highest measurement value of the
displacement force exceeds the deﬁned limit value, the test is considered failed. If
demanded, the oscillation of the displacement force is evaluated as well.

]

N

[
 
t
e
c
r
o
F

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

-50

-100

-150

-200

-250

-300

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

283

TRW

rack displacement force

DTR-3567-04

<---   Start CCW

range of characteristic CCW values

maximum:

minimum:

average:

+/-  55 mm

+/-  50 mm

 216.17 N

 216.17 N

 153.19 N

 153.19 N

 185.11 N

 184.06 N

oscillation:

  62.98 N

  62.98 N

range of characteristic CW values

maximum:

minimum:

average:

+/-  55 mm

+/-  50 mm

 204.65 N

 204.65 N

 146.90 N

 146.90 N

 177.97 N

 177.80 N

oscillation:

  57.75 N

  57.75 N

symmetry around the averages

symmetry [-55mm bis 55mm]:

   7.14 N

symmetry [-50mm bis 50mm]:

   6.25 N

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

Ende CW   --->

30

40
Displacement [mm]

50

Datei:

7_000388--939092-081104-1520

tested steering

steering parameters:

VW PQ24 mech.

gear number:

000388

valve number:

steering type:

LHD

steering paths:

128 mm

Velocity:

rev:

3.76

Oil pressure:

steering paths/rev:

34.04 mm

Oil flow rate:

mm

/s

0 bar
l
/min
0 

tower angle:

hydraulic oil:

25 °

date of 
measurement
date:

08.11.2004

08.11.2004

prescribed 
measurements:
10 

measured curve

limit curve

Test machine:

939092

valve in front of rack-and-pinion

Fig. 11.32 Rack displacement force of a mechanical rack-and-pinion steering

The rack displacement force of a mechanical rack-and-pinion steering is
applied over the rack path in Fig. 11.32. In this case there were values of up to
200 N permitted for the central area of the rack; 250 N may be achieved in the
outer dovetailing area. The rack displacement forces of mechanical gears are
usually a little higher than those of rack-supported power-assisted gears. The
reason is that all the rack forces of mechanical gears are directly transferred over
the pinion/rack link. High input steering torques generate high forces in the
dovetailing, the major part of which is acting on the rack yoke. The high pre-
tension of the rack yoke demanded thereby and a gliding foil corresponding to the
forces inﬂuence the rack displacement force.

11.6.1.4 Efﬁciency

Some vehicle manufacturers require information about the efﬁciency of the gear,
distinguishing direct and indirect efﬁciency. For the direct gear efﬁciency, one
observes the conversion from the rotating input shaft into the translation of the rack,
i.e. the ratio of rack force to pinion torque achieved as the pinion is moving. For
indirect efﬁciency, also called reset efﬁciency, the movement transferred by the
chassis on the rack is examined, i.e. the quotient of accessible pinion torque and rack
force at the moving rack is computed. The direct efﬁciency established from the rack
shift of a typical mechanical rack-and-pinion steering is shown in Fig. 11.33.

284

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.33 Direct and indirect efﬁciency of a mechanical rack-and-pinion gear

The result conﬁrms the standard values for the direct efﬁciency of a mechanical
rack-and-pinion gear which, according to the load, are found in the area of 85–
92 %. The indirect efﬁciency of the mechanical gear is often a little lower; this
depends on the dovetailing design.

11.6.1.5 Noise (NVH) Requirements

The general Noise, Vibration, Harshness (NVH) requirement of a mechanical
rack-and-pinion gear is the ‘absence’ of any annoying rattling noise. Hence, steps to
avoid noise are considered already during the design of the gear. Calculations and
simulations support these considerations. As soon as the ﬁrst prototypes are
available, hardware examinations on the test bench follow. The gear is ﬁxed on the
test bench and realistically loaded. Responses according to frequency and excita-
tion amplitude occur at the bearing points of the rack which are then evaluated for
their practical relevance. If there is any need for improvement in the area of the rack
yoke, remedial actions as discussed in Sect. 11.4.3.2 may be examined and
implemented as, for example, the change of rack yoke clearance and spring stiffness
or the insertion of O rings. A successful tuning is conﬁrmed in the vehicle test.

11.6.2 Strength Requirements of the Gear

Examination of the static and dynamic strength is decisive for the strength
requirement.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

285

11.6.2.1 Static Strength

The static strength of a mechanical rack-and-pinion gear is conﬁrmed chieﬂy by
the ‘fracture torque test’ and the ‘Charpy impact test’.

Fracture Torque Test

The focus of this test is the check of the rack’s static strength, pinion and case. The
parts are tested until failing by applying a torque to the input shaft both ways,
without any lateral force, while the rack is blocked. The test is passed if at least
one deﬁned torque level was achieved before the torque drops and the part in the
steering fails. The requirements are usually in the range of 250 Nm.

Charpy Impact Test

The impact is directed onto the gear by a tie rod above the ball pivots of the outer
joint. The position of the tie rod corresponds to the built-in location at full
deﬂection. The rack is fully extended on the load side. The moment of inertia of
steering column and wheel is applied by a substitute mass at the input shaft. The
requirements to the gear are met if the full effectiveness was proven for each load
layer and no part has fractured.

11.6.2.2 Dynamic Strength and Wear Test

Parking and wear tests are carried out within the scope of testing the dynamic
strength.

Parking Test

The parking test is a bench test which applies high rack loads, to simulate the
service life load of a gear within a short time. This test is an important part of the
test programme for mechanical rack-and-pinion steering, because it yields state-
ments on service life for almost all the parts. The input shaft is driven over the rack
stroke with constant speed. A test load equivalent to the highest operation load of
the steering opposes the rack’s direction of movement. Equal operation loads are
applied at both outer joints, right and left. At the end stop, the axial joint touches
the gear case. The torque at the input shaft is raised to the prevail torque and kept
at this value. Then the rotation of the input shaft and the direction of the load at the
tie rods is reversed.

286

Wear Test

J. Hullmann et al.

The wear test is performed on a test bench that simulates the service life load of
the gear in a rather short time, because of the level of the initiated forces and
torques. Primarily, parts like pinion, rack, bearings and the internal fouling of the
gear are tested by abrasion.

The input shaft is driven against a test load at the rack, the speed should be
constant over the rack stroke. The test load is applied to the outer joints of the tie
rod and the input shaft of the steering. At the end stop (stroke end position), the
axial joint touches the gear, enabling a gain of the torque. When the peak torque is
reached, the rotation at the input shaft and thereby the direction of the rack force is
reversed.

If after the wear test the functional values of the steering do not correspond to
the given speciﬁcation any more, the test is failed. A rack yoke clearance of
0.5 mm or higher also produces a fail result of the test.

11.6.3 Environmental Requirements of the Gear

Environmental requirements are met if the salt spray test and the dirt water test
were passed in an environmental simulation.

For the salt spray test, a steering is sprayed with different NaCl solutions, com-
pliant with DIN ISO 9227. The following requirements apply:

11.6.3.1 Salt Spray Test

• no base metal corrosion
• absolutely water-tight
• effective after the test.

11.6.3.2 Dirt Water Test

This test is performed at a completely assembled steering which is repeatedly
driven against either end stop by turning the pinion. This test includes two oper-
ating modes, consisting of spraying the steering and a subsequent dry run. For
spraying, the whole steering including the tie rods is sprayed with dirt water at zero
pressure. The dry run heats the gear with hot air. After the test, the gear has to be
absolutely sealed, as in the salt spray test.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

287

11.7 Design Veriﬁcations and Product Validation

of a Rack-and-Pinion Gear

The release procedure and the tests to be ﬁnished for release are parts of the
speciﬁcations. The releases occur at
the development
programme.

important points of

The entire release procedure is coordinated with the customer (OEM), before
the gear supplier is selected. This release procedure becomes a compulsory part of
the speciﬁcations. Only steerings that passed all the tests described in the test
speciﬁcations can receive an internal product
release from the steering
manufacturer.

The purposes of these tests and the requirements of the respective samples are

discussed in the following.

11.7.1 Concept Veriﬁcation

The purpose of this test is to verify product features qualitatively (the product may
be used without safety risk) and quantitatively (the demands of the speciﬁcations
are kept). The concept veriﬁcation (CV) phase is marked by loops in the devel-
opment, ﬁnished when the design is ultimately ﬁxed.

11.7.2 Design Veriﬁcation

The purpose of the design veriﬁcation (DV) tests is to corroborate product features
of samples made with substitute tools. These tests conﬁrm that the product design
matches the demands for quality. The tests are carried out after the ﬁnal deﬁnition
of the design, no further loops will be passed.

11.7.3 Product Validation

The purpose of the product validation (PV) test is to ratify product features of
samples in series production (industrial manufacturing). When the samples are
made, the parameters of the later series production have to be observed precisely.
This includes the manufacturing of parts, assembly, machines and tools used,
procedure sequence and quality control.

The PV test (and the DV test) are conceived to check the product features

concerning

288

J. Hullmann et al.

• Static strength
• Dynamic strength
• Wear-resistance and
• Environmental resistance.

The size of the applied test loads depends on the operation loads expected for
the product. The release programme is passed when all requirements of the rele-
vant test standards were met within the deﬁned scope of validation.

11.7.4 Accompanying Test

The purpose of the accompanying test is a random check of product features which
cannot be monitored by the quality control during production. These features are
commonly described in the generic product speciﬁcation. The quality of the
supplied parts and the stability of the assembly process are controlled by these
tests. Hence, the samples have to be made compliant with the deﬁned and released
process parameters.

11.8 Hydraulic Steering Systems

The hydraulic power-assisted rack-and-pinion steering is an advancement of the
manual steering into which additional elements were introduced to amplify the
rack force. Figure 11.34 shows that it consists of a mechanical part, very similar to
the mechanical rack-and-pinion steering described in Sects. 11.4 and 11.5, and a
hydraulic part including the components for force generation (cylinder/piston),
steering (valve) and transmission of the auxiliary energy (transfer lines and
hydraulic connections).

The effective rack force of this steering model is generated by a superposition

of mechanical and hydraulic force:

FR ¼ Fmech þ Fhydr ¼

þ DpC MHð

Þ (cid:1) AC

ð11:3Þ

MH
rPi

11.8.1 Objectives

11.8.1.1 Reducing the Steering Forces

The main argument for the development of power steering was the reduction of the
necessary steering forces, esp. when the vehicle is at rest, to improve the driver’s

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

289

Fig. 11.34 Design comparison of mechanical and hydraulic steering

convenience. The demand for this discharge of the driver has grown with rising
front axle loads and the resulting higher rack forces of the steering.

11.8.1.2 Reducing the Steering Ratio

The possibility to reduce the steering ratio was also exploited early on. For manual
steerings, it has to be high, so that the steering forces are kept convenient for any
driver and within the scope of the registration regulations (ECE regulation R79).
Such a design often prevents fast changes of course at low speed, because the
driver is not physically capable of applying the necessary wheel angles fast
enough. The reduction of the steering ratio in power steerings improves the
steering convenience and safety, because, for example, quick evasive manoeuvres
in city trafﬁc are better supported. The tendency to further reduce steering ratios or
to employ VGRs that are dropping beyond the central position of the rack is
ongoing and has become an important objective for power steering.

11.8.1.3 More damping of the steering system

Another purpose is to increase the damping of the steering system for various
appearing vibrations and to suppress interferences initiated in the steering system
by the road. One particular objective is to integrate the additional elements that

290

J. Hullmann et al.

some mechanical gears may need into the power steering, so that the add-on costs
of the power steering are partially compensated.

11.8.1.4 More Freedom in the Design of the Chassis

A power steering is standard equipment in most vehicle classes, hence, the pos-
sibility to avoid compromises in chassis design in favour of lower steering forces is
exploited as well. This concerns, e.g., the deﬁnition of the castor and the choice of
the tyre thickness.

11.8.2 Necessary Changes in the Vehicle Opposed to Manual

Steering

The package of the hydraulic steering has to accomodate some additional com-
ponents by which the gear loses compactness (see Fig. 11.35). One is the steering
valve on the input shaft, extending the least distance between rack axis and
attachment of the gear to the intermediate steering shaft. Furthermore, the steering
cylinder has to be arranged in the extension of the rack axis or parallel to it.

The auxiliary power supply, either a part of the secondary drive unit of the
internal combustion engine or an electrically driven engine/pump aggregate, and its
connection to the power steering by pipes and hoses, entails more profound changes.
On the other hand, compromises in the design of the front axle geometry in

favour of low steering forces are not required any more.

11.8.3 Necessary Changes in the Gear Opposed to Manual

Steering

The gear is designed for much higher operation loads. This is needed because of
the generally higher steering forces resulting from the design of the front axle

Fig. 11.35 Comparing
packages of manual and
hydraulic gears

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

291

geometry. Even more signiﬁcant is a change of the driver’s behaviour who steers
much more often when the vehicle is at rest, i.e. when the rack forces are high,
because any power steering will facilitate this without trouble. Yet some com-
ponents of the gear, like dovetailing or pinion bearing, are less stressed by driving,
because they are loaded only with lower torques applied by the driver. Hence, the
design of the strength of these components is focussed on a few or a single peak
load which may appear during abuse situations like a kerb impact or accidents in
which even the highest possible power-assistance is insufﬁcient and a major part of
the rack force will transfer into the mechanical part of the steering.

11.8.4 Speciﬁc Features of Hydraulic Gears for On-board

Use

No servicing is intended for the hydraulics of the steering system—apart from a
regular check of the oil level within the scope of a general vehicle inspection, to
avoid failure from minor leakage. This places high demands on the sealing system
of the steering hydraulics.

Other than with a manual steering, the safety concept of the power-assisted
steering system also has to consider a failure of the power-assistance. The formal
requirements are met by a mechanical driving of the steering wheel to the front
wheels and by a proof of low enough steering forces if the power-assist fails,
compliant with EU regulation ECE R79. It is ensured as well that the driver can
handle a vehicle with failed power-assist safely enough, even in real trafﬁc situ-
ations, and that any failure is indicated early on.

11.9 Constructions and Components of Hydraulic Gears

The function of a power-assisted rack covers the following aspects:

• Solid or elastic attachment of the gear case to the vehicle (mainly at the sub-

frame which takes up the front axle)

• Deﬁned mounting points of the axial joints of both tie rods at the rack in a ﬁxed

distance

(transverse axis)

• Translation of the rack, parallel to the Y axis of the vehicle co-ordinate system

• Deﬁned gear ratio between rack translation and input shaft rotation
• Deﬁned mounting point for the steering column at the input shaft of the gear, so
that its position and the orientation of the input shaft allow the observation of the
speciﬁcations for the attachment to the steering wheel (package, free running,
uniformity of the gear ratio)

292

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.36 Main components of the hydraulic rack-and-pinion steering

• Integration of the steering hydraulics which receive the wheel torque applied at
the input shaft and its translation into an assisting force in the direction of the
rack.

Figure 11.36 shows an exploded view of a typical gear, the main components

are labelled.

Many components are similar to those of the mechanical gear: pinion, rack
yoke, rack, bushing, case and gaiters. They were already discussed in Sect. 11.4.
This chapter therefore only discusses the additional components of hydraulic
power steerings, based on the general construction of a rack-and-pinion steering:
steering cylinder, steering valve and connections.

11.9.1 Conﬁgurations

Various conﬁgurations were developed to adapt the gear to the package and front
axle geometry of the car, differing chieﬂy by the arrangement of the steering
cylinder.

11.9.1.1 End Tap

This conﬁguration, shown in Fig. 11.37, is characterised by the continuous rack
which is dovetailed on one half (mechanical part of the gear) and designed as a
piston rod with piston on the other half (hydraulic part of the gear). The respective
axial joints of the tie rods are joined at their ends. This is currently the most
common version.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

293

Fig. 11.37 Hydraulic rack-and-pinion steering with end tap

This conﬁguration of the steering is compact and of low weight; it facilitates a
stiff joining of the wheels, because the rack also joins both tie rods without further
components and because the tie rods transfer the force into the gear without any
offset into the rack axis. Left- and right-hand drive version can often be built by
mirroring the steering at
the middle of the rack, ultimately exchanging the
mechanical and the hydraulic part. The rather short remaining length of the tie rods
can be a shortcoming of this arrangement. It is deﬁned by the distance of the
steering arms at the wheels and by the total length of the rack. Big bending angles
of the tie rod joints can result from deception and rebound of the front wheels,
entailing a high lateral force as a part of the tie rod forces transferred to the rack;
this has to be considered when designing their strength. On the other hand, large
toe-in changes over the spring path of the front wheels can result, forcing com-
promises in the design of the chassis geometry.

However, a suitable design of the chassis can apply short tie rods favourably to

reduce the steering ratio for high steer-angles even further.

11.9.1.2 Central Tap

This conﬁguration, shown in Fig. 11.38, also consists of a mechanical and a
hydraulic part which are connected by a continuous rack. The tie rods, however,

Fig. 11.38 Rack-and-pinion steering with central tap (tie rods not shown)

294

J. Hullmann et al.

are mounted outside of the axis in the middle of the rack, between the mechanical
and the hydraulic part.

The advantage of a possibly larger tie rod length is countered by higher con-
struction expenditure and weight. In the 1980s and 1990s, when power steerings
were offered as extra equipment for lower vehicle classes, this construction
allowed installing a compact and light manual gear with one-sided tap (short gear)
and a power-assisted gear with central tap in the same vehicle, without further
adaptation of the mounting or the tie rods. This design is avoided in new con-
structions and was lately used only in some all-terrain vehicles, in which advan-
tages of long tie rods for the chassis geometry are more apparent, on account of
very long spring paths.

11.9.1.3 Parallel Auxiliary Cylinder

The parallel arrangement of the steering cylinder to the rack axis developed from
the desire to use a power steering in a chassis that was originally made for a
manual steering, without essential changes. A differential cylinder is connected to
the steering case, so that the piston rod is parallel to the rack and coupled to its end
by a connecting element. The cylinder is an independent unit, the steering case is
modiﬁed chieﬂy to accept the steering valve. One shortcoming of this construction
is the different effective piston surface in the two cylinder chambers, resulting
from the fact that on one side of the piston, the piston rod covers a part of the
piston’s surface. If the same rack force is desired, different pressures have to be
applied according to the steering direction, this needs to be observed during valve
design. Because of the axial offset, the piston rod transfers bending torques into the
rack, and the connecting element is charged with high loads, too. The weight is
then higher than that of a gear with end tap, and efforts for assembly and costs are
higher, too. The advantages are a possibly longer tie rod and a basically higher
ﬂexibility of the package, because the steering cylinder can be arranged in different
positions inside the gear case. This conﬁguration is not used any more in passenger
cars if the whole platform is equipped with power steering.

Heavy-duty vehicles, though, feature prototypes of a similar conﬁguration,
shown in Fig. 11.39. They should be used if the still widespread rigid front axle

Fig. 11.39 Prototype of a parallel gearbox for heavy-duty vehicles

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

295

Fig. 11.40 Assembly pipe and rack

with recirculating ball-with-nut gear and steering linkage is substituted with an
independent suspension with rack-and-pinion steering. However, the axial joints
are then attached at both sides of the hydraulic cylinder, and the mechanical part of
the steering including the rack is arranged in parallel.

This design enables quite long tie rods which are useful to achieve large turning
angles of the front wheels ([55˚ for the inner wheel) while maintaining Acker-
mann’s condition to a great extent. Both features are necessary to provide a small
cornering circle even for a long wheelbase and to make is usable in practise. The
reduction of the whole steering ratio can be limited until the full angle of the
wheels is achieved. That is desirable for heavy-duty vehicles, so that enough
power-assist is available over the whole steering path, while the gear is very small
and light.

The conﬁgurations in the following chapters refer to steering systems in the

preferred design, the end tap.

11.9.2 Cylinder

The cylinder of a power steering contains all the parts for supplying an assist
power by hydraulic means. The parts are shown and labelled in Fig. 11.40.

In addition, the cylinder includes one or several outside mounting points for
on-board mounting. In power steering, the bushing of the rack is placed into the
cylinder area to establish a very wide distance between the two bearing points in
the steering.

296

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.41 Rack with concave drillings and piston groove

11.9.2.1 Rack in the Cylinder Area

The rack in the cylinder area has the following functions:

• Bearing the piston and the piston forces
• Sealing the cylinder space and the rack gaskets
• Bearing externally transferred longitudinal and lateral forces with low elasticity
• In most conﬁgurations: Air pressure compensation between both spaces, sur-

rounded by the gaiters, when the rack is moving.
Racks are mostly made of corresponding round bar steel in one piece—two-part
assemblies are seldom used for mechanical or hydraulic applications. To reduce
weight and to permit the mentioned airﬂow, the rack is drilled hollow across the
in the hydraulic area (see Fig. 11.41). When the
whole length or at
mechanical section including the dovetailing is ﬁnished and a radial groove is
introduced into the rack to fasten the piston, it is ground in the whole hydraulic
area to achieve a sufﬁcient surface ﬁnish for the rack seals, which may not be
impaired by the further production process.

least

The same requirements apply to the layout of the rack strength as to mechanical
steering systems. They result esp. from the fact that the rack is a critical part in
safety issues that has to maintain a solid connection between the guided wheels
and a controlled movement along their longitudinal axis under any circumstances.
The area critical for the strength is generally near the dovetailing, towards the
middle of the rack, hence, no particular requirements need to be observed for the
hydraulic section of the rack. Yet, overall, the rack has to be laid out with more
strength than a manual steering would provide. One reason is the wider length of
the rack which allows for higher bending torques when lateral forces are intro-
duced at their ends. Another is the higher potential rack forces, particularly in
abuse situations like kerb impacts. They are caused by a combination of hydraulic
peak support and extremely high steering wheel torques (they can amount to more
than 100 Nm). Even in this case, the rack may not suffer plastic deformation that
would affect its easy motion in the gear.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

297

11.9.2.2 Pistons with Piston Ring

The piston is made from a rotary steel part, the piston ring consists of a PTFE
compound (ﬁlled with bronze or graphite), produced by sintering or extrusion, then
it is twisted and cut to length.

Together, they have the following functions:

• Hydraulic separation of the two cylinder spaces with least internal leakage
• Transmission of the hydraulic forces to the rack.

Figure 11.42 shows piston and piston ring in the mounted state, joined to the

rack.

The sealing of the cylinder chambers is a primary task of the piston ring. The
gap (approx. 0.1 mm) between the outer diameter of the piston and the inner
diameter of the cylinder pipe is closed by the piston ring. It is located in a groove
of the piston whose depth allows it to perform compensating movements. Since the
outer diameter of the piston ring is wider than the cylinder pipe and there is the
biasing force of the O-ring under the piston ring, a static contact pressure is
generated to prevent the ﬂuid from ﬂowing over the piston ring when the pressure
rises quickly (blow-by effect).

The actual sealing effect, however, results from a contact pressure, applied by
the ﬂuid pressure. The piston ring is pressed against the corresponding groove
ﬂank, and the O-ring exerts a radial force on the inner diameter of the piston ring.
A required prerequisite for meeting this task is constant free access of the ﬂuid to
the O-ring. During rapid mutual pressurisation it may happen that the piston ring
will touch the turning point of the groove ﬂank and prevent direct access of the
pressure medium to the O-ring. Then the pressing force for sealing is not produced,
which can cause leaking. Therefore, grooves are made at both sides of the piston
ring, to keep the hydraulic connection to the O-ring upright (Fig. 11.43).

The gap between piston ring and piston groove should allow the ring to move. If
the ring is too wide, however, it will move during a change of the pressurised side
(e.g., by reversing the steering direction) from one contact surface of the groove to
the other. This ﬁrst delays the pressure buildup in the cylinder chamber, then
releases it with a steep gradient when the piston ring has achieved its ﬁnal position
and the sealing begins. This causes sound impulses in the hydraulic system, these
are clearly audible in the vehicle and are unacceptable.

Fig. 11.42 Assembly rack
with piston and piston ring

298

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.43 Effect of the ﬂuid
pressure on piston ring and
O-ring

The gap between the outer diameter of the piston and the inside diameter of the
cylinder pipe prevents the piston from touching the cylinder wall, even if the rack
bends under lateral force. But under lasting inﬂuence of high pressure and high
temperature, the material of the piston ring is able to creep through a too wide gap
(oil temperatures up to 120, 140 ˚C are possible in individual applications), so that
the piston ring extrudes into the gap, loosing its sealing capabilities.

There are different ways to attach the piston to the rack. They have in common
that material from the inner diameter of the piston is transformed by pressing into a
radial groove on the rack. The piston disposes of a collar with low wall thickness at
its inner diameter, either on one side or on both sides. This collar is radially
deformed by pressing with a corresponding matrix, by rolling out or by swaging
hammers into proper grooves on the rack, establishing a positive connection. If the
piston has a collar only on one side, then the other side will be supported by a
retaining ring which lies in a rack groove.

Basically, the piston has to be able to transfer the hydraulic peak forces into
both directions without moving relative to the rack. Otherwise its motion would
generate sound impulses in the hydraulic system, similar to those described for the
piston ring.

11.9.2.3 Rack Gaskets and Sealing System of the Cylinder

The main function of the rack gaskets is to seal the hydraulic area of the cylinder
pipe reliably, under any possible condition, to prevent leakage for the whole
service life. The gaskets should further ensure that no air is sucked from the space
within the bellows into the cylinder. This can happen during extreme steering
movements at high rack speed, when low pressure is generated in a cylinder
chamber, because the volumetric ﬂow extracted by the pump is below the

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

299

Fig. 11.44 External and internal installed rack seal

changing volume of the chamber. Another common and, for this effect, critical
situation occurs when the vehicle is mounted and the front wheels are swivelled
while the engine is switched off.

Figure 11.44 shows installed rack seals. The left ﬁgure displays a seal pressed
into the rack jack, as it is inserted at the end of the hydraulic cylinder (external
rack seal), the right ﬁgure shows a seal pressed into the steering case on the border
between the mechanical and the hydraulic part of the gear (internal rack seal).

Conﬁguration of a rack seal

The rack seal consists of a metal body which establishes the strength to resist
pressures of 120 bar and more. This body is moulded with a rubber mixture in such
a way that the sealing elements in the outer and inner diameter receive their shape.
The used rubber material has to establish the compatibility to the used hydraulic
oil, it needs to be sufﬁciently strong at high temperatures and sufﬁciently ﬂexible at
low temperatures. At the mating face to the rack high abrasion resistance and low
friction is also required, this avoids stick-slip effects and any resulting audible seal
squeaking.

Interface at the external diameter

The seal at the external diameter is pressed into the case or jack. To establish
sealing at this point, the press ﬁt has to be conﬁgured for sufﬁcient radial pre-
tension of the mating face, the seal seat has to be machined with narrow tolerance
margins and it needs a deﬁned surface structure. A too rough surface could cause
the outer seat of the seal to wear or shear off upon assembly. A too smooth surface
could mean that in spite of correct size, the press ﬁt of the seal could fail and be
pulled out of its seat when low pressure is applied in the corresponding cylinder
chamber. This occurs when the steering system is ﬁlled and in some operation
modes. A large enough wedge-face supports the seal if the cylinder chamber is
pressurised. A supporting plastic ring integrated into the seal often serves this
purpose.

300

J. Hullmann et al.

Interface in the inner diameter

At this interface relative movements between sealing lip and rack may occur. It is
laid out so that it leaves only a thin oil ﬁlm for lubrication behind when the rack
moves out, and this oil ﬁlm can be fully retaken when the rack moves in. The
radial pretension is established by combining three effects, see Fig. 11.45.

First, some 50 % of the whole radial force is issued by the spiral spring inte-

grated into the seal, when it is widened to the rack diameter during assembly.

Second, the perimeter of the sealing lip is widened during assembly, too,

contributing some 40 % of the whole radial force as an elastomer tension.

Third, there is an elastomer bend section (approx. 10 % of the whole radial
force, all data given for ambient temperature) which results from the bend (bend
angle 7–12˚) of the diaphragm surface when it is pushed onto the rack.

In addition to the static radial force, the pressure admission ﬂow generates a
radial force part on the sealing lip which rises proportionally to the pressure,
because the sealing lip is not vertically oriented to the rack, but turned at an angle
into the cylinder space. The diaphragm surface is distorted under rising pressure,
so that in addition to the primary sealing lip, acting in the static state (0 bar
pressure above atmospheric), the sealing lips on the base or the diaphragm surface
on the rack are touching and supporting the sealing (see Fig. 11.46).

One particular difﬁculty in the layout of a seal is the required high ﬂexibility of
the mating face during radial movements of the rack. The bearing plan of a
rack-and-pinion steering (guide about rack yoke and steering pinion) is the reason
that the rack moves radially under lateral force, relative to the seal, and it rolls, for
example, due to radial dovetailing forces between rack and steering pinion. The
sealing lip has to follow these movements and make sure that a sufﬁcient radial
pretension is maintained around the whole perimeter of the rack—otherwise oil
will leak out in such situations. This is most difﬁcult in extreme cold start situa-
tions, because then the elastic mixture loses its ﬂexibility. Further, one needs to

Fig. 11.45 Static preliminary
tension of the rack seal on the
rack

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

301

Fig. 11.46 Function of the rack seals

ensure that these movements entail no overstretching of the elastic body, because it
will otherwise lose its mechanical strength and fail early under pressure (pene-
tration wound).

Integration of the seal in the gear

The internal rack seal which separates the hydraulic from the mechanical section is
used directly at an accordingly shaped place in the steering case.

The external rack seal is implemented into the rack jack. Then the outer

diameter of the rack jack is sealed with an O-ring against the cylinder pipe.

In general, the maximum working pressure of a rack-and-pinion steering is
limited by the rack seals. A very high pressure is aimed at, because then the
required rack force can be generated with a small piston surface, allowing for the
layout of a low volumetric pump ﬂow, which is favourable with regard to energy
consumption and thermal load of the steering system, beside advantages for
package and weight. Above a limit of approx. 140–150 bar, however, the risk of
steering failure due to leakage rises for conventional seals within the intended
service life.

11.9.2.4 Cylinder Pipe with Connections

The cylinder pipe has many tasks:

• Surround the cylinder space with sufﬁcient pressure resistance
• Supply hydraulic connections to link the cylinder chambers and the transfer lines

to the steering valve

• Bear and seal the rack jack

302

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.47 Gear case as an integral case

Fig. 11.48 Gear case with pipe/case connection

• Supply mounting points for the gear
• Bear other individual mounting points, for example, for a heat shield
• Join the seal bellows.

Two conﬁgurations are common, shown in Figs. 11.47 and 11.48.
First is the cylinder pipe, an integral part of the steering case, made of die-cast
aluminium (integral case). The mounting points of the gear, hydraulic connections
and other mounting points can be integrated into the mould. Like the valve area,
the cylinder area has to be fully machined.

Second is a separate pipe, most commonly a steel pipe, pressed onto a short
gear case containing input shaft and valve. The inside of the pipe receives its
inside diameter and the required surface ﬁnish without further treatment by a
process called calibrating, it consists of pushing a steel sphere with deﬁned
diameter through the pipe. For the hydraulic connections, however, the cylinder
pipe has to be drilled ﬁrst, and then corresponding connecting pieces have to be
welded to the pipe. Mounting elements are welded at the pipe, too, bearing the risk
of welding distortion of the pipe, which would not be acceptable in the cylinder
area. In general, the combination of gear case and pressed steel pipe is cheaper
than the integral case. The latter also puts high demands to the available
die-casting technology, limiting the scope of potential manufacturers. However,

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

303

depending on the number and complexity of the parts to be welded at the steel
pipe, the integral case can also be cheaper, in addition to the lower weight of this
conﬁguration.

11.9.3 Rotary Disk Valve with Input Shaft and Steering

Pinion

The steering valve is, from the technological point of view, the core of the
hydraulic power steering. Today it is always a rotary disk valve and has the
following tasks:

• Maintain a mechanical through-put from the input shaft to the steering pinion
• Connect both cylinder chambers with the inlet and runback of the hydraulic

supply

• Record the wheel torque introduced by the driver and identify the course
• Adjust the hydraulic pressure depending on the acting wheel torque and direct

the pressure into the cylinder chamber corresponding to the course.

The steering valve is connected to the driver by the steering column and the
steering wheel, and esp. the level of the current power assist, i.e. the pressure
directed from the steering valve into a cylinder chamber is clearly felt. Therefore,
the steering valve has to build up the driver’s support in a predictable, repeatable
and steady way, with low hysteresis and without
the
requirements for precision of the steering valve parts are high.

lag. This means that

The parts of the gear are shown and labelled in Figs. 11.49 and 11.50, both

assembled and in an exploded view.

Fig. 11.49 Steering valve ZSB with naming of the parts

304

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.50 Parts of a steering valve in explosion representation

11.9.3.1 Steering Pinion

The steering pinion is very similar to the version in mechanical gearboxes. Its
support however, is right above and below the dovetailing area in the case, so that
reaction forces are not transmitted from the dovetailing into the steering valve. The
mechanical coupling of the input shaft is maintained both by a torsion bar whose
end is pressed into the body of the steering pinion, and by end stop surfaces for the
input shaft, that limit the peak torsion of the torsion bar, which represents a
mechanical overload fuse.

Furthermore, the steering pinion disposes of a mating face for a shaft-lip type
seal, to seal the valve chamber arranged right above or below the upper steering
pinion support, so that the support is either inside the hydraulic chamber and runs
wet or is outside and runs dry.

11.9.3.2 Torsion Bar and Overload Fuse

The torsion bar connects input shaft and steering pinion axially, so that they have a
deﬁned position to each other. It also causes a relative twist between input shaft
and steering pinion as a function of the steering wheel torque, which is used to
control the power assist and its direction. Its layout has to maintain an exactly
deﬁned torsion spring stiffness which is primarily determined by diameter and
length of the choke. It has an inﬂuence on the required steering wheel torques
(more stiffness = more steering forces) but also a profound impact on the steering
feel and the feedback of the steering—these facts are discussed in more detail in
Sect. 11.10. Within the scope of the greatest possible angle difference between
input shaft and steering pinion, deﬁned by their respective stop surfaces, the
torsion bar has to be permanently rigid. Endangered cross sections are near the
choke and near the O ring groove.

The torsion bar is pressed into a drilling at one end of the steering pinion. At the
other end it is connected with the input shaft usually by piercing both crosswise
and securing them with a pin. The valve is mounted into a hydraulic balancing
stand which models the surroundings of the gear near the steering valve. The
steering pinion is ﬁxed onto the mounted sleeve, and the operation of the valve is
simulated by moving the input shaft. Then the valve characteristics for a clockwise
and a counterclockwise torsion are recorded. Finally, the input shaft is moved into

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

305

a position in which the valve indicator is symmetrical for both rotational direc-
tions: the hydraulic centre. That is, a twist out of this position around a certain
angle, clockwise or counterclockwise, will produce the same pressure. In this
position, the input shaft is connected with the unloaded and tension-free torsion
bar, e.g., by drilling and pinning. By this process, called the balancing of the valve,
it is ensured that pressure is not driven into one cylinder chamber without wheel
torque and that the pressure builds up, according to the wheel torque, symmetri-
cally into either rotational direction.

11.9.3.3 Sleeve with Valve Rings

The sleeve is one of two parts representing the function of the steering valve (see
Fig. 11.51). It is solidly connected with the steering pinion in the rotational
direction, however, it can follow an angular or axial offset between the sur-
rounding input shaft and the steering pinion within certain limits. On the outside,
the sleeve has three radial grooves that create three chambers, separated by the
valve rings, once they are installed into the case. The middle groove is connected
with the inlet of the hydraulic supply by drillings in the case, the upper and lower
groove are connected with one of the cylinder chambers.

The valve rings are almost identical with the already described piston rings in

terms of function and resulting requirements, material and conﬁguration.

Inside, the sleeve is cylindrical. Axial grooves are implemented at a certain
distance from the end of the sleeve which have sharp, right-angled edges at the
rim. They adopt the valve function in their interaction with the grooves and control
edges of the input shaft (see Sect. 11.9.3.4). The remaining cylindrical sections of
the inner diameter without grooves, and the corresponding surfaces of the input

Fig. 11.51 Sleeve with valve rings

306

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.52 Input shaft

shaft sealing this valve area by a gap, are as narrow as possible. Hence, high
demands are made to the treatment of the cylindrical inner diameter, both with
respect to the sizes with very low tolerance margins and with respect to the surface
ﬁnish.

11.9.3.4 Input Shaft

The input shaft is the second part of the steering valve. It has the purely mechanical
function of transferring the wheel torques, either from the pinning into the torsion
bar or from the end stop surfaces into the steering pinion, it is shown in Fig. 11.52.
The inside of the input shaft is drilled hollow. The hollow cavity of the version
shown here is connected by lateral drillings to runback grooves and the valve
chamber beyond the sleeve, whose section in turn is connected by a case drilling to
the runback of the hydraulic supply. On the outside, the hollow cavity is sealed by
an O ring between input shaft and torsion bar.

In the actual valve section, the input shaft is the counterpart of the sleeve with a
high-precision cylindrical outer diameter and axial grooves. Their edges, called
control edges, are provided with an exact structure, either by sanding several facets
or by stamping a certain form of the control edges. The curve of the power assist
over the wheel torque is determined by this structure, as described in Sect. 11.10.1.
The contour near the sleeve and the sleeve itself seal the high-pressure area by
narrow gaps, as described above. At its upper end, the input shaft is supported to
take up the lateral forces initiated by the steering column. A radial oil seal seals it
against its surroundings (Fig. 11.53).

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

307

Fig. 11.53 Cut view of an input shaft with control edge

11.9.3.5 Conﬁguration Forms

Many versions of the described valve conﬁguration were developed to solve
special problems, mostly for packaging. They are not widespread, because these
versions cause add-on costs or negative concomitants like more friction, and they
are not required if the car is properly designed. Alternative valve designs (star
valve, coil valve) have been fully displaced by the rotary disk valve as well.
However, to kinds of valve housings are still distinguished, see Fig. 11.54.
The easier form, the cartridge valve, has a valve housing which is a part of the
complete steering case. In this version, the lower pinion bearing is ﬁxed. The outer

Fig. 11.54 Cartridge valve (on the left) and bolt-on valve (on the right)

308

J. Hullmann et al.

diameter of the pinion is limited by the inner diameter of the pinion seal which in
turn is given by the outer diameter of the sleeve and the space required for the seal.
The widest diameter of the pinion determines the biggest possible steering ratio
(rack stroke per pinion rotation).

The alternative form, the bolt-on valve, is completely preassembled in its own
valve housing and screwed on the steering case. The ﬁxed bearing is the upper
pinion bearing, attached between valve and steering case. The size of the pinion is
not restricted by the sleeve in this conﬁguration. A higher assembly effort and a
greater number of individual parts are the setbacks.

11.9.4 Other Parts of a Hydraulic Gear

Other parts which have to be added to a hydraulic gear shall be mentioned brieﬂy,
for the sake of completeness.

11.9.4.1 Transfer Pipelines

The task of the transfer pipelines is to hydraulically connect the valve section with
the cylinder section individually for each cylinder chamber. They are usually made
of low-diameter steel pipe and provided with different kinds of hydraulic con-
nections at their ends, depending on the requirements of space and assembly.

The cross sections have to be selected in such a way that, despite quick steering
movements and accordingly high volumetric ﬂows in the transfer pipelines, there
will be no high resistance to ﬂow, esp. not when the ﬂuid is cold and more viscous.

11.9.4.2 Bellow Vent Pipe

In contrast to the mechanical gears which admit a free air exchange between the
compressed and the expanded bellow when the rack moves, the sealed cylinder
area of the hydraulic steering has to be circumvented. Solutions establishing the
exchange by an external connection of the bellows by means of a pipe have almost
fallen out of use. The costs for the bellows rise, because of the required pipe
connection (the bellow is no longer axially symmetric), the external pipe has
shortcomings in the package and the air exchange system is prone to leakage
during operation, potentially entailing long-term corrosion on the rack and sub-
sequent oil leakage of the gear.

More often, the hollow drilling of the rack is used to enable the aerial exchange
between both sides of the cylinder. This is made possible by a lateral drilling
before the dovetailing and either another lateral drilling at the end of the rack or
venting grooves introduced into the axial joint.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

309

Table 11.5 Some characteristics of hydraulic rack gears
Vehicle class

Compact
cars

Compact
category

950
7,000
24
40
90–120

1,150
8,500
26
42

Front axle load (kg)
Maximum rack force (N)
Rack diameter (mm)
Piston diameter (mm)
Maximum working
pressure (bar)

Volumetric ﬂow ( l/min)
Rack stroke (mm)
Gear ratio
Temperature

7.5

6
±65 to ±85
40–60 mm/rotations (sports car also 75 mm/rotations)
−40 to ?120 ˚C (partially also ?140 ˚C)

10.5

12

9

Middle
class

1,500
11,000
28
46

Van/SUV Light utility

1,800
12,500
30
48

vehicle

2,100
15,000
32
52

11.9.5 Typical Characteristics of Hydraulic Gears

The layout of rack gears for passenger cars is always speciﬁc to the respective car
platform. Speciﬁc features of the drive concept, the layout of the package or the
deﬁnition of the chassis affect the requirements for the respective gear signiﬁ-
cantly. Therefore, there are major differences between the gears even for vehicles
in the same class. This also concerns their characteristics.

Table 11.5 gives an overview of the representative characteristics of gears in

the different vehicle classes.

11.10 Functionality of the Steering Hydraulics

11.10.1 Steering Valve: Principle of the Cutback

According to the terminology for hydraulic parts,
the steering valve is a
mechanically operated 4/3-way proportional valve with an open centre. This
means that a continuous volumetric ﬂow is transported by the hydraulic supply
through the valve. The resistance to ﬂow is least
in neutral position. With
increasing deviation, the resistance to ﬂow of the valve increases steadily, and the
ﬂow pressure rises. At the same time, depending on the rotational direction, one
chamber of the steering cylinder is connected to the inlet and the high-pressure
levels there, the other one is connected with the runback and the low-pressure level
prevalent there. The active principle of the steering valve is the speciﬁc cutback of
a continuous volumetric ﬂow.

As shown in Fig. 11.55, the conﬁguration of the steering valve corresponds to
that of a Wheatstone bridge. A pressure difference is generated by changing the
resistances to ﬂow of the bridges B1 and B4 or B2 and B3 in pairs. They are

310

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.55 Diagram of the steering hydraulics

constantly passed by the hydraulics ﬂuid and directed into both chambers of the
steering cylinder. In real valves, there are several Wheatstone bridges in parallel,
three of them are shown in the example. Only one bridge, i.e. a 120˚ segment of the
valve cross section, is examined to understand the active mechanism in the valve.
The ﬂow path of the hydraulic liquid in the valve is as follows: The ﬂuid
streams into the central ring channel on the outside of the sleeve. Drillings pass it
on to the space between sleeve and input shaft, more precisely, to a place where
the input shaft has an axial groove on its outer diameter while the sleeve has none
on the inner diameter.

The ﬂuid continues into a space where the sleeve has an axial groove on its
inner diameter but the input shaft has none on the outer diameter (note: In the
image below on the right, the hydraulic spaces are dark while sleeve and input
shaft are bright). A sufﬁciently wide gap remains in the neutral position of the
valve between both areas (bridge B1 and B3), because of the negative overlap of
the valve, so that the ﬂuid can ﬂow over with little resistance. The volumetric
ﬂows splits symmetrically between both possible directions of ﬂow. Each of the
grooves in the inner diameter of the sleeve is again connected by drillings to one of
the ring channels in the outer diameter of the sleeve: the groove that is left in the
image is connected to the upper ring channel and the right groove to the lower ring
channel. The two ring channels are connected via the transfer pipelines with one
cylinder chamber each: the upper ring channel with the cylinder chamber which

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

311

supports a steering movement to the left and the lower ring channel with the
opposite chamber.

Next, the hydraulic liquid ﬂows again into an area with a groove in the input
shaft and without groove in the sleeve (bridge B2 and B4), again, there is little
resistance in the neutral position because of the negative overlap.

In the form shown here, the grooves in the input shaft are connected by drillings
to their hollow internal parts, so that the ﬂuid is conducted to there. It ﬂows axially
to the input shaft into an area which is not covered by the sleeve, leaves by lateral
drillings in the input shaft and returns by a drilling in the case and a connected
runback into the tank. The state of the not actuated valve (central position) is
shown on top in Fig. 11.56.

If the input shaft is torsioned relative to the sleeve, as shown in the ﬁgure, the
cross sections change where the ﬂuid is streaming from a groove in the input shaft
to a groove in the sleeve, or vice versa. For example, if there is a counterclockwise
torsion of the input shaft, the cross section of the bridge B1 grows, so that the
ﬂuids passes easier into the groove of the sleeve which is connected to the cylinder
chamber supporting a steering movement to the left. The cross sections of the
bridges B2 and B4 shrink, so that the respective volumetric ﬂow passing over both
bridges is hemmed in the same measure (symmetrical ﬂow distribution). There is a
corresponding back pressure in the space limited by these bridges, it is equal to the
cylinder chamber pressure pA. The bridge B3 then receives a wider cross section,
so that the volumetric ﬂow across this bridge can freely pass away into the tank. In
this area, the pressure level is low and corresponds approximately to the tank
pressure, and thus also to the pressure in the cylinder chamber B (pB).

Fig. 11.56 Cutaway view of the valve in the actuated state

312

J. Hullmann et al.

The form of the control edges in the input shaft essentially determines the
runoff cross section of the respective bridges as a function of the relative position
of input shaft and sleeve, describing the valve curve.

The oriﬁce formula serves well to compute the approximate pressure drop as a

function of the runoff cross section:

Q2 ¼ B2 (cid:1)

mit pR (cid:5) 0

Q1 ¼ B1 (cid:1)
p

p

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
pP (cid:4) pA

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
pA (cid:4) pR
p

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
pP (cid:4) pB

Q3 ¼ B3 (cid:1)
p

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
pB (cid:4) pR

Q4 ¼ B4 (cid:1)

mit pR (cid:5) 0
s

ﬃﬃﬃ
2
q

Bi ¼ CDi (cid:1) Ai (cid:1)

Symmetry of the control edges:

Distribution of the volumetric ﬂows:

QP ¼ Q1 þ Q3 ¼ Q2 þ Q4 ¼ QR

The Eqs. 11.9 and 11.10 result in:

B2 ¼ B3

B1 ¼ B4

Q1 ¼ Q3

Q2 ¼ Q4

and

and

With static rack:

Q2 ¼ Q1 (cid:4) QA _xrð

Þ

_xr ¼ 0 : Q2 ¼ Q1

The Eqs. 11.11, 11.12, 11.13 and 11.15 yield:

Q1 ¼ Q2 ¼ Q3 ¼ Q4 ¼

QP

1
2

ð11:4Þ

ð11:5Þ

ð11:6Þ

ð11:7Þ

ð11:8Þ

ð11:9Þ

ð11:10Þ

ð11:11Þ

ð11:12Þ

ð11:13Þ

ð11:14Þ

ð11:15Þ

ð11:16Þ

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

Effective cylinder pressure:

From Eq. 11.4

From Eq. 11.6:

With Eq. 11.17:

Dp ¼ pA (cid:4) pB

pP ¼

þ pA

pP ¼

þ pB

Q2
1
B2
1

Q2
3
B2
3

Q2
1
B2
1

Q2
3
B2
3

þ DP þ pB ¼

þ pB

ð11:20Þ

Equations 11.9 and 11.16 yield for a static rack:
(cid:6)

(cid:5)

Dp ¼

1
4

Q2
P (cid:1)

1
B2
2

(cid:4)

1
B2
1

Substituting Eq. 11.8 yields:

Dp ¼

q
8 (cid:1) CD

Q2
P (cid:1)

(cid:5)

(cid:6)

1
A2
2

(cid:4)

1
A2
1

The valve curve is given as the pressure difference over the wheel torque, see
Fig. 11.57. The relationship between wheel torque and relative torsion angle of
input shaft and sleeve is given by the stiffness of the torsion bar. The outmost line
which is recorded for increasing actuation of the valve, i.e. for rising pressure

313

ð11:17Þ

ð11:18Þ

ð11:19Þ

ð11:21Þ

ð11:22Þ

Fig. 11.57 Example of a valve curve

314

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.58 Number of the bridges and distribution of the pressure zones in the sleeve

(ascending branch) is authoritative for the examination of a measured valve curve.
Friction in the input shaft moving relative to the sleeve and to the case produces
lower wheel torques on the descending branch at the respective pressure. The
difference between the ascending and the descending branch is the valve
hysteresis.

Real valves have three or four bridges arranged in parallel, so that the volu-
metric ﬂow splits evenly between them. On the one hand, this requires more
precision in manufacturing the valve parts because the cross sections at each
bridge have to be small to achieve the desired total cross section, and all bridges
have to be precisely synchronised. On the other hand, there are two advantages:

• Segments with high ﬂow pressure and low return pressure are alternating in the
inside of the sleeve. As mentioned before, the gap should be narrowest between
inner diameter of the sleeve and outer diameter of the input shaft to provide for
least leakage, however, nothing may stick. The maximum deformation of the
sleeve is less if it occurs in many, but small segments all around the valve, rather
than in a few large segments (see Fig. 11.58). A higher number of parallel
bridges allows designing a lower gap width, in particular for high-pressure
valves.

• A higher number of control edges enlarges the hydraulically moistened
perimeter. This enlargement improves the pressure energy drop. A lesser chance
for cavitation is the result, valve hisses are suppressed.

The accuracy by which a desired valve curve may be achieved is strongly

dependent on precise treatment of input shaft and sleeve.

11.10.2 External Inﬂuence on the Valve Indicator

The equations derived from the oriﬁce formula to deﬁne the pressure difference in
the piston over the actuation angle of the valve show the following dependence
(assuming a constant ﬂow coefﬁcient):

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

315

• The pressure rises quadratically with the volumetric ﬂow.
• The pressure rises quadratically with the shrinking cross section of the gap at the

control edges.

• The pressure rises linearly with the density of the ﬂuid.

De facto, the friction of the ﬂuid in narrow cross sections has an inﬂuence as
well, but it is not signiﬁcant for driving and shall not be discussed here. One effect
occurs at high viscosity of the ﬂuid that increases the pressure difference in the
piston with rising viscosity. In reality, this high viscosity is only present after a
cold start, in particular when mineral oil is used as a hydraulic ﬂuid. Their
inﬂuence is well perceptible in the car (lower wheel torques), but short-lived, on
account of the quick heating up of hydraulic power steering.

However, the density of the ﬂuid varies only slightly with temperature and

between different ﬂuids during operation, so that there is no signiﬁcant effect.

The valve curve is designed so that for a volumetric ﬂow, which is assumed to
be constant and transported by the pump, a given valve curve (pressure difference
in the piston over wheel torque) is generated by adjusting the gap at the control
edges as a function of the position of the valve, that belongs to the respective
wheel torque. According to the treatment process (sanding or stamping the control
edges of the input shaft), the accessible structures are limited. A change in size of
1 µm would already alter the valve curve at the control edges measurably,
therefore, the ﬁne tuning of the control edges is carried out after a preliminary
tuning in a simulation, applying an iterative process of making and testing.

Observing the given tolerance margins for the valve curve in serial production
is not accomplished by monitoring the shape of the parts and by controlling it in
the manufacturing process—already the required measurement of a corresponding
number of parts is not feasible with the needed accuracy. At least, the valve
characteristic of a mating of sleeve and input shaft should be measured during
balancement and checked for obervance of the tolerance margins before they are
attached to each other. For some scattering widths, a hydraulic measurement of the
parts against a reference part can make sense, so that input shafts or sleeves or both
are classiﬁed, and then favourable matings are selected for balancement and
mounting.

Installation in the gear changes the valve curve against its state during bal-
ancement. This is partially due to more friction at the input shaft (seal and sup-
port), partially also to minor tensions esp. between input shaft and sleeve that
result from tolerance margins of the parts and the steering case. These tensions
entail more friction and slightly change the relative position of the control edges of
the input shaft to the grooves of the sleeve. As already mentioned, variations of
1 µm have already a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the valve curve there, so that changes
can result which, if they are systematic, may be corrected by corresponding cor-
rections of the control edges and the balancement of the valve. However, a stiff
valve assembly with little free travel and high rigidity is favourable, to lower the
inﬂuence of outside factors affecting the valve.

316

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.59 Inﬂuence of the
volumetric ﬂow on the valve
characteristic

Other than the interfering inﬂuence which has to be considered to keep the given
valve indicator, there are also inﬂuences which can be used for a speciﬁc adaptation
of the valve characteristic. It can be efﬁciently altered, for example, by a variation
of the volumetric ﬂow, based on a given shape of the control edge, see Fig. 11.59.
This effect becomes usable in pumps with variable volumetric ﬂow, for
example, to generate a speed dependence of the required wheel torques, providing
low torques at low speed and high torques at high speed, to improve the control of
the steering manoeuvres. In turn, a pump powered by the internal combustion
engine has to transport a sufﬁcient volumetric ﬂow even at idling speed, to avoid
an uncomfortable increase of the wheel torques at this operation point which is
often used for parking manoeuvres.

11.10.3 Effects of Steering Movements: Volumetric Flow

Splitting

So far, only the static case, without any movement of the rack, was considered in
the examination of the valve indicator. If the rack is moved, the distribution of the
volumetric ﬂows in the Wheatstone bridge changes. A volumetric ﬂow is taken
from a place at the growing chamber (for example, between the bridges B1 and
B4) and added at another place by the shrinking chamber (for example, between
the bridges B2 and B3). These volumetric ﬂows to and from the cylinder depend
on the speed and surface of the piston.

Figure 11.55 shows an example: a movement of the rack towards the arrow at
the speed x and against the load Fr. The valve is actuated according to the
introduced load in such a way that the cross sections of the bridges B1 and B4 are
widened and those of the bridges B2 and B3 are shrunk, so that pA ≈ pP applies on
the high-pressure side and pB ≈ pR on the low-pressure side, i.e. the bridges B2 and
B3 delimit the high-pressure area from the low-pressure area. Due to the symmetry
of the control edges, the same volumetric ﬂow Q2 = Q3 is ﬂowing. The hydraulic
cylinder takes a volumetric ﬂow QA from the volumetric ﬂow Q1, so that
Q2 = Q1 − QA with QA depending on the rack speed x.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

Equations 11.11 and 11.14 imply:

Q2 ¼ Q3 ¼

ð

QP (cid:4) QA _xrð

Þ

Þ

Q1 ¼ Q4 ¼

ð

QP þ QA _xrð

Þ

Þ

1
2

1
2

By analogy with the Eqs. 11.21 and 11.22, Δp is:
"

Dp ¼

1
4

(cid:1)

ð

QP (cid:4) QA _xrð
B2
2

Þ2

Þ

(cid:4)

ð

QP þ QA _xrð
B2
1

#

Þ2
Þ

Dp ¼

q
8 (cid:1) cD

(cid:1)

QP (cid:4) QA _xrð
ð
A2
2

Þ2

Þ

(cid:4)

ð

QP þ QA _xrð
A2
1

Þ2

Þ

317

ð11:23Þ

ð11:24Þ

ð11:25Þ

ð11:26Þ

This means that for increasing rack speed, the volumetric ﬂow passing the two
closed bridges will drop. To maintain the same power assist, their cross sections
have to be reduced, the valve has to be actuated further, meaning more manual
power. If, ﬁnally, the complete volumetric ﬂow is absorbed by the steering
cylinder, no more volumetric ﬂow is ﬂowing through the bridges, there is no more
pressure drop there, whatever the cross section of the bridges. In this case the
power assist suddenly fails (‘Catch-the-pump’).

Steering systems with variable pump (e.g., EHPS) enable a recording of the
steering wheel rate, which the volumetric ﬂow of the pump may follow within the
scope of its efﬁciency. This helps to compensate the described effect. Esp. EHPS
systems can raise the issued volumetric ﬂow by lowering the system pressure, so
that a sudden failure of the power assist can be avoided. The power assist will only
drop proportionally to the rising steering speed when the limit of the system
performance is achieved.

11.10.4 Valve Noises: Hiss

The principle of the valve demands rather high volumetric ﬂows through narrow
gaps. This is accompanied by a perceptible pressure drop in the ﬂuid, entailing
cavitation, if there is an overﬂow into the low-pressure area. HF hissing sounds
develop, which are emitted as an airborne sound and as a structure-borne sound by
the input shaft of the gear into the steering column. Whether airborne sound enters
the passenger compartment depends on the installation position of the gear. The
shape of the steering column determines whether structure-borne sound advances
to the wheel and is emitted there as airborne sound.

The focus of gear development is on preventing the origin of noise. Attempts
are made to achieve at least a very steady curve of the ﬂow speed by corresponding
design of the control edges. The given valve curve should be achieved by a shape

318

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.60 Fluid ﬂow in the actuated valve—CFD simulation

of the control edge that generates the desired back pressure without zones of very
high ﬂow speed. The corresponding layout is supported by CFD simulations.

Figure 11.60 shows an example of the given 3D-geometry and the calculation

results in the form of ﬂow speed and local pressure proﬁles.

Another means to reduce hissing noises is a higher return pressure, e.g., the
speciﬁc use of throttles in the tank connection of the valve or in the runback. The
effect is a generally higher pressure level in the whole gearbox, reducing the
likelihood for cavitation even at consistently high ﬂow speed. On the other hand,
hydraulic losses are a drawback of this measure, the volumetric ﬂow has to be
transported by the pump against a higher pressure level. In the end, this increases
the fuel consumption of the vehicle and the thermal load of the whole hydraulic
power steering, so that additionally, an engine oil cooler may have to be used,
increasing the weight and the costs of the system.

To handle this problem, variable throttles were developed for the runback, these
are controlled over the ﬂow pressure. The effect of the throttle is thus limited to
those situations in which cavitation can occur in the valve. This function can be
integrated into the steering valve. This valve design is described in Sect. 11.11.4.
However, a complete elimination of the cavitation is not feasible. Therefore, a
second approach is to keep the remaining noise away from the driver and the
passengers.

11.10.5 Internal Leakage

Internal leakage denotes the volumetric ﬂow which ﬂows through the valve when
it is fully actuated, i.e. closed. This happens only at certain pressures, most of the
time at the peak system pressure. This volumetric ﬂow cannot be used to do work

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

319

Fig. 11.61 Effect of the gap heights in the valve on internal leakage

in the cylinder, it is therefore a loss to be avoided. However, in contrast to the
external leakage, internal leakage does not affect the function of the gear but only
its efﬁciency.

Internal leakage occurs at different places of the gear:

• At the control edges which leave a residual gap between input shaft and sleeve
even in the completely actuated state to avoid a contact of both parts and thus the
risk of sticking. Therefore the bridges cannot be completely closed, entailing a
permanent overﬂow by the valve from the high-pressure to the low-pressure
side.

• At the cylindrical mating faces of input shaft and sleeve that should prevent an
axial escape of the ﬂuid from the high-pressure area of the valve. A small gap
has to remain again to avoid contact of both parts so that the valve would be
stuck. Figure 11.61 shows the internal leakage as a function of the height of this
gap.

• At the sealing rings between sleeve and valve housings which should prevent an
overﬂow of the ﬂuid from a ring channel of the sleeve with high pressure into a
ring channel with low pressure or into the runback space of the valve housing.
With corresponding layout and correct assembly this leakage can to be assumed
to be zero.

• In the cylinder over the piston ring or the mounting of the piston by overﬂow of
the ﬂuid from the high-pressure side of the cylinder to the low-pressure side.
This leakage path can also be neglected if layout and assembly are correct.

Especially high-pressure steering systems with pumps feeding only a little ﬂow
to conserve energy, such as electrically powered hydraulic steering, high internal
leakage affects the efﬁciency of the steering system. Corresponding optimisation
helps to lower the internal leakage below 0.3 l/min at 100 bars.

320

J. Hullmann et al.

11.10.6 Modelling (Position Control Circuit)

The regulation-technical aspects of a hydraulic power steering can be modelled as
a position control circuit. A steering wheel angle is applied by the driver and
transferred to the input shaft. This steering wheel angle corresponds to a nominal
position of the rack. The external rack forces are acting as disturbance variables,
caused by righting moments at the wheels or drilling torques of the wheels when
steering at rest.

If there is a deviation between nominal and actual position of the rack, the
torsion bar is used to close the control circuit on two parallel paths. First, a force
proportional to the deviation is mechanically transferred to the rack by means of
the torsion bar and the steering pinion. The second path leads over the valve,
guiding a certain pressure into the corresponding cylinder chamber to support the
desired movement of the rack. In the quasi-stationary case, the level of the assist
power is determined by the valve curve. If the rack force is sufﬁcient, the rack
moves towards its nominal position. Indeed, the valve, being a controller in this
circuit, has no I portion, so that some deviation will always remain as a function of
the applying external forces.

This explains that even a steering system follows control rules with corre-
sponding natural frequencies and damping, in particular it has a stability limit. If
that limit is crossed, vibrations occur in the steering system which are perceptible
or audible. They are perceived by the driver as very disagreeable.

To precisely determine the stability limit, the dynamic behaviour of the steering

system is modelled and complemented by the following parts and effects:

• masses, elasticities and damping of

the different mechanically coupled

subsystems

• non-linearities, such as the friction between quite moving parts
• capacities and inductances of the hydraulic system originating from stretching

hoses under pressure and mass and ﬂow speed of the ﬂuid

• resistances to ﬂow in the hydraulic system from throttles or oriﬁces
• external factors, such as the control behaviour of the pump for varying pressures.

Hence, the parameter setting for the correct modelling of a steering system in
the simulation is rather complicated and assumes intensive recording of the
characteristics of the steering system in tests.

11.10.7 Damping: Instabilities

An essential factor for the stability reserve of the steering system is the gradient of
the valve characteristic (pressure difference in the cylinder over wheel torque)
which shows the ampliﬁcation in the control circuit. In principle, it is desirable to
lay out the valve characteristic in such a way that beyond a certain pressure, which

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

321

is never achieved during driving but only in a standing vehicle, the wheel torque
rises as little as possible. This enables a good feedback of the steering to the driver
in the operating range and, yet, quite low wheel torques during parking. On the
hand, this would require a very large gradient of the valve curve, which entails
instabilities in the steering system. Hence, in reality, one aims for a high gradient
that is sufﬁciently far from the stability limit.

To lift the stability limit even further, it is also possible to increase the damping
in the steering system. In the easiest case, a resistance to ﬂow is introduced into the
hydraulic system, e.g., a throttle in the runback line. It generates a resistance that is
dependent on the volumetric ﬂow and takes energy from the system to lower the
amplitudes for a non-stationary curve of the volumetric ﬂow. The pressing of all
seals at their mating faces, reinforced by the higher system pressure, entails
additional friction and dampening. The effect of the throttle is the bigger, the
higher the back pressure. However, the limits are narrow, because the throttle
losses decrease the efﬁciency of the steering system, increase the energy con-
sumption caused by the steering system and load it very strongly with heat.

There is also the possibility to throttle the volumetric ﬂow streaming out of the
cylinder chamber (see also Sects. 11.11.3 and 11.11.4). A damping proportional to
the rack speed results. In addition, there is less kickback of the steering system, i.e.
the gear transmits less external force impulses to the driver, caused, for example,
by road bumps. Mind that narrow limits are set here as well, because quick
steering movements generate much higher rack speeds than would occur in an
unstable situation, so that a throttle setting yielding sufﬁcient damping will often
intolerably limit the efﬁciency of the steering system in evasive manoeuvres.

11.11 Additional Hydraulic Systems

Additional systems for hydraulic steering are used to further improve its proper-
ties, based on the standard parts of the gear, both by resolving opposing target
situations and by shifting the limits of the system beyond those of the standard
layout.

11.11.1 Centring

The standard valve layout provides a power assist even for small wheel torques.
However, in the region which is relevant for straight driving with small course
corrections, the function of the hydraulic steering should be very similar to a
mechanical steering. The standard valve desing offers a driving of the input shaft
to the steering pinion with very high stiffness, this is favourable for precise
steering in the mentioned driving conditions. Nevertheless, this stiffness is deﬁned
by the torsion bar in the hydraulic steering. At the same time it has to permit a

322

J. Hullmann et al.

sufﬁcient relative torsion between input shaft and steering pinion to close the
corresponding gaps in the valve, without applying too high wheel
torques.
A fundamental disadvantage of the hydraulic steering develops. The layout of a
hydraulic power steering aims at using a very stiff torsion bar without raising the
wheel torques for cornering or parking too much.

To solve this conﬂict, a centring torsion bar is used, as depicted in Fig. 11.62,
both disassembled and assembled. A coarsely rigid driving is produced by a pre-
tense unit parallel to the torsion bar, until the wheel torque surpasses the centring
torque applied by the pretense unit. Then the input shaft starts to torsion relative to
the pinion, and the additional righting moment is applied by the torsion bar.

The depicted system is an example of such a parallel unit. It consists of two
rings, three calottes are introduced at angles of 120˚ into one of the facing sides.
The rings are arranged in such a way that the calottes lie on top of each other and
that a sphere lying in between them establishes a positive contact between both
rings.

If both rings are torsioned relative to each other, the sphere moves up a ramp in

both opposite calottes and presses the two rings apart.

One ring is connected to the sleeve of the valve and to the steering pinion by
grouting. The other ring disposes of axial grooves in its inner diameter. These
grooves correspond to axial grooves which are introduced, in addition, into the
input shaft. The positive contact is again established by spheres running in the
grooves between ring and input shaft. Therefore the rotation of the input shaft is
transferred to the ring, while the degree of freedom required for an axial movement
relative to the shaft is granted.

A centring force is exercised by a spring between the input shaft and the
attached ring. It is transferred by the spheres to the ring fastened on the sleeve.
A relative torsion between input shaft and sleeve and the attached rings converts

Fig. 11.62 Centring by means of a spring-loaded axial rotary clutch

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

323

Fig. 11.63 Wheel torque
over angle of torsion in the
comparison

the axial spring tension into a righting moment which acts with the righting
moment of the torsion bar. In contrast to the torsion bar, this mechanic may use the
shape of the calottes (ramp angle) and the pretension of the spring to set a torque
which is (almost) rigidly transferred from the input shaft to the steering pinion,
without relative torsion and, hence, without actuation of the valve. This results in
the desired centring, shown in Fig. 11.63 where it is compared to a steering valve
which has only a conventional torsion bar.

In addition, there is the option to choose spring stiffness and shape of the
calottes so that the effective valve stiffness and valve characteristic are even more
controlled, for example, by a degressive curve of the ramp angle.

There is also the option to use this mechanism for a parameterised steering that

may be speed-sensitive. This is discussed in Sect. 11.11.2.

An additional system for centring permits separating the operation ranges of the
valve for straight driving and cornering within certain limits and to optimise them
individually. This reduces conﬂicts and increases the degrees of freedom by
tuning.

By proper choice of the centring torque, the operation point of the power assist
is set in such a way that the steering during straight driving is very precise. Then
the torsion bar stiffness can be set lower, so that the wheel torques rise less steeply
to the parking range with increasing rack force than in a conventional system. This
improves the steering comfort in such situations.

Centrings for steering valves exist in many conﬁgurations which are also more
compact, easier and cheaper than the version discussed here. Their effect is similar
to the described solution.

11.11.2 Speed Dependence

Conﬂicts in valve tuning result from the vehicle speed, too. At very low speed and
in particular when parking, the steering should be very smooth to provide the best

324

J. Hullmann et al.

steering comfort, i.e. to offer high power assist for low wheel torques. At high
speed, the support has to be much lower to maintain sufﬁcient steering precision
and to avoid accidental jerking around of the steering. Yet the full power assist
should be available to the driver at need, for example, to keep control of the
steering if a front wheel has left the road and rolls on a soft shoulder. In the layout
of the vehicles, high-speed safety dominates esp. in Europe.

A speed-sensitive inﬂuencing of the valve characteristic grants a solution of this

conﬂict and more parking comfort.

There are two basic technical concepts: Setting the volumetric ﬂow in the
steering valve allows, as described, a variation of the wheel torque. This principle
is used only in systems which supply the gear according to demand by a variable
pump.

There are other systems that vary the applying wheel torque beyond a certain
relative torsion between input shaft and pinion, they set the effective stiffness of
the torsion bar, in other words, they adapt to the respective driving situation: A low
stiffness if high support is desired, a high stiffness if a driving with low elasticity is
important.

A conventional torsion bar with very low stiffness is complemented with a
parallel additional system in the construction, supplying an additional righting
moment that can be controlled from the outside.

A central part of such systems is a mechanism that transform the relative torsion
of the valve into a linear movement along the valve axis, as discussed in
Sect. 11.11.1 for the centring. The ring linked with the input shaft of the additional
system is here a hydraulic piston, the reaction piston, with a piston ring dividing
the space behind the valve drilling of the case into two chambers.

A spring sets a pretension of the system and a rigid driving at low wheel
torques, as in the centring system. Beyond this torque, the valve is actuated. The
torsion bar is not very stiff, so that the mechanically generated righting moment
rises only little. The actuation of the valve raises the ﬂow pressure. This pressure is
diminished by a driven magnetic valve and fed into the chamber between the
reaction piston and the input oil seal. The axial force generated by the pressure on
the reaction piston generates the main part of the righting moment in the valve.
The magnetic valve creates a ﬁxed ratio between ﬂow pressure and reaction
pressure as a function of electric power. This allows to set different righting
moments by modifying the ﬂow through the magnetic valve to a speciﬁc ﬂow
pressure.

Finally, an excess-pressure valve in the reaction chamber ensures that the wheel
torques do not rise too high if the full power assist is required in extreme situations
while the magnetic valve permits high reaction pressures at the same time. This is
also a part of the safety concept which adjusts the characteristic curve at the
highest reaction effect if the additional system has failed. Then the high-speed
response of the steering can be set while the driver is able to achieve the maximum
pressure without applying too high manual torques.

Figures 11.64 and 11.65 show this system and the possible variation of the

valve curve.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

325

Fig. 11.64 Representation of a system with hydraulic reaction

Fig. 11.65 Valve
characteristic of a system
with hydraulic reaction

It can be seen that the valve characteristic can be divided into three areas.
Around the middle position, the pretension of the centring spring acts, so that no
power assist builds up. At higher wheel torques, the cylinder pressure over the
wheel torque rises about linearly, its gradient depends on the electric power of the
magnetic valve. The characteristic curve with the lowest wheel torques (often
called parking characteristic [no translation found]) uses only a low reaction
pressure to prevent the reaction piston from lifting. For the characteristic curves
with a more level gradient, a steep increase of the gradient is then observed beyond

326

J. Hullmann et al.

a certain wheel torque. A further rise of the reaction pressure is prevented by the
excess-pressure valve in the reaction chamber.

This design provides the most freedom in valve layout by tuning the shape of
the control edge at the valve, the torsion bar stiffness, the shape of the calotte,
stiffness and pretension of the centring spring, the excess-pressure valve in the
reaction chamber and the ratio of reaction pressure to ﬂow pressure. This is
opposed by a considerable additional expenditure of parts for the valve and the
whole steering system, in particular the magnetic valve, its electric connection and
an ECU, to supply it with power according to the given parameters, such as the
driving speed.

More internal leakage occurs, because the volumetric ﬂow in the reaction
chamber is taken from the inlet. This additional leakage rises with the reaction
pressure and has to be considered during the layout of the hydraulic pump.

A more simple system falls back on the same mechanics, but pressurises the
piston from the other side. Here the space between reaction piston and input oil
seal is directly connected with the runback. The exhausting ﬂuid from the valve,
though, is still dammed up by an electrically adjustable throttle valve, before it can
ﬂow away into the steering runback. The centring spring is powerful in this sys-
tem. The reaction piston generates an opposing force to the centring force of the
spring, as a function of the back pressure caused by the electrically adjustable
throttle valve.

The variation of the valve curve is achieved mainly by a change of its dead
band. The setting for high speed does not dam up the runback, and the full centring
force of the spring acts. For parking, the centring force of the spring is almost
completely eliminated. However, the slope of the valve characteristic is also
determined by the torsion bar stiffness and, in addition, by the form of the calottes.
It cannot be varied.

This system is a little cheaper because it does not fall back on an adjustable
pressure converter but only on an adjustable throttle. Its disadvantage is the
accumulation of the whole volumetric ﬂow in the runback, resulting in higher
losses and more heating of the system in driving situations when only low wheel
torques are aimed at.

11.11.3 Damping Valves

This additional system has the purpose to reduce the steering kickback when force
impulses are initiated from the outside. This happens, essentially by integrating a
steering damper into the rack-and-pinion steering, as was occasionally used in
steering systems with a ball-recirculating gear with nut.

The cylinder and the rack with piston assume the supply of the power assist and
the function of
the identical parts of a steering damper. To receive a
speed-sensitive damping, the volumetric ﬂow leaving the cylinder chamber has to
be throttled, so that a force develops against the direction of movement. However,

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

327

Fig. 11.66 Cylinder with hydraulic connections and damping valve

the streaming volumetric ﬂow may not be throttled to avoid cavitation and aeration
in the cylinder chamber.

The following conﬂict results: An effective damping of external force impulses
requires a cutback which would be so powerful that a desired quick steering
movement could not achieve the required rack speed even when the peak pressure
was issued into a cylinder chamber. Thus it would not support evasive manoeuvres
accordingly. This has to be counteracted by limiting the pressure difference from
the throttle with an excess-pressure valve.

Hence, a damping valve like in Fig. 11.66 is attached directly to the hydraulic

connections of the cylinder and combines the function of three hydraulic parts:

• The check valve that allows ﬂuids to stream unhindered
• The throttle which builds up a pressure dependent on the volumetric ﬂow as the

• The excess-pressure valve which limits the peak back pressure caused by the

ﬂuid leaves

throttle.

Figure 11.67 shows one example of a characteristic curve for a damping valve

passed in damping direction.

11.11.4 Steering Valves with Damping Qualities

Proper design enables integrating the functions of the damping valves into the
steering valve to a great extent. Figure 11.68 shows the conﬁguration of such a
valve.

The purpose is to activate the throttle function only at need, i.e. when cornering,

when the strongest kickback occurs.

At the same time such steering valves offer a solution for hydraulic instabilities
in the steering system. The conﬂicts between damping in the steering system and
efﬁciency and load, mentioned in Sect. 11.10.7, can be resolved this way. The
throttles are activated only when instabilities can occur. The usual valve curves

328

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.67 Characteristic curve of a damping valve

Fig. 11.68 Steering valve with deﬁned damping by additional control edges

have a ﬂat gradient around their neutral position, so that there is a sufﬁcient
stability reserve, even without additional measures. The biggest part of driving
takes place here. Passing into the parking range, at high pressure, makes a gentle
introduction of the throttle desirable.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

329

This function can be integrated into the steering valve by an additional control
edge pair, passed by the ﬂuid before it leaves the valve and streams into the
runback.

In the neutral position of the valve, these control edges leave a wide gap for the
discharge of the ﬂuid. If the valve is operated,
the control edges on the
high-pressure side close like those of a conventional valve, while those on the
low-pressure open even further. On the low-pressure side, the additional control
edges reduce the cross section of the gap if the valve is strongly actuated. The
discharging ﬂuid is throttled. The throttle is not activated on the high-pressure side.
Therefore a slight counterpressure against the high working pressure in the
accordingly pressurised cylinder chamber is generated in the opposite chamber. Its
level depends on the applying volumetric ﬂow. Since oil is squeezed out of the
attached chamber as the rack moves, the volumetric ﬂow rises proportionally to the
rack speed, so that a speed-sensitive damping results from an instationary move-
ment of the rack, effectively reducing the vibrations. The intensity of the throttle
effect is controlled by the layout of the additional control edges.

11.11.5 Pressure Limitation in the Rack-and-Pinion End

Position

An undesirable effect of hydraulic gears is the peak system pressure applying as
the steering is held at the end position. The steering valve is fully modulated then
and allows only a small volumetric ﬂow to pass, while the pump works against the
peak pressure and conducts almost the entire transported volumetric ﬂow through
the excess-pressure valve back into the tank.

This causes a mechanical load of the steering system by acting forces and
pressures. It also causes a very quick heating of the hydraulic ﬂuid. Especially in
pumps driven by the internal combustion engine,
the permissible maximum
temperature of the ﬂuid can be passed within less than a minute if very high engine
speeds apply at the same time. Adjusting and maintaining this operation mode is
ultimately an abuse of the car, but it cannot be excluded for the whole range of end
customers, and is difﬁcult to prove if the customer complains about a failing
system.

Another problem develops because the driver suddenly imposes a high load for
the pump when the steering is already at the end position, the valve is in neutral
position (no applying wheel torque) and the driver steers towards the end position.
If the engine is idling, the control of the idling speed cannot always compensate
this sudden additional load fast enough—there is the risk that the engine shuts
down as a result of the steering movement. This can be avoided by raising the
idling speed. But this signiﬁcantly increases the standard consumption of the
vehicle, on account of the idle running phases which are frequent in the test cycle.

330

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.69 Cylinder with overﬂow grooves in the piston end positions

A practical solution of these problems is a pressure limitation at the end
position. This is made by inserting overﬂow grooves into the cylinder near the end
positions of the piston. They enable a leakage oil ﬂow from the high-pressure side
of the cylinder to the low-pressure side if the piston crosses them, see Fig. 11.69.
Depth and number of the grooves are set in such a way that all the volumetric
ﬂow given off by the pump is passing through them with the desired rest pressure.
A very low rest pressure is aimed at. It is limited, nevertheless, by the need to
provide a sufﬁcient hydraulic rack force for steering the opposite way, away from
the stop unit, so that the wheels are moving without additional wheel torques from
the driver (manual steer). The required force is lower than that needed for steering
towards the stop unit, because of the weight righting of the steering.

The thermal load of the steering system is signiﬁcantly lowered by a pressure
limitation at the end stop, so that additional engine oil coolers can be renounced in
most cases. Part of the add-on costs for this system is thus compensated. Besides
less loss at the end position, this is also an effect of better thermal absorption,
because the pump does not conduct the hot hydraulic ﬂuid directly to the tank, but
through the pipes to the gear, then through the valve and both cylinder chambers
and then through the runback to the tank. It can emit heat this way.

Another advantage is that noises from steering at the stop unit are reduced by
the lower pressure. To be precise: mechanical noise from touching the end position
and hydraulic noise which can be caused, otherwise, by the high pressure gradient.
If this noise occurs in gears without pressure limitation with an annoying intensity
it has to be eliminated. To do so, an additional elastic element between the end
position in the gear and the axial joint of the tie rod is inserted.

A limiting factor for the application of such a system is the layout of the chassis
structure. The righting moments applied by the axle at the full steer-angle are often
very low, especially in vehicles with front-wheel drive. There is a risk that the
remaining support is not sufﬁcient to steer away from the end position at need.
That is perceived by the driver as a subjectively unpleasant ‘sticking’ of the
steering.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

331

11.12 Ball-Circulation Gears with Nuts/Utility Vehicle

Steering Systems

11.12.1 Fields of Application

The ball-recirculating gear with nut is the traditional form of steering which
converts a rotation of the steering wheel into a swivel of the steering arm which is
transferred by the track and tie rods to the wheels.

This transmission by leverage is also the main advantage of their modern
applications: vehicles whose guided axle is rigid are almost always equipped with
ball-recirculating gears with nut. By a corresponding layout of the steering
structure they permit mounting the gear to the frame and following the compli-
cated spatial movements of the rigid axle with little kinematic repercussions on the
steering system. This applies in particular for axles which are attached only by leaf
springs.

However, a rack-and-pinion steering has to be connected solidly with the body
of a rigid axle. This produces conﬂicts with package and steering kinematics and
demands for a very loadable and highly ﬂexible attachment of the steering column.
The joints in the steering column have to cover a wide range of angles. Their
length offset should have a very high stroke, so that the joints are able to follow
any possible relative movement between the axle with gear and the frame or even
that of a driver’s cab that is elastically supported on the frame.

Nowadays, vehicles with rigid front axles are mainly found in two categories:

• cross-country vehicles destined for off-road service that should admit extremely

• utility vehicles of the middle and heavy class with permissible front axle loads of

high axle crossing

more than 2 t.

In typical conﬁgurations, either the gear is mounted to the body frame on the
driver’s side, the corresponding front wheel is connected by a track rod and both
front wheels are connected by the tie rod (shown in Fig. 11.70), or the gear is
placed in the middle of the car and both front wheels are coupled directly by tie
rods.

No sufﬁciently large rack-and-pinion gears are available for coaches with
independent suspension in the front axle. A steering quadrangle is usually used for
applications in these and for the rare use of ball-recirculating gears with nut in
passenger cars. One more track rod is sometimes used as a connecting element in
coaches, on account of the driver being seated far in front of the front axle.

All arrangements have in common that they contain many elements which
introduce friction and elasticities or even free travel into the steering system. They
affect in general the steering feel and precise steering. Lots of leverage elements
also indicate an expensive steering system, so that the ball-recirculating gear with
nut was displaced by the rack-and-pinion steering wherever it is available as a
feasible alternative.

332

J. Hullmann et al.

Fig. 11.70 Connection between gear and front wheels in utility vehicles with rigid front axle

Fig. 11.71 Ball-recirculating gear with nut in a cutaway view

11.12.2 Conﬁguration of Ball-Recirculating Gears with Nut

Ball-recirculating gears with nut are produced only in an integrated module, so that
the mechanical part of the gear and the hydraulic part are gathered in a common
case. This module is also called integral steering or block steering.

The ball-recirculating gear with nut, of which Fig. 11.71 shows a sample cut-

away view, can be separated into the following subassemblies:

• Valve with valve housing and input shaft
• Steering shaft, linked with the valve

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

333

• Ball nut and piston, linked with the steering shaft by balls
• Steering shaft with dovetailing segment.

The input shaft, linked with the steering column, and the valve are similar to
shaft and valve of a hydraulic rack-and-pinion steering. It is another rotary disk
valve with input shaft, sleeve and torsion bar. However, the valve is designed for
much higher volumetric ﬂows and higher working pressures, compliant with the
purpose of the gear, so that, for example, the circulatory cross sections are wider
and the walls of the sleeve are thicker.

There the spindle follows instead of the pinion, it is connected to the steering
nut. A rotation of the spindle is converted into a translation of the ball nut and the
positive connection between them is established by recirculating balls, so that the
friction is low. The opposite end of the ball nut is a piston in a cylindrical part of
the steering case. The cylinder chamber, located there, is connected by a channel
in the case with the corresponding ring groove of the sleeve, while the other ring
groove is connected directly with the whole remaining cylinder space. Waste-gate
valves are in the ball nut, they are operated if the piston approaches the end
position. They open a transfer canal, conducting ﬂuid from the high-pressure side
to the low-pressure side with a deﬁned rest pressure (cf. Sect. 11.11.5). This avoids
unrequired loads of the whole steering system when the steering is kept at the end
position.

The movement of the ball nut is transferred by a dovetailing to the steering
shaft and then produces a swivel of the tightly pressed-on steering arm at the
outside of the case. The dovetailing has a constant or a variable gear ratio,
according to the conﬁguration of the gear.

11.12.3 Comparison Between Ball-Recirculating Gear
with Nut and Rack-and-Pinion Steering

Resemblances between a ball-recirculating gear with nut and a rack-and-pinion
steering are only found in the steering valve which is made in the same manner.
All together, the ball-recirculating gear with nut is much more robust and
suitable for applications with hard conditions or that have to merge high reliability
with a long service life, as, for example, utility vehicles, which are usually laid out
for a road performance of 1 million km.

One reason for the high robustness is the sealing system with only one radial
high-pressure oil seal at the steering shaft. The shaft is only rotating there and,
hence, easier to be sealed than a rack with two high-pressure seals against which it
is linearly moving. This allows for peak working pressures of 185 bars, soon to
become 200 bars.

A ball-recirculating gear with nut offers a better damping against external
impacts as well, chieﬂy because of
the
ball-recirculating gear with nut. It is higher for movements applied by the input

the mechanical efﬁciency of

334

J. Hullmann et al.

shaft than for repercussions of the ball nut, so that these are damped by more
friction. Finally, the ball-recirculating gear with nut is more compact and, hence,
suggests to cover a wide spectrum of vehicle applications with few standard
products. Then any required individual adaptations are carried out in the design of
the steering linkage and the support for the steering. This way, the ﬁnancial beneﬁts
of mass manufacturing may be exploited even for speciﬁed applications which are
built only in small numbers, as is common with some utility vehicle models.

This is opposed by drawbacks of the whole steering system. Including the
required steering linkages, a steering system with ball-recirculating gear with nut
is much heavier and, at least when build in great numbers, more expensive than a
rack-and-pinion steering. The huge number of transmission elements between
steering column and wheels and their elasticities and frictions at the joints affect
the steering feel—a rack-and-pinion steering permits a more immediate perception
of events at the wheels. These factors are important for passenger cars where the
advantages of the ball-recirculating gear with nut are limited. That
is why
rack-and-pinion steerings are almost always used in passenger cars.

11.12.4 Technical Data and Parameters

See (Table 11.6).

11.12.5 Additional Systems

On account of the equal conﬁguration of the steering valve, the respective systems
for centring the torsion bar (Sect. 11.11.1) and speed-sensitive control of the valve
characteristic (Sect. 11.11.2) are also found in ball-recirculating gears with nut.
They are somewhat similar to the conﬁgurations for rack-and-pinion steering.

Valve designs that introduce speciﬁc damping into the gear (Sect. 11.11.4) can
be transferred to ball-recirculating gears with nut as well. In utility vehicle
applications, they are more important than in passenger cars, on account of the
high power assist and the resulting high power of the valve.

Damping valves (Sect. 11.11.3) are not required, due to the mentioned damping
qualities of the ball-recirculating gear with nut against external impacts. A pres-
sure limitation at the end stop (Sect. 11.11.5) is already included in the standard
layout. One special additional system found in gears for heavy utility vehicles with
several guided axles is an option to connect an auxiliary cylinder.

Instead of designing large special gears for these vehicles, which are usually
produced in quite small numbers, the required additional steering force is introduced
by coupling an auxiliary cylinder to the steering linkage near the second guided axle,
that is required anyhow. This cylinder is supplied over the steering valve, since the
valve housing has hydraulic connections linked to the corresponding ring channels

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

335

Table 11.6 Some parameters of hydraulic ball-circulation gears with nut
Vehicle class

Cross-country
vehicles

Light
utility
vehicle

2.5
1,700

Moderately
heavy
utility
vehicle

5.5
5,000
715–185
12

Heavy
utility
vehicle

Construction
vehicles

7.5
6,500

9.5
8,500

16

25

1.8
1,200

Front axle load (t)
Maximum source torque (Nm)
Maximum working pressure (bar) 120
Volumetric ﬂow (l/min)
Swivelling angle output shaft
Gear ratio
Temperature

8

6
±90˚ to ±100˚
Approx. 16:1 to approx. 26:1
−40 to ?120 ˚C

of the valve sleeve. This permits using the same gear that is found in cars with one
guided axle, except for this small modiﬁcation, and keeping the load of individual
parts very low by distributing the power supply according to demand.

11.12.6 Dual-Circuit Steering

Heavy utility vehicles with very high front axle loads or two front axles may fail to
observe the registration regulations for operation at power assist failure when the
steering is used mechanically exclusively. The dual-circuit steering, whose sche-
matic hydraulic diagram is shown in Fig. 11.72, maintains a sufﬁcient volumetric
ﬂow of the steering oil supply even when one steering circuit has failed.

Normally only the pump powered by the internal combustion engine (1) is
connected with the gear (4/5) by the dual-circuit transfer valve (6). A slight cut-
back of the volumetric ﬂow in this valve helps to install a control pressure which
actuates the valve against a spring into the displayed position. The runback leads
over this valve into the tank as well. The tank has two separate chambers which are
interconnected above the least level.

The auxiliary pump (2) is mechanically connected to the live axle, usually at the
output shaft of the drive gearbox. This helps to ensure that the required volumetric
ﬂow can be provided even when the internal combustion engine has failed, as long
as the vehicle moves. Normally, the transported volumetric ﬂow is conducted by
the dual-circuit transfer valve back into the tank (3). A slight cutback is present
here as well. The developing back pressure is monitored to warn the driver if the
second control circuit fails (he or she would not notice otherwise) and to request
stopping the vehicle.

If the primary control circuit fails, there is no control pressure at the dual-circuit
valve. Then the spring adjusts the valve in the second switch position. Now the gear
is fed by the second control circuit, a leak loss over the main pump is prevented by
the check valve (8). The driver is warned and asked to stop the vehicle.

336

J. Hullmann et al.

Cylinder chamber A

Cylinder chamber B

1 Main pump (internal combustion engine) 5 Steering valve 

2 Auxiliary pump (gearbox output)

6 dual-circuit transfer valve 

3 Tank with two chambers

7 Excess-pressure valve auxiliary

4 Steering cylinder

circuit 

8 Check valve of the main pump

Fig. 11.72 Scheme of a dual-circuit steering

The gear itself and all its parts are considered sufﬁciently failsafe, so that no

further redundancy is necessary.

11.13 Requirements for a Hydraulic Gear

The general requirements for function and strength of hydraulic gears are, in the
end, an extension of the requirements for mechanical rack-and-pinion gears with
speciﬁc tests of the steering hydraulics.

Hence, only the additional requirements shall be discussed here.

11.13.1 Functional Requirements

The function tests are complemented by measurements of the valve characteristic
and the internal leakage. Both were discussed in Sect. 11.10.

11 Mechanical and Hydraulic Gears

337

11.13.2 Strength Requirements

11.13.2.1 Static Strength: Burst Pressure Test

The static strength of the hydraulic system is tested by introducing a volumetric
ﬂow into the gear when the steering valve is closed. The ﬂow is controlled in such
a way that the pressure rises steadily. The gear has to remain tight, up to the peak
working pressure including a safety reserve, and it has to stay fully functional. In
addition, the burst pressure, i.e. the point at which a part of the steering hydraulics
fails, has to lie above a certain limit value, say, at least three times the peak
working pressure.

11.13.2.2 Dynamic Strength: Pressure Pulsation

The dynamic strength of the steering hydraulics is tested by generating pressure
pulses in the gear. This may be done either by actuating the steering valve when
the rack is blocked or by introducing a varying rack force. A high number of
pressure pulses is desired, hence, the excitation should be high-frequency (5 Hz or
more). The gear has to be fully operatable after this test.

11.13.3 Environmental Requirements: Cold Start Test

An important quality of hydraulic gearboxes to be checked is the sealing under
cold circumstances. As described, seals lose their ﬂexibility when it is very cold,
and they may not be able to sufﬁciently follow movements of the rack, the steering
pinion or the input shaft any more. A cold start simulation test to check whether
hydraulic oil is leaking under these conditions.

Down to a temperature of −20 ˚C, this must not happen at all. At lower tem-
peratures, most tests run down to −40 ˚C, some millilitres of leakage are tolerable,
according to the purpose of the vehicle.
Tie Rods

12.1 Introduction

The tie rod connects the steering gear with the wheel carrier and transfers the gear
stroke to wheel carrier and front wheel.

From the kinematic point of view, this is a crank mechanism, with the rack
acting as a slider and with the wheel carrier acting as a rotating member
(Fig. 12.1). The tie rod is the coupling member (Heißing and Ersoy 2007). At the
same time, the stroke of the wheel has to be enabled. A three-dimensional
movement develops; hence, the design of the mounting points of the tie rod as ball
joints has to have suitable degrees of freedom. It is due to the lever ratios (length of
the tie rod vs. distance of the tie rod mounting at the wheel carrier to the carrier’s
axis of rotation) and to the carrier’s angeled axis of rotation that the appearing
angles are bigger at the wheel carrier than they are at the gear.

A common modern tie rod consists of an inner and an outer joint. The inner
joint (near the gear) is also called the axial joint. The outer joint (near the wheel) is
also known as the radial joint. Both joints are adjustably connected to each other.
Most of the time, the joints should have low friction torques, to achieve good
responsiveness of the chassis and low actuating forces.
Fig. 12.1 Interaction of gear, tie rod and wheel carrier. Source ZF Lemförder GmbH

12.2 Basic Variants

12.2.1 Tie Rods for Ball-and-Nut Steering

In the ball-and-nut gear, the turning of the ball-and-nut steering wheel is converted
by a screw wheel with a spiral groove, in which the balls roll (Stoll 1992). The left
and right tie rods are connected by a middle bar. The movement of the steering
wheel is converted into a yaw and transferred to the middle bar. Space and costs
restrict
structure today mainly to big commercial vehicles, when
rack-and-pinion steerings cannot be used, e.g., because of the high loads. The
rather slender middle bar will under certain circumstances be beneﬁcial, too, e.g.,
with regard to ground clearance.

this

Figure 12.2 shows a front axle with a ball-and-nut gear. Tie rod implementa-

tions of this design are shown in Fig. 12.3.

12.2.2 Tie Rods for Rack-and-Pinion Steering

For passenger cars and transporters, this design is currently used most frequently,
esp. because of its rather low costs (Fig. 12.4). Hence, the remainder of this
chapter will only discuss this design in more detail; in any case, much of the
content also applies to tie rods for ball-and-nut gears.

In rack-and-pinion steerings, the steering movement is transferred by wheel,
gear and tie rods to the front wheel carrier and ultimately to the tyres. The tie rods
are directly attached to the gear rack. In contrast to the ball-and-nut gear, here, the
rack assumes the function of the middle bar as well. Moreover, the inner joint is
protected by the gaiter of the gear, so that no distinct sealing system is needed.

12 Tie Rods

341

Tie rod

Joining

ball-and-nut gear/
drop arm

Middle bar

Fig. 12.2 Front axle and ball-and-nut gear. Source ZF Lemförder GmbH

Wheel
carrier
attachment

ball-and-nut
gear/drop
arm attachment

Tie rod

l

Middle bar

Fig. 12.3 Sample structures of tie rods for ball-and-nut gears. Source ZF Lemförder GmbH

Outer joint

Inner joint

Fig. 12.4 Sample implementation of a typical tie rod for passenger cars. Source ZF Lemförder
GmbH

The whole design of a rack-and-pinion steering entails quite short tie rod
lengths of 250–350 mm. Deﬂecting and rebounding of the wheel result in high
tilting angles at the joints of both wheel and rack. These big angles cause high
requirements on the design of the tie rods.

342

D. Adamczyk et al.

12.3 Tie Rod Joints

12.3.1 Inner Joint (Axial Joint)

The inner joint tilts in the steering process and during jounce and rebound, due to
the arrangement of the tie rods at the rack, while the outer joint essentially tilts
upon jounce and rebound but turns upon steering (Fig. 12.5).

The inner joint has a thermoplastic liner as its bearing element—the ball race;
an additional elastomer ring is inserted here. The elastomer ring seen in Fig. 12.6
acts like a spring, counteracting free travel in the joint from overloading and wear
of the ball race by readjusting itself. Loading capacity and robustness are thereby
increased for the service life. The joint is sealed-for-life.

Ball stud and housing are mainly produced in cold forging. Cold forged parts
improve the geometrical accuracy, so that only the ball of the ball stud has to be
processed by additional machining, keeping the material allowance very low
(Landgrebe et al. 2001). The ball stud has a gaiter support groove to accept the
gear gaiter. The groove can either be coldly reshaped or machined in a separate

Elastomer

ball race
(Thermoplastic)

ball stud

Threaded connection
for Outer joint 

tilt

Bellow support groove

Threaded connection 
for rack

Fig. 12.5 Rotary and tilting movement of an outside joint

Fig. 12.6 Design of an inner
joint. Source ZF Lemförder
GmbH

turn

tilt

(a)

(b)

343

12 Tie Rods

Fig. 12.7 Effective surface
of an axial tie rod bearing in
push and pull direction. a
Effective bearing surface
towards pressure. b Effective
bearing surface towards
pulling direction (joint
opening)

step (Fig. 12.6). In contrast to the sealing system of the outer joint, only a static
sealing is necessary here; there is, hence, no relative movement between ball stud
and gaiter in the sealed zone. During operation, the gaiter is stressed only by its
own linear expansion. Only when the toe is adjusted by turning the pivot, the gaiter
glides in the support groove.

The inner joint commonly requires a wider diameter than the outer joint. The
resulting (effective) surface of a joint support is smaller towards the tie rod
opening, and the tie rod can support less load in this direction. However, the inner
joint is loaded just in the pulling direction of the ball stud, towards the housing
opening (Fig. 12.7). By contrast, the outer joint is loaded vertically to the ball stud;
accordingly, the resulting surface of the bearing is much bigger towards the load.
The joint housing and the bearing are protected against environmental inﬂu-
ences by the gaiter. Hence, it has to meet only few requirements for surface
protection, but the shaft of the ball stud is exposed to corresponding inﬂuences.
A few common kinds of surface protection for ball studs of inner joints are, e.g.,
cathodic immersion painting (CIL) with a resistance of 240 h salt spray test, zinc
iron (ZnFe) with 480 h and zinc nickel (ZnNi) with 720 h.

12.3.1.1 Ventilation Function of the Inner Joint

A steering movement compresses and relaxes the gaiter alternatingly on the right
and left side of the gear. Without integrated pressure compensation, the enclosed
air would produce high or low pressure in the steering gaiter. These different
pressure ratios would subsequently cause leakages at the gear.

In the past, the function of the pressure compensation was maintained by

linking both sides of the gear with separate air conduits.

An integrated function has been produced for some years, and ‘air-leading
grooves’ are now introduced into the axial tie rod housing. These grooves may be
part of the housing manufacturing, without additional expenditure, and they enable
a pressure compensation across the hollow steering rack. A least overall cross
section is necessary in the integrated state to allow for the pressure compensation.
Three grooves will meet this demand perfectly. The resulting discontinuous thread
can be safely made and screwed (Fig. 12.8).

Drilled ventilation holes in axial joint housings are still in use sometimes,
instead of ‘air-leading grooves’; they require an additional step of housing man-
ufacturing, though.

344

D. Adamczyk et al.

Fig. 12.8 Air-leading
grooves in the inner joint.
Source ZF Lemförder GmbH.
a Hollow rack. b Air-leading
grooves

hollow rack

air-leading grooves

12.3.2 Outer Joint (Radial Joint)

Figure 12.9 shows different versions of housings for outer joints. The housing
design is substantially limited by available space, requiring either straight and
simple or several times stepped housings for the outer joints. Bigger and broader
wheels have restricted the use of straight housings to rare applications.

The structure of the joint and its interacting parts are shown in Fig. 12.10; this
joint as well is sealed-for-life. It is joined to the wheel carrier by the ball stud,

Fig. 12.9 Design example of outer joints. Source ZF Lemförder GmbH

Fig. 12.10 Construction of
an outer joint. Source ZF
Lemförder GmbH

Filler cap

Spherical 
liner

Seal gaiter

Housing

Retainers 

Ball studs

12 Tie Rods

345

mainly by means of a conical seat and screwing (see also Sect. 12.7). In contrast to
the inner joint, the housing of the outer joint is chieﬂy made in hot forging.

Hot forging allows for complicated geometry, for example, stepped housings.
However, the housing has to be machined later to achieve, e.g., the necessary
tolerance margins in the bearing area. Simpler housings can be produced by cold
forging. Coldly forged housings need hardly any machining; hence, they are
cheaper.

The outer joint is exposed to powerful ambient inﬂuences, since it is close to the
wheel. Hence, galvanic coating is increasingly common for surface protection, e.
g., ZnFe and ZnNi.

The ball studs as well are coated more and more frequently to enable robust

sealing (see Sect. 12.5.4).

12.4 Toe Adjustment

Axial joint and radial joint are connected by a shifting thread. It allows to adjust
the toe of the wheels. The best adjustment of the toe serves to improve a stable
straight course and to lessen tyre wear, among other things.

All the solutions shown in Fig. 12.11 are in use today, depending on function
and assembly requirements. The toe adjustment is mainly automated, so that any
of the mentioned screwing options may be chosen,
in accordance with the
assembly process of the vehicle manufacturer.

12.5 Requirements and Design

12.5.1 Design Regulations for Tie Rods

Basically, the sizing of tie rods observes a relationship between vehicle weight or
axle load, rack force and joint sizes used. Figure 12.12 shows this relationship. The
yellow area marks the transition zone. Apart from the outer forces acting on the tie
rod or its joints, the joint size is mainly ﬁxed by the greatest angles and the highest
operating temperatures.

12.5.2 Design of the Tie Rod with Regard to Component

Strength

The component strength is the most important feature of a tie rod. If it breaks, the
active chain of the pull/push forces is interrupted, and de facto, the vehicle cannot

346

D. Adamczyk et al.

Design solutions for the toe adjustment:

D. Tangential screw connection
(vertical clamping, eases automation)

n
n
o
o
i
i
t
t
c
c
n
n
u
u
F
F

t
t
r
r
o
o
f
f
f
f

E
E

C. Two-piece cone ring
(more optimisation and functional separation)

B. One-piece cone ring
(optimised clamp effect)

A. Counter connection
(the most frequent application, cheap)

Fig. 12.11 Designs of toe adjustment. Source ZF Lemförder GmbH

be steered any more. To prevent this from occurring, CAE methods are used for
the design and the parts are controlled by extensive tests. The tie rods are validated
ﬁrst by means of FEA (Fig. 12.13), then test on physical parts and ﬁnally validated
on-board. The loading conditions, distinguished by operation load, special events
and abuse, are relevant for the design. The operation load must not permanently
deform the metallic parts, but the loading conditions Special events and Abuse
may tolerate or even welcome any remaining distortions (see ‘Damage chain’ in
Sect. 12.9.1). Yet the mechanical link between gear and wheel carrier has to
survive any loading condition.

Figure 12.14 shows the relationship. The red characteristic curve marks the load
requirements. For the tie rod, they are deduced from the vehicle loads it is exposed
to. The green curve above shows the stress-number curve of the tie rod which is
accordingly above the load requirement. The sketched lines mark the beginning
plastic deformation and, ﬁnally, the area in which the tie rod may or should snap.
The tie rod has to remain operable even under loads from special events. This is
ensured by using high-strength, ductile materials for the relevant parts. Steels are

12 Tie Rods

347

Vehicle class

Allocation of the joint size

Steering 
assistance 
force [N]

Superclass

Uppper 
middleclass 

Middleclass 

Lower 
middleclass 

Compact cars

15000

14000

13000

12000

11000

10500

10000

9500

9000

8500

8000

7500

7000

6500

Outer joint

Inner joint

∅22
∅26

∅25
∅29

∅27
∅32

Fig. 12.12 Relationship between vehicle size, steering assistance force and joint or ball sizes to
be selected, Runge et al. (ATZ 10/2009)

0,30%

0,16%

]

N

[

Plastic deformation at Fmax

[mm]

Look at a distortion of 10 mm

Fig. 12.13 Shows a simulation of a buckling force. Source ZF Lemförder GmbH

348

D. Adamczyk et al.

Fig. 12.14 Relationship between the loading conditions operation load, special events and abuse.
Source ZF Lemförder GmbH

used, but also aluminium materials, they are a lightweight alternative. Whether
light materials are applicable, depends in particular on the free space on-board (see
also Sect. 12.8).

12.5.3 Design of the Joint Bearing

Many modern passenger car joints have a plastic bearing liner made of a ther-
moplastic material (plastic with linear macromolecules, Menges 1970). In the
operating mode, polyoxymethylene, or POM for short, enables a good compromise
between the requirements for loading capacity, low movement torques, tolerance
margins and zero backlash. Polyetheretherketone (PEEK) is used for very high
temperatures. Composite materials and metal bearing liners are also used in special
housings (Heißing and Ersoy 2007).

The choice of the proper bearing material is linked to the requirements of load
and temperature (Fig. 12.15). One important layout criterion is the permissible
surface pressure that the installed bearing liner can endure under temperature
exposure without ﬂowing. An excess of the permissible pressure can cause free
travel in the joint when the car is driven. Free travelling joints usually strike by
noise and free travel in the steering. The result are customer complaints during the
main examination of the vehicle which can again cause repair sessions to exchange
the joints or the tie rod.

12 Tie Rods

349

Temperature

< 80°C

80°C to 100°C

> 100°C

Parameters

Wear

Temperature

Forces: 
Kerb impact
Peak loads

Ball race material:

POM 

POM / PEEK 

PEEK

In the transitional area of 80°C to 100°C, the choice of materials is determined by the
specific requirements.

Fig. 12.15 Bearing material as a function of load and temperature. Source ZF Lemförder GmbH

12.5.4 Design of the Outer Joint Sealing

The joint sealing prevents dirt and water from entering the bearing. Penetrating
water leads to corrosion in the bearing (Guy 1976). Dirt and corrosion mean more
wear and can entail an untimely failure of the joint by free travel. This is the most
frequent cause for failing joints. Hence, the design of the joint sealing is a core
element of joint layout. Figure 12.16 shows the process of development for joint
sealings.

Specification/
demands

 
   Interactive joint /
sealing development 
(incl. Standards)

Design Instep
     system

OK

2D-FEA

3D-FEA

NOK
.

OK

Sample

Release

OK

Environ-
mental 
simulation

OK

advance tests

Fig. 12.16 Design ﬂowchart for a joint seal. Source ZF Lemförder GmbH

350

D. Adamczyk et al.

12.5.4.1 Requirements of the Joint Sealing

The joint sealing is subject to more complicated dynamic loads than shaft-lip type
seals, resulting from the superposition of turning and tilting movements which the
outer joint has to perform during the steering stroke and concurrent deception and
rebound of the wheel. The rotary angles of the joint are approx. ±35˚ and the tilting
angles approx. ±30˚, depending on the design of the axle.

Implement a static sealing at the housing, the sealing is radially and axially
gliding at the pivot. The dynamic sealing function is achieved here by the com-
bination of radial and axial parts. The gaiter is exposed to superimposed stress
from tilting and turning. This function is implemented by choosing a proper
geometry and material. Elastomers are frequently used. The design is checked by
FEA (Fig. 12.17). The sealing system is validated by running an environmental
simulation in a test chamber and complemented by vehicle tests.

At rest, the particular requirement of the high-pressure cleaning is important;
during a cleaning process, housing and pivot sealing have to withstand at least
80 bars.

CR is an elastomer that is frequently used for gaiters. A temperature range of
−40 to +80 ˚C can be covered by standard quality CR. HNBR and others are used
for higher temperatures till 100 ˚C.

Corrosive inﬁltration of sealing systems cannot be fully avoided, the sealing
areas are therefore often corrosion-proof to ensure that the sealing function will be
maintained for many years. Dynamic sealing at the ball stud is very important
here. Different nitration procedures have prevailed. They provide the advantages
of an abrasion-proof corrosion prevention (BMFT 1981). The ball itself may be
coated, supplying additional strength. Slight inﬁltration of moisture will then not
cause corrosion in the bearing. An alternate option to nitration is the use of
additional construction elements, as, for example, a slip ring made of a material
that is poor in corrosion. This slip ring is visible in Fig. 12.17.

Fig. 12.17 3D-FEA of a
sealing system. Source ZF
Lemförder GmbH

Slip ring

12 Tie Rods

351

12.6 Damping/Decoupling

In particular housings, damping or decoupling functions are assumed by the tie
rods. Undesirable vibrations are damped or decoupled by a damping or decoupling
element (Stoll 1992). A decoupling function can be assumed by the inner joint, the
outer joint or a separate element (Fig. 12.18).

Advantage: The spring designator can be designed according to requirements. The
versions shown can maintain a damping function throughout the service life of the
vehicle.
Disadvantage: Undesirable elasticities. Separate parts, leading to higher costs and
weight.

12.7 Interfaces to the wheel carrier

Various manufacturing methods and materials are used for implementing wheel
carriers.

A steel-forged wheel carrier establishes an ideal connection of the outer joint
(see also Fig. 12.19). A conical connection is used here to connect the outer joint
with the wheel carrier. Expenses and weight may also demand that wheel carriers
are made of metal sheet, cast steel, cast aluminium or aluminium-forging tech-
nology (Vieregge et al. 1994). In these housings, pressed-in jacks and conical disks
of high-strength materials are applied. They are able to accept the necessary

Fig. 12.18 Options to integrate damping and decoupling in the tie rod. Source ZF Lemförder
GmbH

352

D. Adamczyk et al.

Fig. 12.19 Conventional
cone connection, mostly in
connection with steel-forged
wheel carriers

Fig. 12.20 Screw connection
of the outer joint with a
lightweight wheel carrier.
Source ZF Lemförder GmbH
a Pressed socket, b Taper
connection

(a)

(b)

surface pressures and to transfer the dynamic operation loads. If the permissible
surface pressure is exceeded, the screw connection looses its pretension, so that the
screw may turn loose under dynamic stress.

Figure 12.19 shows a cone plug connection with a 1:10 cone for a steel-forged
wheel carrier, while Fig. 12.20 shows solutions with pressed-in jacks and a level
cone for a 1:1 cone for lightweight wheel carriers.

12.8 Lightweight Design

Lightweight chassis for passenger cars are marked by the reduction of the
unsprung masses, applied in many parts.

This demand is also made to the tie rod, mostly at the outer joint. The housing

of the outer joint offers the greatest potential.

12 Tie Rods

353

Fig. 12.21 Example of a
lightweight tie rod. Source ZF
Lemförder GmbH

Outer joint with aluminium forged
housing

Aluminium forged alloys and suitable cast aluminium materials are in use.
These materials feature the required high ductility and a very good resistance
against corrosion. Hence, they need no additional coating.

The aluminium joint housing is designed durable, taking space and design
regulations into account, by analogy with steel-forged housings. A direct com-
parison shows that lightweight materials require more space.

The example (Fig. 12.21) provides a weight reduction of approx. 30 %, com-

pared with a steel implementation.

12.9 The Future

12.9.1 Overload Behaviour

Tie rods are quite cheap parts that can be exchanged by the service with little
effort. Hence, the tie rod assumes in some cars a ‘sacriﬁcial or safety function’.
The buckling load of the tie rod is adapted to this function, so that the rather
expensive parts, like gear and wheel carrier, are protected from damage by the
buckling of the tie rod even during abusive driving. This is then the upper limit of
the buckling load. The lower limit is determined by the forces applied in safe
driving. A buckling force window is the result, inside of which the tie rod responds
to an introduced load. The failure response with the sequence of failing parts (here:
the tie rod fails before gear and wheel carrier) is also called a damage chain.

Not only compressive forces, but also tractive forces are transferred by the tie
rod, hence, a buckling force window is not enough to protect the adjoining parts
against overload if a manoeuvre is made under pull load (see Fig. 12.22).

Reliable overload protection needs to use a safety element. It is designed for an
overload window of, say, 20–25 kN. If this load of the tie rod is achieved on-board
(pull or push load), the safety element distorts in such a way that the tie rod is then
permanently extended or shortened. The tie rod has to continue transferring
steering forces when the safety element was activated, but it will do so with more
free travel/changed length. The steering clearance/length modiﬁcation is selected
so that the driver will note the fault and visit a car service.

D. Adamczyk et al.

Push direction 

Pull direction

Tolerance for max. 
tie rod force 

Tolerance for max. 
tie rod force 

]

N

[
 
e
c
r
o
F

Fmax

Fmin

Travel s [mm]

Travel s [mm]

Safety function guaranteed 

Safety function not guaranteed

Fig. 12.22 Buckling/pull load diagram. Source ZF Lemförder GmbH

354

]

N

[
 
e
c
r
o
F

Fmax

Fmin

F

End stop force

Failure at 
max. force

Displacement
force level

Shearing element, welded case

Shearing element, screwed case

Corrugated tube

s

Fig. 12.23 Function of the safety element and examples of different safety elements. Source ZF
Lemförder GmbH

This progress towards the classical buckling force window safely protects the
complicated systems gear and wheel carrier against overloads in push or pull
direction.

The functionality of the safety element is shown in the diagram in Fig. 12.23

(ZF Patent 1991).

12 Tie Rods

355

Fig. 12.24 ZF LSM—sensor ZF Lemförder module. Source ZF Lemförder GmbH

12.9.2 Sensor Joint

A sensor located in the ball joint can record any movement of the joints (e.g., the
tilting angle). This data helps to deduce the driving and vehicle condition, as, for
example, the ride-height of the car or the deception velocity of the wheel. This data
is required, e.g., for headlamp levelling, for the ride-height situation of air sus-
pensions or for regulated dampers.

Different sensors are in use, some of which have to be integrated on-board by
expensive belt leverages. Including all required mountings, this structure is rather
heavy, consuming space and producing more inaccuracies in the signal chain. The
actual sensors of modern solutions, e.g., for ride-height sensors, have a lower
signal quality, due to the tolerance ranges of the mechanical auxiliary leverages
and of their assembly, for example. Integrated joints avoid these additional
inaccuracies.

Integrated joints entail a more compact and much lighter implementation, and
the quality of the signal is better, saving up to 1.0 kg of weight in comparison to
current sensors. The implementation shown below has an unchanged sealing and
support system of the joint. The outside sensor records the force line of a magnet in
the joint, using a non-magnetic cover. The magnet is integrated into the front side
of the ball stud, unused for the joint function, and does not require any additional
space.

Figure 12.24 shows examples of the ZF Lemförder sensor module.
Hydraulic Power Supply

Servo Pumps

13.1.1 Introduction

Hydraulically supported steering systems have been a standard of the car industry
for many years, being state-of-the-art even in compact cars. The open centre
steering system with a volumetric ﬂow-controlled vane-type pump has prevailed
against other possible steering systems, essentially because of its price. This
steering system is questioned, though, by the very heated debate about energy
conservation. Power-saving hydraulic systems are advancing, hence, because the
power dissipation of a limited vane cell can no longer be neglected. These systems
will be discussed in the following.

13.1.2 Vane-Type Pump

This kind of power-assist pumps is the classical, most common type of pump
(Fig. 13.1).

The function group of the pump basically consists of a rotor (4) with inserted
movable wings and a cam ring (3). The rotor is turning in the cam ring, the wings
are touching it due to the centrifugal forces in the slotted rotor. Separate chambers
develop, whose volume changes when sliding along the cam ring. The oil volume
sucked into any chamber is compressed when the chamber shrinks, and it is
pressed out. A constant vane-type pump is designed for two strokes. The

Fig. 13.1 Arrangement of a
two-stroke vane-type pump

D. Semmel

compressive forces developing in the rotor are compensated by the symmetrical
arrangement of two inlet (1) and outlet kidneys (2), the bearing load remains low.
The transported volumetric ﬂow rises proportionally to the pump rev. The
characteristic curve of the volumetric ﬂow of an on-board vane-type pump is
usually descending. A dropping characteristic curve helps
the
power-assist for high speeds (and, hence, a high pump rev). The volumetric ﬂow is
controlled by the limitation valve, shown in Fig. 13.2. The volumetric ﬂow control
is based on the principle that more ﬂow through the throttle generates a more
pronounced pressure drop at the throttle. The pin (4) follows the piston (1), moving
with the pressure difference, because of the pretension of the spring (5). The ﬂow
cross section in the drilling of the sleeve (3) changes, this affects in turn the
pressure difference and, hence, the size of the backﬂow cross section, released by
the piston (1).

to lower

A typical dropping characteristic curve of a volumetric current is shown in

Fig. 13.3. The position of the limiting point is clearly recognisable here.

The aim is to drive the pump at the limiting point across the whole rev range.
This way, a steady power-assist level is maintained. Providing the highest volu-
metric ﬂow is very important for the parking mode (low rev, low speed, high
demand for steering activity).

The indicator for quality and efﬁciency of a vane-type pump is the volumetric
efﬁciency, plotted in a characteristic curve of the volumetric ﬂow over pressure for
a speciﬁc operation point. An ideal pump would keep the volumetric ﬂow constant
for the whole pressure range, meaning that the gap losses in the pump would
remain steady with rising pressure. Unfortunately, pump characteristics of that
kind cannot be implemented, because the gap losses are rising with pressure, in

13 Hydraulic Power Supply

359

Fig. 13.2 Limitation valve

Fig. 13.3 Volumetric ﬂow characteristic curve of a limited vane-type pumpVane-type pump

spite of pressure compensation in the pump. The characteristic curve in Fig. 13.4
shows a standardised curve of the permissible drop of the volumetric ﬂow over the
pressure range, representing an upper permissible limit curve. The size of the
pump is considered in this depiction, too, because the volumetric ﬂow is nor-
malised to the geometrical ﬂow volume.

360

D. Semmel

Fig. 13.4 Limiting characteristic curve of the volumetric ﬂow over pressure of a vane-type pump

13.1.2.1 Vane-Type Pumps with Bypass Valve for Energy

Conservation

These pump models are sold by various manufacturers, using brand names like
ECO, EV2 (Fig. 13.5) or KEEPS.

The principle of these pumps is to reduce the energy consumption by lowering
the circulation pressure in the steering system when the steering is passive, e.g.,
when driving straight. In an open centre steering, the circulation pressure arises
from the permanent transport of the oil volume through the system. It can be
controlled either by the pressure losses of the oil-carrying parts or by the present
volumetric ﬂow.

Output

input

Fig. 13.5 Arrangement of the steering pump with bypass valve (EV2) (IXETIC)

13 Hydraulic Power Supply

361

Fig. 13.6 Comparison of the energy consumption of conventional vane-type pumps and with
pumps with bypass valve

The circulating volumetric ﬂow of this pump model is signiﬁcantly lowered
when a suitable bypass valve is used, so that the circulation pressure in the system
drops. The limited volumetric ﬂow and the used volumetric ﬂow are transported in
this pump against the present circulation pressure, hence, a considerable amount of
energy is saved for high engine/pump speeds and low steering activity (e.g.,
straight driving on the highway).

Figure 13.6 shows the energy conservation potential in a driving cycle. The
volumetric ﬂow can be lowered only by a certain amount, according to the driven
speed, so that no driving dynamics are lost. The actual energy conservation
potential per manoeuvre is therefore quite low. Figure 13.6 also shows very clearly
the reduced circulation pressure in the initial area without steering activity.

13.1.2.2 Variable Pump

Variable vane-type pumps are an advancement of the classical vane-type pump.
The pump is able to generate only as much volumetric ﬂow as is required for the
steering system, due to the function of the variable pump capacity. The interior
circulation of a volumetric ﬂow in the limited area of a conventional vane-type
pump is thereby avoided. Variable pumps are single-stroke vane-type pumps. The
pump chambers are divided into suction and pressure chamber by an eccentric
deviation of the cam ring, by means of a pressure balance. The deviation is
designed according to demand, so that only the actually required oil volume is
transported. When the idling speed operating point is reached, the variable pump
transports a constant volumetric ﬂow. A rising pump rev leads to an increasing

362

D. Semmel

pump pressure which in turn leads to a pressure increase in the cam ring via the
governing valve, reducing the eccentricity. The geometrical pump capacity
decreases and overproduction of pressurised oil is prevented. A drop of the pump
rev and a descending pressure gradient produce in turn a higher deviation of the
cam ring, the geometrical pump capacity rises again.

The power input of a vane-type pump is approximated as follows:

P ¼ Vgeom (cid:2) n (cid:2) p (cid:2) 1:67 (cid:3) 10(cid:4)3 ½W(cid:5)

ð13:1Þ

Vgeom. Geometrical pump capacity [cm3/U]
n
p
1.67

Pump rev [rpm]
Pressure [bar]
Unit correction value

In a conventional vane-type pump, the limited volumetric ﬂow is preloaded on
the pressure in the system, too. Very high power dissipations at high pump revs
and system pressures are the result. The power input of a vane cell with 12 cm3/
rev, for example, may be 1,002 W for a circulation pressure of 10 bar and a pump
rev of 5,000 rpm. These values correspond to straight driving on the highway
without steering activity, the generated energy loss of 1 kW is converted into heat,
which has to be removed via the steering engine oil cooler. The use of energy
saving pumps is therefore an important help to reduce power dissipations, and the
variable pump provides the highest potential savings (Figs. 13.7, 13.8, 13.9).

Fig. 13.7 Cutaway view of a variable pump. Source ZF Lenksysteme

13 Hydraulic Power Supply

363

Fig. 13.8 Characteristic curve of the geometrical pump capacity and the volumetric ﬂow over
the variable pump speed

Comparison of different pump designs’ power consumption during rotation

power consumption of 
conventional vane pump

power consumption 
of vane pump with 
bypass

power consumption of 
variable displacement pump  

0,00

1000,00

2000,00

3000,00

4000,00

5000,00

6000,00

7000,00

8000,00

Engine speed [rpm]

Fig. 13.9 Comparison of the pump designs of a vane cell

]

W

[
 
r
e
w
o
P

7000,00

6500,00

6000,00

5500,00

5000,00

4500,00

4000,00

3500,00

3000,00

2500,00

2000,00

1500,00

1000,00

500,00

0,00

364

D. Semmel

Fig. 13.10 Detail, pump element of a radial piston pump

13.1.3 Radial Piston Pump

these lateral drillings are closed at

The radial piston pump consists of individual pump elements which are driven by a
common eccentric shaft. The cylinder spaces are ﬁlled with oil through lateral
drillings in the piston which connect to the oil-ﬁlled pumping chamber. In the
transport stroke,
the lower edge of the
respective cylinder, so that pressure builds up during the further stroke movement.
The beneﬁt of this principle is internal suction control, i.e. the transported
volumetric ﬂow remains fairly constant across the whole pump rev range. This
suction control results from the fact that higher pump rev reduces the time to ﬁll
the cylinder spaces. This reduction prevents complete ﬁlling of the space, the
transport volume per pump stroke drops with increasing speed. On the other hand,
the transported volumetric ﬂow remains constant for the entire pump rev range.
Therefore, in contrast to a limited vane cell, this type of pump requires no volu-
metric ﬂow limitation; any losses from limitation are hence avoided. The radial
piston pump can even be operated at very high pressure (200 bar), so that a broader
application range is covered than with a vane-type pump (Fig. 13.10).

The disadvantage of a radial piston pump is its high price, due to complex
manufacturing. Furthermore, the much inferior acoustics in comparison to the
vane-type pump are noticeable. This is a ﬂaw of the design, primarily resulting
from ﬂuctuating pressure as a result of the much lower number of pistons (com-
monly 7–8 pistons, according to pump size). A comparable vane-type pump with
similar geometrical pump capacity has at least 11 wings, accordingly producing 11
displacement compressor chambers (Fig. 13.11).

13 Hydraulic Power Supply

Fig. 13.11 Construction of a
radial piston pump. Source
ZF Lenksysteme

365

13.1.4 Tandem Pump

The tandem pump is a combination of vane cell and piston pump, providing an
independent supply of two different hydraulic cycles (e.g., power steering and
rolling stabilisation system) whose constraints with regard to system pressure may
differ. Most rolling stabilisation systems are high-pressure systems with pressures
of approx. 180 bar, but a vane-type pump cannot operate these economically. The
vane-type pump is sufﬁcient for the steering, though, as the highest accessible
system pressures of a vane-type pump are approx. 150 bar. A combination of both
pump types on one shaft yields the following beneﬁts:

• less construction space by common use of the central plate of both pump types
• only one drive required in the auxiliary driveline of the engine
• less weight (Fig. 13.12).

13.2 Oil Supply and Oils

13.2.1 Oil Tank

Vehicles with hydraulic power-assistance need a servo oil tank to maintain a clean
oil reserve in the steering system, compensating the volume and degassing and
calming the medium. Filling the system is more difﬁcult without a tank, too. Other
functions of the servo oil tank are ﬁltration, cooling and maintaining the supply of
the steering system for any possibly applicable acceleration of the car.

366

D. Semmel

Fig. 13.12 Cutaway view of a tandem pump (IXETIC)

13.2.1.1 Types

Servo oil tanks are now mainly made of plastic (PA), welded as die-cast parts or
blow-moulded. These production methods have prevailed because of price and
design. A ﬁlter element can be easily and safely integrated into the two-part
construction (Fig. 13.13).

Servo oil tanks are classiﬁed as either pump-mounted or body-mounted con-
ﬁgurations. The beneﬁt of pump-mounted conﬁgurations is their short inlet pipe
into the pump which is ideal designwise to avoid cavitation in the pump. The
mounting of the servo oil tank to the pump is a disadvantage of this conﬁguration,
because it has to be shaped in such a way that HF aggregate vibrations do not
produce ruptures in the tank. Pump-mounted servo oil tanks are also exposed to
higher temperatures than body-mounted tanks, due to the proximity of the pump to
the exhaust manifold.

13.2.1.2 Filling and Ventilation

Current series production steering systems are ﬁlled by vacuum ﬁlling. First, a
ﬁlling quill is placed on the tank opening to generate a vacuum. This vacuum is
maintained for some time to detect any potential leakage. If the values are within
the deﬁned range, the system is ﬁlled with pressure through the quill and leveled to

13 Hydraulic Power Supply

367

Fig. 13.13 Construction of a pump-mounted servo oil tank

Fig. 13.14 Connection of
separation efﬁciency and ß
value (HYDAC)

maximum at the same time. Easy ﬁlling and subsequent ventilation of the system
in a garage are enabled by operating the steering end-stop-to-end-stop while the
engine is running. Steering systems can be ventilated in this manner very well.
Then the level in the tank is checked.

368

13.2.1.3 Filtration

D. Semmel

The ﬁlter conﬁguration of power-assisted steering systems is always arranged as a
runback ﬁlter in the tank. A coarse non-woven ﬁltration with a mesh size of
100 µm is sufﬁcient for steering systems without servotronics (speed-sensitive
change of the steering torque).

A ﬁne ﬁltration with a mesh of at least 15 µm is absolutely necessary for
servotronics steering systems. The design of these ﬁne ﬁlters has to consider not
only the mesh size but also the ﬁlter surface. These ﬁlters are also usually equipped
with a bypass to prevent the ﬁlter element from bursting when the ﬁlter is polluted.
The following features are observed when:

• original pollution in the system
• pressure loss of the cartridge, new and saturated
• pollution entering during service life.

13.2.1.4 Separation Efﬁciency

The separation efﬁciency ßx of a ﬁlter measures particle sizes and amounts which
the ﬁlter is able to ﬁlter out. The ßx value indicates the capability of the ﬁlter
element to separate particles of a speciﬁc size. Typical data for a hydraulic system
are, e.g., ß12 [ 200. The ß value is higher than 200, according to the curve shown
in Fig. 13.15, an almost complete separation is therefore possible. The index 12
means that all particles [12 µm are reliably ﬁltered out. Figure 13.14 illustrates
the connection between ß value and separation efﬁciency of a ﬁlter element.

Fig. 13.15 Design of a ﬁlter element (HYDAC)

13 Hydraulic Power Supply

13.2.1.5 System Purity

369

Purity is very important for the safe function of a hydraulic system. System purity
distinguishes between original dirt and impurity from the operation of the system.
The purity of the single parts which enables safe functioning of the system is
deﬁned by the following parameters:

• whole amount of pollution in the respective component, in mg/oil-covered

surface

• highest permissible particle sizes, 2D, in µm × µm
• deﬁned special particles, inevitably resulting from the chosen manufacturing

process, the deﬁned amount does not impair the function of the system.

Typical purity data for hydraulic lines are:

• highest particle load: 1.5 mg per metre of line
• greatest particle size: 200 × 90 µm
• exceptions: Number of special particles per metre of line length:
• not more than 25 hard particles \500 × 200 µm
• not more than 25 soft particles \2,000 × 90 µm permissible
• no abrasive particles

Testing methods to identify the system purity
Basically, the method for a purity test of hydraulic parts has to be qualiﬁed to be

compliant with VDA19/ISO 16232, i.e.

1. Blind value measurement
2. Decay curve with 10 % or other criterion
3. Double test

Concerning ﬂushing time, preliminary treatment and ﬂushing amount,
the
parameters are set so that the criteria for the decay curve are met. If the measured
values deviate from the set points deﬁned in the standards, then the test method is
reevaluated. This qualiﬁcation needs to be carried out before the ﬁrst test. It is run
in the deﬁned scope at a sample component (or two of them, for a double test). The
purpose of the qualiﬁcation check is to ascertain the suitability of the used
extraction process. Most extraction processes are indirect methods and aim at
grasping as much of the particle pollution on the component as possible.

There is in principle no absolute way to determine the actually present particle
load. Therefore, decay measures that should maintain the suitability criterion
according to Fig. 13.16 are performed. Repeatedly checking the same part should
identify a decrease of the particle pollution. The criterion for the suitability of an
extraction process is the decay criterion, see Fig. 13.16.

Decay criterion:

X

cn (cid:6) 0:1 (cid:3)

ciðn (cid:6) 6Þ

370

Fig. 13.16 Check of the
decay criterion and the blind
value

D. Semmel

A sufﬁcient decaying response to the extraction of pollution is present if after
up to six subsequent checks of the same part, the ﬁnal measured value is not higher
than 10 % of the total of the measured values.

13.2.1.6 Design Under Lateral Acceleration

Manoeuvres that involve extreme lateral or longitudinal acceleration are critical
for the design of the tank. One needs to ensure that the intake of air during such
manoeuvres is avoided under any circumstances and that any escape of oil from
the tank is safely prevented.

To do so, one makes a cross section of the tank at the slant of the present
acceleration and at the level of the oil volume. It needs to be ensured that the
suction neck is sufﬁciently covered, i.e. is under the oil level. The ﬁlling volume
thus determined is the ‘min’ ﬁlling of the container. This is a purely theoretical
design, hence, a sufﬁcient safety distance for any sloshing in the car needs to be
kept. If there is not enough safety distance, the tank needs to be enlarged or
redesigned by clever integration of ribs in such a way that the suction neck is at
any time sufﬁciently covered at any time. Finally, the theoretical design is con-
ﬁrmed on a centrifuge test bench before starting the system on-board (Fig. 13.17).

13.2.2 Steering Hoses and Tubes

Conduits in the steering system are essentially classiﬁed as high and low pressure
conduits, applying both rigid tubes and ﬂexible hoses. The high-pressure conduits
connect the pump pressure output and the steering valve in the gear, low-pressure
conduits are arranged in the complete runback system of steering valve–radiator–
tank.

13 Hydraulic Power Supply

Fig. 13.17 Liquid level in
the tank at strongest braking

371

The following issues are observed when:

• avoid any pressure losses by sufﬁciently sizing the cross sections of the tubing
• sufﬁcient acoustic decoupling of the overall system
• safe squeezing of the hose integration
• sealing of the overall system for the full service life.

13.2.2.1 High-Pressure Duct Including Screw Connection (Hose Types

and Construction)

It is of utmost interest that the stretch tube may serve in high-pressure conduits as
an acoustic decoupling element. This is basically achieved by the design of the
hose. A 10 % increase of volume should be achieved at peak pressure. How the
tissue of the pressure carrier is made has an essential inﬂuence on the stretching
response of the hose. Polyamides or aramide ﬁbres are used most of the time. The
thread angle inﬂuences the stretch response of the hose as well. Figure 13.18
shows a typical hose design.

Resonators or tuners are also used in stretch tubes. They are PTFE tubes with an
inner diameter of approx. 6 mm and additional lateral drilling holes. The length of

372

D. Semmel

continuous no. Construction

Material

01

02

03

Inside layer

CSM

strength carrier PA

Outside layer

CSM

Fig. 13.18 Hose construction of a stretch tube

Fig. 13.19 Resonator in the stretch tube

the tuner and the number of the lateral drilling holes are the main acoustic tuning
parameters in the steering system (Fig. 13.19).

13.2.2.2 Screw Connections Of High-Pressure Lines and Stretch tubes

Overview on the standard high-pressure screw connections (Fig. 13.20):

Classical hydraulic screw connection for high-pressure applications; high loss

of pressure, low accuracy of the position during assembly (Fig. 13.21).

Pressure screw connection in steering hydraulics systems; resistant to pressure
up to 150 bar, little loss of pressure, very sensitive against rupture from vibrations
(Fig. 13.22).

Fig. 13.20 Ring neck screw
connection

13 Hydraulic Power Supply

Fig. 13.21 Saginaw screw
connection

373

Fig. 13.22 a and b Flange screw connection

Universal screw connection for high-pressure applications with good accuracy
of positioning, little loss of pressure, resistant to rupture from vibrations, needs
much space.

374

D. Semmel

13.2.2.3 Suction and Return Conduits

The suction and return conduits are low-pressure conduits. Accordingly, the hoses
are much simpler than stretch tubes, the used elastomer can be less resistant to
temperature than that of stretch tubes.

The return line from the gear to the servo oil cooler has acoustic signiﬁcance as
well. The purpose is to make the hose very soft, taking any possible cavitation
effects from the steering system into account that may result from excitation at the
tyres. Ideally, a small compensation volume which prevents cavitation from
impacts at the tyres can be made available by proper design of the return line.
Throttles that are effective against steering kickback are also used in the return
line.

13.2.2.4 Acoustic Tuning/Noise Measures

A comparison of different stretch tube tunings at 80 bar follows (Fig. 13.23):

This representation shows very well how the acoustic behaviour of the
hydraulic system can be inﬂuenced by a suitable choice of resonators, throttles and
hose lengths. The purpose of any stretch tube tuning is to achieve the best possible
loss of pressure. Acoustic tuning targets mainly the
damping for the least
low-speed range. This reﬂects situations like parking or driving at low speed, e.g.,
city trafﬁc. Hydraulic noises are especially annoying here.

Fig. 13.23 Pulsation curves of pump speeds and different secondary measures

13 Hydraulic Power Supply

375

Fig. 13.24 Temperature curve in the steering system, comparison of constant and variable pump

13.2.3 Cooling/Cooling Fronds/Cooler

The easiest kind of servo oil cooler is a simple cooling frond, integrated into the
return line. This type of cooler is sufﬁcient for steering systems with variable
pumps or low steering power. Most vehicles with standard servo pumps and higher
steering power already need a soldered cooler.

The most efﬁcient form already need of cooling is an oil/water heat exchanger,
because it also provides for a quick heating of the system at very low temperatures.
There is no general rule for the need or size of a servo oil cooler, because this
depends very strongly on purposes and constraints of the steering system. An
important part of deﬁning the size of a servo oil cooler is the notion that during a
deﬁned driving cycle that is passed several times, the temperature curve will be
inert below the deﬁned peak temperature. Figure 13.24 shows the inﬂuence of the
used servo pump on the temperature response (Figs. 13.25, 13.26)

13.2.4 System Limits

The operational conditions of the car are vital for the hydraulic design of a steering
system. A hard off-road passage with high steering forces and engine speeds is the
worst case of operating conditions for vehicles in the SUV segment, especially
since the vehicle has a very low cooling air ﬂow, due to the low speed.

Driving manoeuvres on a round course are the worst case of operating condi-
tions for sports cars. The vehicles are running at very high speed, the high
cornering speeds are producing very high steering pressures. Impacts from

376

Fig. 13.25 Soldered servo
oil cooler

D. Semmel

Fig. 13.26 Oil/water heat
exchanger

crossing ‘kerbs’ can even cause the steering system to switch to the pressure
limitation for a short time, so that the hot pressurised oil in the pump is transported
directly to the suction side. The steering system is even further heated up, if this
lasts longer, failure from overheating may be the consequence.

A safe design of the steering system should never surpass a servo oil temper-
ature of 120 ˚C during normal operation. Temperature peaks of 150 ˚C may occur
for a short time, depending on the operation medium. Nevertheless, they should
remain isolated events that should not add up to more than half an hour during the
whole service life.

The system pressure of the steering is usually deﬁned at an upper limit of
120 + 8 bar. This limit has also proved itself with regard to a suitable choice of
stretch tubes, because the volume reception of pure high-pressure hoses is very
limited.

13.2.5 Servo Oils

The preferred hydraulic oil used in steering systems is Pentosin. The earlier used
oil ATF was almost completely replaced by Pentosin. The reason is Pentosin’s
much higher stability with regard to temperature and viscosity across a very wide

13 Hydraulic Power Supply

377

Fig. 13.27 Viscosity/temperature diagram for different servo oils

Fig. 13.28 Distinction of the purity classes

temperature range. The following curves compare different oils across the whole
temperature spectrum. The advantage of Pentosin is most effective in the very low
temperature area (Fig. 13.27).

378

D. Semmel

Fig. 13.29 Recommended purity classes for hydraulic systems

Fig. 13.30 Accessible purity classes by way of supply of the hydraulic oil

13 Hydraulic Power Supply

379

13.2.5.1 Other Speciﬁcations

As discussed in the chapter ‘Filtration’, system purity is an essential criterion for
the safe operation of a steering system. The basic purity of the used operation
medium contributes essentially. The oil is divided into the following purity classes
according to ISO (Fig. 13.28):

Figure 13.29 lists the current hydraulic systems, to facilitate the choice of the
purity class required for safe operation of a hydraulic system with the recom-
mended ﬁltration. They shall serve only as a ﬁrst indication, suitable tests have to
ensure that the selected purity class is sufﬁcient.

The basic purity of a hydraulic oil depends essentially on the way the oil is
supplied. Barrel oil does not meet the requirements for a complicated hydraulic
system with regard to its purity class. However, the purity class can be signiﬁ-
cantly raised by suitable ﬁltration in the ﬁlling station. The classiﬁcation of the
purity class by kind of supply, shown in Fig. 13.30, is important for appraisal by
the customer service, because different ways of supply are quite common here.
A note on suitable ﬁltration needs to be included in the customer service
instructions.

Chapter 14
Electrically Powered Hydraulic Steering

Jochen Gessat, Alois Seewald and Dirk Zimmermann

14.1 Introduction

Electrically powered hydraulic steering was developed in the early 1990s from the
demand for power-saving steering systems which can be controlled independently
from the internal combustion engine. The capabilities of these systems has been
successively expanded.

14.1.1 Conﬁguration and Functional Principle

Electrically powered hydraulic steering consists of a motor pump unit
(MPU) which can be modularly combined with a steering gear, see Fig. 14.1.
Other than the arrangement shown, a conﬁguration can be chosen in which the
MPU is directly mounted on the steering gear. This leads to a ﬁlled and tested
compact system which has no more hydraulic interfaces during vehicle assembly.
The steering gear is a standard hydraulic steering gear whose valve was adapted to
the (lesser) volumetric ﬂow of the MPU by an altered geometry of the valve
control edge.

The MPU has a hydraulic part with external gear pump, hydraulic resonator and
check/pressure relief valve, as well as an electric motor with ECU. It is screwed to

J. Gessat (&) (cid:1) A. Seewald (cid:1) D. Zimmermann
TRW Automotive, Livonia, MI, USA
e-mail: jochen.gessat@steeringhandbook.org

A. Seewald
e-mail: alois.seewald@steeringhandbook.org

D. Zimmermann
e-mail: dirk.zimmermann@steeringhandbook.org

M. Harrer and P. Pfeffer (eds.), Steering Handbook, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-05449-0_14,
(cid:1) Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017

381

382

J. Gessat et al.

Fig. 14.1 Electrically powered hydraulic steering (Source Fa TRW, D segment vehicle)

Fig. 14.2 Hydraulic diagram and valve curves

the vehicle or to the steering gear, by means of brackets adapted to the application.
The hydraulic connection to the steering gear is established by hoses.

Figure 14.2 shows the hydraulic diagram to illustrate the functional principle.
The MPU is driven with the input parameters vehicle speed and steering wheel
rate, providing the system’s volumetric ﬂow. If there is no steering wheel angle

14 Electrically Powered Hydraulic Steering

383

sensor, the load is reported back to the MPU as a pressure converted into interior
electric levels to control the rev.

The motor pump unit additionally contains the tank with an optional return line
ﬁlter, the pressure relief valve (PRV) and the check valve. The PRV limits the
peak system pressure and protects other parts against overload (e.g., hoses). It also
limits the load torque of the engine and prevents stalling. The check valve is open
when the steering is switched off, providing ventilation of the system. During
service, when the steering is switched off and the vehicle is jacked up, the rack can
be easily shifted, without any hydraulic pressure building up. In the fault case of a
blocked pump, it provides for easier steering of the system, because the pump is
circumvented. The hydraulic pipe system contains pipes and hoses on both the
high- and the low-pressure side, to transmit energy and to improve the steering
equipment acoustics. The steering gear consists of the steering cylinder and a
4/3 port directional control valve in rotary disk conﬁguration with an open centre
(open centre valve). When free of load, the ﬂow is passing the valve with very
little resistance. If the rack is loaded, a torsion spring (torsion bar) is twisted by the
driver’s steering torque. This generates a proportional torsion angle, shifting the
valve, so that a pressure difference builds up which is keeping the load in balance.
The torsion and, hence, the steering wheel torque depend on the valve’s volumetric
ﬂow and also on the volumetric ﬂow of the motor pump unit (see also chapter
‘Hydraulic power steering’). If the volumetric ﬂow rises, a lower torsion angle
(less torque) will be sufﬁcient to generate the same pressure difference in the
steering cylinder that would apply when the volumetric ﬂow was smaller. This
effect is used to directly inﬂuence the steering feel as a function of vehicle speed.
Figure 14.2 shows (on the right) the course of the valve curve if the steering rack
is not moving (5 l/min EPHS valve) for different nominal MPU volumetric ﬂows
(nominal revs). The disruption of the valve curve towards higher torques, seen here
for higher revs ([4,000 1/min) and pressures above 60 bar, is based on the volu-
metric ﬂow/pressure characteristic curve of the motor pump unit, because the
volumetric ﬂow drops at higher pressure, cf. also Fig. 14.5 left (MPU characteristic
curve). In this situation the unit does not achieve the deﬁned nominal rev any more.

14.1.2 Steering System Classiﬁcation

Electrically powered hydraulic steering is a semi-active electric steering that has a
solid connection between steering wheel angle and tyre steer-angle. The assist
torque is variable and determined by means of a steering diagram.

Though the auxiliary torque can be parameterized, as opposed to electrome-
chanical steering systems, the direction is not reversible. This enables several
comfort and energy functions, but no special torque functions like active tracking
or automatic parking, because the electrical drive has no direct kinematic tie to the
gear. Nevertheless, the decoupling has the beneﬁt that the system needs less
expenditure with regard to functional safety. Besides, the steering feel is not
affected by the qualities of the electric motor (e.g., mass moment of inertia).

384

J. Gessat et al.

Table 14.1 Steering systems and functions

HPS
conventional

EPHS

EPS

Steering system classiﬁcation
Steering wheel angle—tyre steer-angle
Steering wheel torque—assist torque
In the direction of assist torque
Energy

Meeting demand and high

Semi active
Solid
Variable

Passive
Solid
Solid
Unidirectional Unidirectional Bidirectional
–

Semi active
Solid
Variable

X

X

consumption
and CO2

efﬁciency

Safety

Comfort

Stop/start compatibility
–
HEV, eV, compatibility FCV –
–
Steering intervention and ESP

(µ-split, oversteer)
Lane departure warning
Lane keeping assistant
Speed-sensitive power assist
Controlled parking
(Semi-)automatic parking

(X)
–
–
(X)
–

X
X
–

(X)
–
X
(X)
–

X
X
X

(X)
(X)
X
(X)
(X)

X System immanent
(X) requires additional components (e.g. video system)

Table 14.1 is an overview of important qualities in comparison to other steering
systems. Note that functions like lane departure warning or controlled parking can
be shown regardless of the steering system. They are standard equipment, e.g., of
conventional hydraulic systems in superclass cars.

14.1.3 Application Examples

The use of EPHS began in compact cars and continued in superclass and sports
utility vehicles, on account of the development of top-performance motor pump
units. A universal applicability for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles
has been achieved since, see Table 14.2. The main arguments for using this
steering are energy saving, the absence of a pump drive in the internal combustion
engine and new drive concepts (hybrid vehicles, electromobiles etc.).

14.2 System Descriptions

The possible system states shall be described ﬁrst, beginning with a system
overview. Then the system design will be discussed. Overall efﬁciency and power
input are discussed at the end.

14 Electrically Powered Hydraulic Steering

385

Table 14.2 Vehicle classes and applications of motor pump units
C/MPV D/E
Vehicle class

A/B

SUV

LCV (3.5 t)

1,090
710

1,200
890

Example
960
Typical front axle load (kg)
560
MPU (W)
96 ? 8 108 ? 8 120 ? 8 120 ? 8 120 ? 8
Max pressure (bar)
5.7
Max volumetric ﬂow
70
Max current (A)
2.5
Standby current (A)
13.5
Nom. voltage (V)
Max assist power (kN)
7.6
Assist power at 540˚/s & 50 mm/rev (kN) 5.7
428
Mechanical power at the rack (W)

9.3
98
2.5
13.5
14.5
10.9
818

9.3
98
2.5
13.5
16.0
10.4
780

12.0
115
2.5
13.5
18.0
11.6
870

7.8
85
2.5
13.5
10.6
8.5
638

1,800
1,000

1,400
890

14.2.1 System Overview

The motor pump unit is controlled by the car’s CAN (high speed, 500 kbit/s),
Fig. 14.3. A signal of the driveline is used to activate the steering. This can be, e.g.,
any data on the stable operation of the internal combustion engine or indicating the
general readiness to drive, as is found, for example, in hybrid vehicles. The
steering diagram, which illustrates the nominal rev of the motor pump unit and the
power assistance as a function of different variables, commonly uses the vehicle
speed and steering wheel rate.

Fig. 14.3 System overview and steering diagram

386

J. Gessat et al.

Fig. 14.4 State diagram

It is also possible to control the power assist by other parameters, as, for
example, the loading state of the vehicle, the oil temperature to compensate the
changing viscosity or the steering wheel angle. Self protection functions and
diagnostics are also implemented.

The system can assume different states or modes. Some of them are:

• system switched off
• system startup (wait for steering request)
• normal operation mode
• system shutdown
• relapse mode

Figure 14.4 shows how the system may be started and set to normal operation. The
ignition signal wakes the system. When an internal test has ended, the internal
combustion engine is running and CAN messages can be exchanged, the normal
operating mode is achieved. A relapse mode (not shown here) can be assumed, e.g.,
when input signals of the motor pump unit are faulty or lacking. In this case, for
example, the MPU can be driven at a steady medium rev to establish sufﬁcient
auxiliary support.

The steering feel is better if the hydraulic system is fed with some least volu-
metric ﬂow. A least rev of the engine is the result: Standby revs of 750 to 2,000 1/min
are available in technical conﬁgurations. The peak rev can be determined from
dynamic requests, benchmark ﬁgures are between 4,000 and 6,000 1/min. This
corresponds to a peak volumetric ﬂow range of 1.5–12 l/min, according to MPU
model. The reference value for the highest system pressure is 130 bar.

14.2.2 System Layout

The power design includes a steady state and a dynamic examination. Typical
requirements for a power steering of passenger cars are between 400 and 900 W of

14 Electrically Powered Hydraulic Steering

387

mechanical power in the rack, depending on the size of the car. The highest power
consumption (battery power) currently permissible in 12 V on-board power sys-
tems is up to 120 A.

14.2.2.1 Steady State Layout

Motor pump units can be modularly combined with different steering gears. Dif-
ferent power classes of motor pump units can meet almost any vehicle require-
ments. The stationary system is in principle examined in two steps:

1. Based on the electric input power in the motor pump unit (power and voltage in
the MPU plug) the hydraulic output (pressure and volumetric ﬂow) is gener-
ated: Volumetric ﬂow/pressure characteristics.

2. The hydraulic output (pressure and volumetric ﬂow) serves to compute the
mechanical output at the rack, taking into account the (small) part which the
driver enters mechanically at the steering wheel.

In this approach all system parameters that are relevant for the power are
examined. It is very important that the electric power supply is deﬁned, i.e. which
voltage is available at which power at which discharge point (input power).
According to application, cable lengths, plug resistance, etc are considered. In
principle, the described approach can be carried out the other way as well, e.g., the
combination of parts (pump size, electrical engine) is deduced from the vehicle
requirements.

Figure 14.5 shows how the force/steering wheel rate diagram is generated from
the MPU characteristics. The pressure generates a force by means of the piston
area, the volumetric ﬂow enables the cylinder movement (ﬁlling of the moving
cylinder). The calculation includes the power contributed by the driver.

Fig. 14.5 MPU characteristic curve and mechanical steering power

388

J. Gessat et al.

14.2.2.2 Dynamic Layout Criteria

A consideration of the steady state system behaviour can lead to a false assessment
of the steering power at higher steering wheel rates.

A dynamic steering process usually starts at zero and drives up to a high
steering wheel rate. Several inertia effects and the control of the MPU (steering
diagram) play an important part for the dynamic response. Some important
parameters are:

• The motor pump unit has to power up from standby to peak rev (esp. mechanical

inertia of the electric motor).

• A part of the volumetric ﬂow is used up for the expansion of the hoses and is not

available as a momentary useful volumetric ﬂow in the valve.

• The valve is not in a ﬁxed position but changes its effective cross sections during

• There are lags in signal processing which are small relative to the mechanical

the steering process.

time constants.

These effects can be accounted for if other qualities like the hydraulic capacities
(hoses), the mechanical moment of inertia of the motor pump unit, as well as the
steering map and signal processing times, are included in the design process. Then
the highest steering wheel torque which the driver has to apply during an evasive
manoeuvre can be used to assess the steering power.

The MPU is veriﬁed by measuring the step response against a hydraulic load
(oriﬁce). A step between the basic and the peak rev is given. It is equal to a step of
the volumetric ﬂow, when a pump with constant pump capacity is used. The time
after which 90 % of the jump level, including the standby volumetric ﬂow, is
achieved is used as a criterion, see Fig. 14.6. This process is derived from the
on-board load situation that also determines the choice of the oriﬁce. If short
enough step response times are given (e.g., 80 ms), the overall system is insen-
sitive to the variation of other system parts, as, for example, hydraulic lines.

Fig. 14.6 Dynamic system
layout

14 Electrically Powered Hydraulic Steering

389

14.2.3 Energy Consumption

First, important operation modes which concern system layout and potential
energy saving are discussed. A discussion of the energy conversion from the
internal combustion engine to the mechanical output and the electric power input
of the steering follows. The often claimed potential energy or CO2 saving is not an
inherent quality of electric or EPH steering but follows from the substitution of an
uneconomically working hydraulic pump. The terms efﬁciency and power input
have to be speciﬁed before beginning the assessment of the energy.

14.2.3.1 Efﬁciency

The term efﬁciency is used for steering against a load. It is the most important
parameter in a system design that includes the deﬁnition of the electrical machine,
because the limited electric input power, e.g., 1,300 W, should yield a very high
the efﬁciency of the
mechanical output (e.g., for parking). For high forces,
valve-controlled cylinder drive is above 90 %. This is due to the fact that the valve
is fully opened towards the cylinder connections, inﬂicting hardly any losses. The
total friction force of all seals is also negligible relative to the generated forces,
because of the good lubrication. Attainable pump efﬁciencies of approx. 90 % and
the motor designs used allow the electrically powered hydraulic steering to
achieve an as high overall efﬁciency as the electromechanical recirculating
ball-with-nut gear. The highest attainable overall efﬁciency is not only a function
of the parts of the steering proper, but it is also affected by secondary parameters,
especially by the cable resistance, see Table 14.3. The typical position of the motor
pump unit in rather cold surroundings affects the overall efﬁciency favourably (e.
g., in the fender area), because the efﬁciency of the electric power pack decreases
at higher temperatures. e.g., for ambient temperatures of about 100 ˚C, the efﬁ-
ciency near the internal combustion engine drops by approx. 4 %.

14.2.3.2 Power Input and Energy Consumption

When driving straight, the efﬁciency is zero, because no mechanical power is
requested from the rack. Then the least possible power input of the steering
becomes the target of evaluation. This state is prevalent as a rule and even the only
one present for assessing the kilometrage by the New European Driving Cycle

Table 14.3 The cable resistance
Cable Engine &

ECU

Pump Hydraulic
lines

Valve Gear with hydraulic

cylinder

Overall
efﬁciency

EPHS at 13.5 V, 85 A, 50 ˚C

390

Fig. 14.7 Energy ﬂow
during straight driving

J. Gessat et al.

(NEDC) according to EC 715/2007, because there is no steering movement. Adding
up the momentary power input (W) yields the energy consumption (Wh or l) for a
cycle with a certain length.

Figure 14.7 illustrates the energy ﬂow of an NEDC, Table 14.4 shows the mean
power inputs for the different parts (Bosch 2002). Note that in spite of the con-
version into electric energy, the point balance for the EPHS or the EMS looks far
better. The main reason is the quality of the hydraulic vane-type pump.

The substitution of the hydraulic pump by a motor pump unit can be evaluated
with the help of a model calculation. One computes the power balance, taking into
account all resistances and the diagram of the internal combustion engine. An
arbitrary driving speed is chosen as an input value. It suggests a certain gear
selection and, hence, combustion engine speed. The road resistances, i.e. the roll

Table 14.4 Average power losses NEFZ in (W)

At the engine crankshaft
Belt drive
Generator
Battery
Cable
ECU
E motor
Pump
Hydraulic lines
Steering valve
Steering gear

EPHS
\60
≤5
≤15
≤5
≤5
≤5
≤5
≤5
≤5
≤5
0

HPS
[340

30–40
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
[250
30–80
30–80
0

14 Electrically Powered Hydraulic Steering

391

Fig. 14.8 Fuel and CO2 saving

and air resistance, and the power input of the secondary consumers are considered.
Using the involved efﬁciencies (e.g., generator, belt drive etc.) the performance is
computed. This allows ﬁnding the current working point (rev, torque) of the
internal combustion engine and to determine the input power and fuel supply per
time. The potential saving is identiﬁed by computing the difference of two cal-
culations, once with a hydraulic pump (HPS) installed and once with an EPHS.
Figure 14.8 illustrates the lower consumption of the EPHS in comparison to the
hydraulic steering as a function of vehicle speed.

Other reference points are the calculated driving cycle values that contain
different vehicle speeds. Computations are usually complemented by roll test
bench measurements, e.g., once with and once without a steering system, to
evaluate its impact. The shortcoming of this method is that many measurements
have to be made to resolve the effect of a few tenths of a litre per hundred
kilometres. The least attainable power consumption of the motor pump unit
depends slightly on the efﬁciency of the electrical machine, hence, the potential
saving is almost fully dependent on the pump to be substituted and on the energy
conversion by the internal combustion engine (switch revs, combustion engine
characteristic). This somewhat lessens the potential saving for smaller pumps (or
smaller vehicles).

14.3 Components

The main components of an electrically powered hydraulic steering are the
steering gear, the motor pump unit, the ﬂuid, feed and return line, brackets and
accessories as well as sensors to record vehicle speed and steering wheel rate. The
steering gear is described in Chap. 11 and will not be discussed again here.

392

J. Gessat et al.

14.3.1 Motor Pump Unit

The motor pump unit consists, among others, of the main groups electric power
pack, external gear pump and check/pressure relief valve, described in the fol-
lowing. The most powerful unit made by TRW will be described as an example.

14.3.1.1 Main Requirements and Interfaces

Concerning the use of the motor pump unit, important main requirements can be
deduced immediately. They are adopted in the system architecture and the choice
of parts.

(a) Vehicle integration

• low weight-to-power ratio or little need for space
• ﬂexible arrangement or adaptation options of the mechanical, electric, sig-

nalling and hydraulic interfaces

• accoustically inconspicuous

(b) Mode of operation, reliability and safety

• high dynamic 1-quadrant operation, continuous mode
• typical service life of 8,000 h, approx. 300,000 km
• self-monitoring/diagnostics
• function safety ISO WD 26262, compliant with classiﬁcation ASIL B

(c) Ambient conditions

• Class IP6K9K (dust isolation, vapour cleaner etc.) or IP6K7K (brief immer-

sion, thermal shock), distinct by application

• ambient temperature range −40 to 140 ˚C
• corrosion resistance 720 h salt spray test
• vibration and shock requirements up to 10 g, distinct by application

(d) Electric requirements

• on-board power supply voltage 9–16 V
• on-board power supply current I \115 A, distinct by application
• quiescent current for terminal 15 consumer I \ 100 µA
• reverse voltage protection.

14.3.1.2 Electric Power Pack

Electronics and motor are integrated into a single unit, an electric power pack, to
serve reliability, more compact space and efﬁciency.

14 Electrically Powered Hydraulic Steering

393

The application deﬁnes the fundamental structure of rotor and stator in a
cylindrical conﬁguration an inside rotor is most common. Basically, the ﬁve dif-
ferent structures indicated in Table 14.5 are suitable, each with their mentioned
qualities, pros and cons. The motor designs ‘stepping motor’ and ‘asynchronous
motor’ are not represented in EPH systems, though.

The ﬁrst electro-hydraulic systems were integrated in compact or lower middle
class vehicles. The applying requirements to power and convenience (acoustics)
favoured direct current motors (DC) or brushless direct current motors (BLDC).
The expansion of EPHS steering to bigger vehicles with higher power and
convenience requirements triggered the development of 3-phase permanent mag-
net synchronous motors with rare earth magnets. They allow achieving very low
volumes or weight-to-power ratios. The weight-to-power ratio is about 40 % less
than that of an asynchronous motor of the same power.

The BLDC version is predestined for this application, because the motor pump
unit is constantly running to supply the standby volumetric ﬂow. The rotor gen-
erates the magnetic ﬁeld, the alternating ﬁeld is generated by electronic com-
muting in the stator. The rotation is generated by alternate attraction and repulsion.
The rotor is turning synchronously, following the rev of the alternating ﬁeld. The
rotor position can be detected by sensors (e.g., Hall effect pulse generator) or by
computational methods (engine model, sensorless control), enabling a very robust
and cheap conﬁguration (Hofer 1998).

The electric power pack, Fig. 14.9, is electronically stabilised at its nominal
speed in its ﬁeld of operation. To properly exploit the electrical unit at higher revs,
it is operated in a weakened ﬁeld. This establishes a rev bandwidth of 750–
6,000 1/min.

As the most powerful EPHS needs about 110 A at a full hydraulic output of
1,000 W, setting a limit to any 12 V vehicle electrical systems, the thermal
management of motor and ECU is very important. Of consequence for the driver is
the time the system can be used at high load or the time it can be kept at the end
stop until a thermal protective mode is activated (critical time). Typically, the
thermal constraints are deﬁned in speciﬁcations, such as ambient temperature,
permissible peak temperature and steering manoeuvre, e.g., the number of sub-
sequent parking cycles.

Installing the motor in the hydraulic oil, i.e. using the ﬂuid to cool the windings
and the ECU, helps to extend the critical time considerably. This effect is due to
improved convective transmission of heat (by a factor of 100 (!) relative to air) and
the additional thermal mass (caloric capacity of the oil). Figure 14.10 shows the
time to reach a critical temperature state in the electronics (e.g., Tcrit = 120 ˚C) as a
function of the ambient temperature (=initial temperature) for a parking cycle. At
an initial temperature of 92 ˚C, the requirement (200 s parking) is just about met
by a drily running motor pump unit. The wet running concept achieves a three
times longer period for this constraint. The recorded measurement can also be
interpreted as saying that the wet running motor pump unit can be used at an
ambient temperature of T = 105 ˚C and yet meet the speciﬁcation.

394

J. Gessat et al.

n
e
p
o

,
g
n
i
d
n
i
w
d
e
t
a
r
t

)
g
n
i
d
n
i
w
g
o
c

e
l
g
n
i
s
(

,
y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

,
y
t
i
s
n
e
d

r
e
w
o
P

,
e
c
a
p
s

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c

s
c
i
t
s
u
o
c
a

,
)
s
t
e
n
g
a
m
h
t
r
a
e

e
r
a
r
(

e
c
i
r
P

s
c
i
n
o
r
t
c
e
l
e

x
e
l
p
m
o
c

r
o
t
o
m

r
o
t
o
m

r
o
t
o
m

s
u
o
n
o
r
h
c
n
y
s

t
e
n
g
a
m

t
n
e
n
a
m
r
e
P

t
n
e
r
r
u
c

t
c
e
r
i
d

s
s
e
l
h
s
u
r

B

t
n
e
r
r
u
c

t
c
e
r
i

D

r
o
t
o
m

s
u
o
n
o
r
h
c
n
y
s
A

e
c
n
a
t
c
u
l
e
r

d
e
h
c
t
i

w
S

M
S
M
P

C
D
L
B

M
C
D

M
S
A

R
S

r
o
t
o
M

s
t
i
n
u

p
m
u
p

r
o
t
o
m

r
o
f

s
e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s

r
o
t
o
m

r
o
t
o
r

e
d
i
s
n
I

5
.
4
1

e
l
b
a
T

)
B
e
F
e
N

(

s
t
e
n
g
a
m

t
r
a
p

t
e
e
h
s

s
u
o
n
o
r
h
c
n
y
s

e
s
a
h
p
-
3

d
e
t
u
m
m
o
c

y
l
l
a
c
i
n
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

t
n
e
r
r
u
c

t
c
e
r
i

D

r
o
t
o
m

s
u
o
n
o
r
h
c
n
y
s
A

r
o
t
o
m
g
n
i
p
p
e
t
S

r
o
t
o
m

C
A
s
e
s
a
h
p

3

r
o
t
o
m
C
D

t
n
e
n
a
m
r
e
p

h
t
r
a
e

e
r
a
R

l
a
t
e
m
n
i

s
t
e
n
g
a
m
e
t
i
r
r
e
F

,

g
n
i
d
n
i
w

r
o
t
o
R

,
s
d
o
r

d
e
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
D

r
o
t
o
r

e
g
a
k
c
a
p

t
e
e
h
s

l
a
t
e
M

C
D

C
D

C
A
s
e
s
a
h
p

3

C
A
s
e
s
a
h
p

3

e
m
a
N

y
l
p
p
u
S

r
o
t
o
R

r
o
t
o
r

d
e
h
c
n
u
p

t
e
e
h
s

l
a
t
e
m

e
g
a
k
c
a
p

t
s
a
c
-
e
i
d

,

d
e
s
o
l
c

r
o
t
o
r

m
u
i
n
i
m
u
l
a

e
g
a
c

-
n
e
c
n
o
c

,
r
o
t
a
t
s

d
e
t
n
e
m
g
e
S

,
e
g
a
k
c
a
p

d
n
a
t
s

d
e
h
c
n
u
P

n
i

s
t
e
n
g
a
m
e
t
i
r
r
e
F

t
e
e
h
s

l
a
t
e
m
d
e
h
c
n
u
P

,
s
e
g
a
k
c
a
p

t
e
e
h
s

l
a
t
e
m
d
e
h
c
n
u
P

r
o
t
a
t
S

g
o
c

e
l
g
n
i
s

r
o
(

g
n
i
d
n
i
w

)
g
n
i
d
n
i
w

r
o
t
a
t
s

d
e
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d

t
r
a
p

t
e
e
h
s

l
a
t
e
m

n
e
p
o

,

g
n
i
d
n
i
w

,
s
e
g
a
k
c
a
p

d
e
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d

)
g
n
i
d
n
i
w
g
o
c

e
l
g
n
i
s
(

n
e
p
o

,
g
n
i
d
n
i
w
d
e
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

y
s
a
e

,
e
c
i
r
P

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

y
s
a
e

,
e
c
i
r
P

e
c
i
r
p
/
s
s
e
n
t
s
u
b
o
R

e
c
i
r
p
/
s
s
e
n
t
s
u
b
o
R

s
e
g
a
t
n
a
v
d
a

n
i
a
M

,
r
o
t
a
t
u
m
m
o
c

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

/
s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

r
a
c

t
c
a
p
m
o
c

V
C
L
d
n
a

t
n
e
m
g
e
S
E
D

/

t
n
e
m
g
e
s

o
t
p
u
r
e
w
o
p
h
g
i
h
m
u
i
m
e
r
P

C

o
t

p
u

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

s
e
i
r
e
S

t
s
o
c
w
o
L

d
e
i
l
p
p
a

t
o
N

d
e
i
l
p
p
a

t
o
N

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a
U
P
M

s
c
i
t
s
u
o
c
A

.

h
c
e
m
y
b

r
a
e

W

e
c
a
p
s
/
y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
E

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

c
i
t
s
u
o
c
A

s
e
g
a
t
n
a
v
d
a
s
i
d

n
i
a
M

14 Electrically Powered Hydraulic Steering

395

Fig. 14.9 Electric motor without sensor and ECU functional diagram

Fig. 14.10 Thermal quality of an MPU running dry or wet with full load

14.3.1.3 Pump and Valves

The pump converts the mechanical power of the motor into a hydraulic output of
the motor pump unit. Figure 14.11 shows (on the left) the functional qualities in
matching block diagrams for an ideal conﬁguration without loss. The input values
of the pump are rev and pressure, the output values are pump volumetric ﬂow and
pump drive torque. Note that the pump volumetric ﬂow is proportional to rev and
geometrical pump capacity (cm3/rev). The idealised conﬁguration is not a function
of pressure. To maintain a hydraulic pressure, deﬁned by the load or the force at
the rack, a torque is required that is inverse proportional to the pump size. For a

396

J. Gessat et al.

Fig. 14.11 Block diagram MPU and characteristic curve design

given motor characteristic curve, the characteristic curve of the motor pump unit
can be raised by the pump size (geometrical pump capacity) to high volumetric
ﬂows and pressures without changing the peak power.

Real conﬁgurations deviate from the ideal response with regard to the volu-
metric ﬂow because of internal leaking (gap losses). This response is described by
the volumetric efﬁciency as a function of rev and pressure. With regard to the
torque, a (small) part serves to overcome the friction at axial and radial bearings.
This is covered by the hydraulic-mechanical efﬁciency. Motor pump units inte-
grate external gear pumps, because these are very robust, cheap and small
(Ivantysyn 1993). Very high efﬁciencies can also be achieved by special manu-
facturing methods (ηvol ≈ 97 %, ηhm ≈ 91 %, → ηtotal ≈ 88 %).

Figure 14.12 shows a conﬁguration example of an external gear pump and its

main parts:

• oil pump body
• gearwheel pair (straight or diagonal dovetailing)
• sealing elements (moulded seals or sealing plates)
• sleeve bearings (with or without bushings)
• lid

The gearwheel pair is supported in the sleeve bearings. This unit is placed into
the body and shut off on both sides by the sealing elements and lids. The pressure
load, rising across the perimeter towards the pressure side, produces a radial
bearing load which is taken up by the sliding ﬁt. Surfaces exposed to operating

14 Electrically Powered Hydraulic Steering

397

Fig. 14.12 External gear pump, combined check and pressure relief valve (Source TRW)

pressure develop from the special design of the moulded seal in the region of the
lids and sleeve bearings. Axial compensation is thereby achieved and proper
sealing of the facing gearwheel surfaces is established.

The tooth gaps carry the liquid across the outside contour from the suction to
the pressure side. The kinematics of meshing produce an asymmetry of the vol-
umetric ﬂow (pump pulsation) whose effect is compensated by secondary mea-
sures. The resonator, integrated into the MPU housing, and the use of special
hydraulic tubes are some of them.

The peak pressure of the pressure relief valve is adjusted by the travel stroke.
The check valve is realised by applying a ﬂat valve body, see Fig. 14.12 on the
right.

14.3.2 Hydraulic Pipe System

Just as with conventional hydraulic power steering, low-and high-pressure lines
made of hose and pipe sections are used in EPHS systems. The higher require-
ments for the damping behaviour of the high-pressure line entails its more complex
structure in an EPHS system. Hence, in the following, the focus is put on the
high-pressure line.

14.3.2.1 Main Requirements

The following list shows the main requirements for a high-pressure line of an
electric-hydraulic power steering:

• hydraulic connection between pump and gear with very low circulatory

resistance

• damping of the pump pulsation, i.e. diminished ﬂuid noise

398

J. Gessat et al.

• damping of system vibrations
• ﬂexible mechanical connection between motor pump unit and steering gear

(reducing the structure-borne sound transmission, tolerance offset).

The mentioned requirements apply for any lines in hydraulic steering systems,
more effort is necessary to dampen the pump pulsation in EPHS systems, though.
The main reason is the variable rev of the electric motor which is adjusted
regardless of the internal combustion engine speed. The rev of the electric motor
rises, e.g., when parking at rest, to make enough volumetric ﬂow available. In this
case, the high-pressure line has to damp the pulsations of the pump across a
broader frequency range. A conventional pump, powered by the internal com-
bustion engine, would in this case run with a steady rev and only discrete fre-
quencies (pump orders) would have to be damped.

14.3.2.2 Conﬁguration and Damping Principles

On the outside, all high-pressure lines in steering systems are made in a similar
manner. Sections of pipe and hose are alternately connected in a row. Impedance
jumps at the contact points from different stiffness values of hose wall and pipe
wall cause a reﬂection of the liquid waves, see Fig. 14.13. The constant reﬂection
and the absorption effect of the hose wall damps the pressure waves.

In spite of this effect, there are always typical natural frequencies of the indi-
vidual segments which reduce the damping. Hose installations or ‘tuners’ are used
to achieve a broadband damping, to improve the damping response of the pipe
system. There are two essential kinds of tuners: the ﬁrst case is a PTFE tube and
the second case is a steel spiral.

14.3.2.3 Determination of the Damping Behaviour

The damping behaviour of the hydraulic pipe system can be analysed indepen-
dently from the car while the response characteristics are determined in a test, see
Fig. 14.14. This reduces the test costs on the vehicle level considerably.

The response characteristics are described by the transmission matrix T. The
matrix joins the vectors of pressure and volumetric ﬂow pulsation at two points, e.
g., beginning and end of a line. Pressure pulsation, volumetric ﬂow pulsation and
matrix terms are complex functions in the frequency range. The transmission
matrix can be determined if pressure and volumetric ﬂow are known at both points.
While the pressure pulsations can be measured directly, the volumetric ﬂow
pulsations in the examined frequency ranges cannot. Indeed, the pressure signals
from two or more points of a line whose response characteristics are known allow
deducing on the volumetric ﬂow pulsation. Hence, the system is switched between
two reference tubes, see Fig. 14.14.

14 Electrically Powered Hydraulic Steering

399

Fig. 14.13 Pipe system conﬁguration—impedance jumps, tuners

Fig. 14.14 Veriﬁcation of pipe systems—response characteristics

Then the terms of the required matrix can be identiﬁed as a function of the
known transmission matrices of the reference tubes and the transfer functions of the
pressure pulsations between the measuring positions 1 and 2, as well as 5 and 6.
A suitable measure of the quality of the damping is the element T11. It rep-
resents the ratio of the pressure amplitude at the line entrance to the pressure
amplitude at the line exit with an ideally closed end. The example shows a
comparison of two pressure pipe systems. The pump frequency range is shown as
well. Pipe system A has a much better damping and is therefore used on- board.

14.3.2.4 Hydraulic Resistance

The pressure loss characteristics of the pipe system is non-linear. The pressure loss
grows progressively with increasing volumetric ﬂow, and as a result, the passive
power dissipation rises disproportionately, see Fig. 14.15.

400

Fig. 14.15 Veriﬁcation of
pipe systems—pressure loss

J. Gessat et al.

To minimize power consumption, the steering system should operate at about

2 l/min. This ensures that EPHS systems will have low

• power dissipation of the hydraulic pipe system (cf. HPS system),
• variation of the power dissipation when different pipe systems are used (cf. HPS

system).

The latter aspect is important in particular because vehicle applications always
require other technical solutions for tubing and acoustic tuning, due to the avail-
able space.

14.3.3 Other Components

14.3.3.1 Sensors

The volumetric ﬂow (or the MPU rev) is controlled by setting vehicle speed and
steering wheel rate. In most cases, sensors are applied which are already on-board,
such as the wheel speed sensor (ABS) or the steering wheel angle sensor of the
electronic stability control (ESC).

14.3.3.2 Fluids

Electrically powered hydraulic steering applies liquid ATF oils, e.g., Pentosin
CHF 11 S or Total LDS H50126. They allow extending the operational temper-
ature range down to −40 ˚C. Purity requirements are compliant with ISO 4406
18/16.

14 Electrically Powered Hydraulic Steering

401

Fig. 14.16 Adaptation to the vehicle environment—brackets and tanks (Bublitz 2010)

14.3.3.3 Tanks and Brackets

Tanks and brackets are parts which are simple to adapt to the application. The
motor pump unit can therefore assume almost any position in the available space.
Figure 14.16 gives an overview of different standard applications.
Electric Power Steering Systems

Alexander Gaedke, Markus Heger, Michael Sprinzl, Stefan Grüner
and Alexander Vähning

15.1 Introduction

A change of hydraulic systems to solely electrically operated steering systems
(Electric Power Steering, EPS) has taken place in passenger car steering systems
during the last years. The use of these systems was originally limited to small vehicles,
because the power density of the electronic parts and the energy available from the
on-board wiring was not sufﬁcient to serve bigger vehicles and higher steering powers.
New technologies enable the general use of EPS in the superclass now. Various EPS
varieties have established themselves in the individual vehicle classes in the market
(see Fig. 15.1). These systems will be described in Sect. 15.2 in more detail.

The advantage of electric power-assisted steering in comparison to HPS is that
it is activated only when needed. This is called a power-on-demand system, i.e.
energy is fed only when the car is steered. A rather low average energy con-
sumption is the result,
leading to better mileage and less CO2 emission.
Figure 15.2 shows the petrol and CO2 reduction for a middle class vehicle with a
2.0 l petrol engine. Note that the savings in fuel consumption and CO2 emission
achieved in NEDC and by end customer driving are of a similar scale.
Fig. 15.1 Operational areas of steering systems in different vehicle and power classes

Fig. 15.2 Saving of EPS in comparison to a conventional HPS. The results of the NEDC (New
European Driving Cycle) and driving by the end customer are comparable. The measurements
were taken at a BMW 320i

High requirements for less consumption and emission make the use of EPS
indispensable in all vehicle classes.

Another advantage of EPS is the additional functionality that meets higher
requirements for vehicle safety, ride comfort and driver-assist. Examples are, e.g.,
parking assistants that guide the vehicle automatically into a parking spot by
intervention into the steering. Systems like Lane Departure Warning should be
mentioned, too. They warn the driver by a superposed torque at the steering wheel
when the lane is unintentionally left. Therefore, functions like Lane Departure
Warning contribute to improving road safety. More functions will be found in
Sect. 15.6.

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

405

benchmark

computation,
 simulation

mechanical 
construction

analysis, 
diagnosis

vehicle testing

integral EPS 
system competence

steering 
mechanism 
design

motor design

testing for NVH

sensor design

safety

systemwide 
integration

software 
development

Fig. 15.3 Scopes of EPS development

The development departments of the steering system manufacturers were facing
new challenges in making EPS available in series. The development of such a
complicated mechatronic system and the applying safety requirements demanded
many new processes of development which had not been required for HPS up to
now. Safety standards IEC 61508 and ISO 26262 should be speciﬁcally mentioned
here (see Sect. 15.5).

With EPS, particular attention has to be paid to the acoustic response of the
on-board system. Servo motors and gearbox layers of the EPS unit emit noise
(vibrations) that had not been present before. They should not be perceived by the
driver as annoying, hence, the development of every individual component and
their on-board assembly has to consider the acoustic transmission paths. Simula-
tion tools are used early on for doing so.

Figure 15.3 presents the various scopes of EPS development. The interaction of
all the mentioned scopes is indispensable to develop an excellent steering system.

15.1.1 Analogies of EPS and HPS

This section will discuss the essential differences of the conﬁguration and function
of HPS and EPS units.

Figure 15.4 shows that the HPS has many individual parts (pump, hoses, gear
etc.) that are usually assembled on-board, not before. Then the system has to be
hydraulically ﬁlled and the connections tested for leakage.

The EPS, though, is supplied to the vehicle manufacturer as a complete and
tested unit. Only the electric connection to the vehicle has to be established to start
running the steering.

406

A. Gaedke et al.

Fig. 15.4 Less complexity in EPS in comparison to HPS. EPS requires no additional parts

The two systems differ in the generation of the power-assist as follows:

• HPS generate the power-assist in a hydraulic cylinder which is connected to the
rack. A hydraulic pump supplies the cylinder with hydraulic energy. It is
actuated by a rotary disk valve (see Sect. 11.3).

• EPS generates the power-assist by means of an electric motor whose force is fed
into the rack or steering column by a servo gear unit. The electric motor is
powered by the on-board wiring. The motor is actuated by power electronics
integrated into the electric ECU of the EPS.
With both steering systems, the detection of the driver’s intention is crucial for

providing the required power-assist. The systems detect it as follows:

• in an HPS, a rotary disk valve is connected to a torsion bar. This component is
accommodated in the steering driveline between wheel and gear. If the driver
steers, the torsion bar is twisted and the rotary disk valve opens one way.
Pressure is applied to one side of the hydraulic cylinder, and the power-assist is
active. The level of the power-assist is a mechanical function of the valve
characteristic (see Sect. 11.10).

• EPS uses torque sensors to identify the driver’s purpose. As in the hydraulic
system, a torsion bar is twisted when a steering movement is initiated (see Sect.
15.3.3). Now the required power-assistance is computed in the EPS-ECU using
the measured torsion bar torque. It is a beneﬁt that the power-assist character-
istics can be changed by a software almost arbitrarily, no mechanical changes
are necessary.

15.2 Designs of EPS Systems

15.2.1 EPSc: Column

The EPSc (Fig. 15.5) is the oldest EPS variety in regular use. It entered mass
production as early as 1988, in a Suzuki Cervo (Stoll and Reimpell 1992). It was
used at ﬁrst only in minis and compact cars whose rack forces and steering powers
are very low. Today, the EPSc is also used in middle-class vehicles. This became

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

407

Fig. 15.5 Electric power-assisted steering with power-assist unit in the steering column (EPSc)

feasible due to the use of new materials for power-assisted gears, steering columns
and pinions that permit transmitting higher torques.

The power-assist unit of the EPSc is accommodated in the interior of the
vehicle. This is favourable with regard to the environmental requirements. In the
interior, the power-assist unit does not need to be watertight, for example. A lower
temperature range of −40 to 85 ˚C applies as well, while the engine compartment
requires −40 to 125 ˚C. Especially the high temperatures are a challenge for the
electronic parts of the power-assist unit. A shortcoming of the interior is that the
power-assist unit is placed very close to the driver and can be heard more easily.
The power-assisted gear of an EPSc is not a self-locking worm gear. The screw
is mounted at the engine shaft of the electric motor, and the accompanying worm
wheel is connected to the steering column. Other gearbox varieties are known, e.g.,
a belt gearbox or a direct drive. However, these do not appear in signiﬁcant
numbers on the market so far.

The forces of the power-assist unit are transferred along steering column,
intermediate steering shaft and pinion, setting limiting factors for the highest
accessible steering forces. A longitudinal adjustment of steering columns, for
example, requires sliding elements in the steering shaft (see Chap. 10). For higher
torques, they have to be laid out more sturdy and, therefore, more expensive. The
easiest conﬁguration of such sliding elements is a simple plastic slider. Higher
transmission torque make expensive metal bearings obligatory.

A particular problem is the crash response of

the EPSc, because the

power-assist unit is in the upper steering column, near the driver.

408

Fig. 15.6 EPSp by NSK
company (Source
Internet NSK Europe)

A. Gaedke et al.

15.2.2 EPSp: Pinion

The power-assist unit of the EPSp is placed right at the steering pinion (Fig. 15.6).
The power-assist torque generated by the electric motor is transferred by a
worm gear to the pinion and the rack. The system can achieve slightly higher
steering powers than an EPSc, because the forces do not need to be transferred
along steering column and intermediate steering shaft. Since the power-assist unit
(engine and ECU) is near the EPSp in the engine compartment, it has to meet
higher requirements for temperature, density and vibration than, e.g., an EPSc.
These higher requirements also apply for the EPSdp, EPSapa and EPSrc systems
(Sects. 15.2.3–15.2.5).

The package possibilities of this system are limited, because the power-assist
unit can be turned only around the axis of the steering pinion. Another problem is
that the power-assist unit is near the driver’s legs. Therefore, it needs to be ensured
that the power-assist unit cannot penetrate into the space of the legs during a crash.

15.2.3 EPSdp: Dual Pinion

The power-assist unit of the EPS Dual Pinion is mounted at a second pinion
(Fig. 15.7). This steering is very well suited for medium or upper middle class
vehicles. The ﬁrst standard use of such a steering occurred on the VW GOLF
Platform in 2002.

The installation of the power-assist unit at the second pinion permits separating
sensor unit and drive unit. Since the main drive pinion gear ratio is independent
from the steering ratio, a power-optimising layout is possible. The additional
system power is 10–15 % higher than that of an EPSc or EPSp.

The power-assist unit can be positioned by an accordingly tuned worm gear,
individually turning 360˚ radial to the rack and main drive pinion axis (Fig. 15.8).
This quality allows adapting the steering to very difﬁcult installation space. A very
good crash safety can be achieved by careful exploitation of the installation space.

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

409

Fig. 15.7 EPSdp by ZF Steuersysteme

Fig. 15.8 Various examples of the EPSdp, the power-assist unit can be placed very ﬂexibly.
Therefore the steering can be best adapted to the available installation space

15.2.4 EPSapa: Axle Parallel

The EPSapa (Fig. 15.9) with an axle-parallel drive is marked by low system
friction and high efﬁciency. This steering is applied in dynamic sports cars, upper
middle class cars, even in high load vehicles, for example, in cross-country

410

A. Gaedke et al.

Fig. 15.9 EPSapa steering by ZF Steuersysteme

vehicles and transporters. The ﬁrst standard model to use the EPSapa was the
BMW 3 in 2007.

In this steering model, the power-assistance is generated by the electric motor
and transferred to the rack by a combination of ball screw and timing belt gearbox.
The ball screw converts the rotation of the engine into a translation of the rack.
This gearbox model requires that the engine is arranged in parallel with the
rack. The power-assist unit can then be turned arbitrarily around the rack, so that
the installation space on-board can be perfectly exploited.

15.2.5 EPSrc: Rack Concentric

The rack-concentric steering system uses a ball screw as a gear to convert the
rotation of the engine into a translation of the rack. In contrast to the EPSapa, the
ball screw is here directly driven by an electric motor. Therefore this steering
system has one gearbox layer less than the EPSapa (cf. Sect. 15.2.4).

The concentric conﬁguration requires a special servo motor with hollow shaft

rotor, because the rack of the steering passes through the motor.

As mentioned above, the motor engages directly into the ball screw, and there is
one gear ratio layer less. Since the multiplication is lower than that of the EPSapa,
an electric motor that can produce higher torques is needed. If the power fed by the
on-board wiring should stay the same, this can be achieved only by a larger motor.
This means that in comparison to an EPSapa, the electric motor of an EPSrc has to
produce a twice as high torque at the same output power level.

Due to the concentric arrangement, the EPSrc is very compact, yet this con-
ﬁguration has a disadvantage. All the previously discussed steering systems allow
arranging the power- assist unit to some extent around the steering, enabling easier
packaging. The motor of the EPSrc and its ball screw can be shifted only slightly
axially along the rack (Fig. 15.10).

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

411

Fig. 15.10 EPSrc, the hollow shaft motor is arranged concentrically around the rack

15.3 Subassemblies of the EPS

15.3.1 Power-Assisted Gear

The power-assisted gear establishes the connection between drive unit, wheels and
driver. Hence, it is active right in the power ﬂow of the EPS. Because of vibration,
friction or inertia effects, the gearbox parts have to be considered in an assessment
of the static and dynamic qualities of the overall system. Combinations of screws,
ball thread, timing belt and rack-and-pinion gears (cf. Chap. 11) are used for EPS
applications, according to the system version. As the gearbox conﬁgurations are
always form closed, every input movement is allocated a unique output movement.

Function The main function of the servo gear unit is the transmission of the
power-assist torque to the rack when the electric motor has provided it on demand.
The rotation of the power- assist drive is converted into a translation of the rack.
The different characteristics of the necessary output power and the available drive
power generate a necessity to adapt the torque or rev level by the power-assisted
gear for power transmission. The drive torques have to be ampliﬁed by a gear ratio
towards the slow end, to generate the necessary rack forces while meeting the
requirements of the power-assist drive with regard to costs, space or power
demand. Accordingly big transmission ratios can be achieved by a combination of
two gearbox layers.

An essential secondary function of the servo gear unit is a change of the axis of
rotation. This concerns the position of the drive and driven axles in space, which is
essential for size and shape of the space the EPS is installed in. A general division
of gearboxes with parallel, intersecting or oblique axes of rotation is possible.

Qualities of power transmission In view of the power transmission, the EPS
gearbox layers are mainly determined by their transmission ratio and their efﬁ-
is the ratio of input and output rev, nin and nout.
ciency. The transmission ratio i

412

i ¼

nin
nout

A. Gaedke et al.

ð15:1Þ

The loss of power in a gearbox layer, PV, is represented by its efﬁciency η. It

represents the ratio of usable power Puse and supplied power Psup.

g ¼

¼ 1 (cid:3)

Puse
Psup

PV
Psup

ð15:2Þ

Technical requirements In the following, the most important technical require-
ments of the power-assisted gear for EPS are listed:

• high static and dynamic strength
• high safety against self-inhibition
• high loading capacity for operation and ambient conditions
• no servicing to maintain the effectiveness for the whole service life
• high efﬁciency to keep speciﬁed limit values for the input and output power of

EPS systems

• low free travel to avoid an unstable steering torque curve during alternate

steering or by dynamic rack force changes

• high stiffness and low moments of inertia as a basis for the best steering feel
• low weight, taking into account strength requirements and target costs
• low emission of structure-borne and airborne sound to avoid interfering noise

and vibrations.

15.3.1.1 Worm Gear

Worm gears belong to the screw gears. The axes of screw and worm wheel do not
intersect. The shape of the screw corresponds to a multi-stroke threaded bolt
whose rotation drives the worm wheel, due to its screw-like shape, see Fig. 15.11.
A big slip component is typical for the transmission of motion in comparison to
spur gears, see also Niemann and Winter (2004). Noiseless and steady transmis-
sion of motion is possible. Nevertheless, the slip towards the contact line generates
a higher loss of power. Therefore, the efﬁciency is lower in comparison to spur cut
gears.

Worm gears are used in the EPSdp to transmit power between electric motor
and main drive pinion. The steering column variety EPSc and the pinion variety
EPSp apply a worm gear for power transmission as well. It is used to transfer the
drive torques of the electric motor to the steering column. Worm gears allow for
great gear ratios in a layer. For EPS applications, they are in the range of 15–30.
The transmission ratio corresponds to the ratio of the number of worm wheel cogs
to the number of thread gears at the screw.

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

413

Fig. 15.11 Worm gear of an
EPSdp. The variable
arrangement of the screw in
the perimeter of the worm
wheel offers an additional
degree of freedom to exploit
the installation space in the
best manner

A worm wheel with plastic gear rim is the most common tool to keep dove-
tailing noise and the wear of the cog ﬂanks low for the whole service life. It cogs
with a hardened steel screw. The gear rim, strongly loaded as a result of the high
forces, is made out of high-performance plastics. To maintain a lasting zero
backlash in the cog engagement, the screw can be put on to the worm wheel using
a helical spring with a deﬁned pretension.

15.3.1.2 Ball Screw Drive

Ball screws transform the rotation of the electric motor in an EPSapa or an EPSrc
system into a translation of the rack and vice versa. The application of ball screws
in steering technology traces back to the ball-with-nut steering gear. Essential parts
of the ball screw (KGT) are, acc. to DIN 69051-1 (1989), the ball thread spindle,
the balls as rolling elements and the ball thread nut including the runback system
and the seal elements, see Fig. 15.12.

Ball screws are favourable for converting rotation and translation because of the
high mechanical loading capacity, the big attainable transmission ratios and the
highly efﬁcient energy transmission with little loss. Efﬁciencies of more than 90 %
can be achieved.

The ball thread spindle of modern EPS systems is a part of the rack. The ball
thread nut also called steering nut, is supported by means of a ball bearing. This
bearing accepts the radial and axial forces applying during the operation. The axes
of steering nut and rack are overlaid. The drive comes either directly (EPSrc) or
via a belt gearbox (EPSapa) from the electric motor. The drive torque is supported
by the rack near the pinion dovetailing. To reduce the resulting load of the steering
pinion, the rack can be Y-shaped.

The principle of ball screws corresponds to that of a wedge which converts a
translation through an inclined plane into a lateral movement and vice versa, see
also Steinhilper and Sauer (2006). The sloped plane is a screwing line around the
rack and inside of the steering nut. Balls are used as rolling elements to reduce the

414

Fig. 15.12 Parts of the ball
screw (EPSapa). This allows
an efﬁciency-optimised
power transmission also with
the highest steering forces

A. Gaedke et al.

friction and to transmit loads between the tracks of ball thread nut and ball thread
spindle.

The slope h represents the distance by which the rack is shifted during one axial
rotation of the ball thread nut. The slope of ball screws in modern electrome-
chanical steering applications has a typical value of 5–10 mm. The slope helps to
directly compute the transmission ratio of the ball screw:

iKGT ¼

2p
h

ð15:3Þ

Layout and safety of ball screws are very demanding. Beside classical bench
tests and strength computed by means of FEM analyses, NVH examinations are
necessary as well, see Fig. 15.13.

15.3.1.3 Toothed Belt Drive

Toothed belt drives of the EPSapa transfer the assist power of the electric motor to
the ball thread nut. The engine shaft (axle drive shaft) and the ball thread nut (driven
shaft) are axle-parallel. The toothed belt drives for EPS applications consist of a

Fig. 15.13 Multi-body simulation of ball screws for the inquiry of internal motion sequences.
The simulation results serve as an early functional safety check

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

415

Fig. 15.14 Timing belt
gearbox of an EPSapa. The
use of high-capacity treads
and diagonal dovetailing
allow for a better noise
response

belt and two serrated pulleys, Fig. 15.14. The transmission ratio corresponds to the
ratio of the diameters of the driven pulley d2 and driving pulley d1:

ibelt ¼

d2
d1

ð15:4Þ

Current transmission ratios are in the range of 2–4.
Toothed belt drives belong to the shape-paired traction drives. The positive
locking of the dovetailing between the belt and the serrated pulleys prevents
slipping during the power transmission. At the same time, the necessary preten-
sions can be signiﬁcantly reduced in comparison to other traction drives. Timing
belts are also called synchronous belts, because of their synchronisation.

The free belt segments between the serrated pulleys are called empty span and
tight span. The tension of the belt in the tight span is higher than its pretension
when load is transmitted between the pulleys. At the same time, the belt tension in
the empty span drops by the same amount. The belt always has to be loaded with a
certain least tension, so that the belt is bedded trouble-free in the dovetailing of the
serrated pulley. A correct belt pretension is vital for service life, noise response
and good transmission of the belt. More noise can develop from ampliﬁed
vibrations of the belt when its pretension is too low, see also Nagel (2008).

A basic sizing of toothed belt drives is stipulated by the standard ISO 5295
(1987). It can be used to approximately identify the required belt width for the safe
transmission of the torque, as a function of the used belt tread, the power and the
geometrical ratios of the gearbox. The detailed layouts that include the loading
time as well, for example, have to be determined in close cooperation between belt
and steering system manufacturers. The use of high-performance treads enables
the highest power density, an energy-efﬁcient transmission of motion and a better
noise response. This can be further improved by diagonal dovetailing. The
increased risk that, because of this, the timing belt might leave the serrated pulley
has to be counteracted by means of ﬂanged wheels.

High differences in temperature near the internal combustion engine and the
resulting load of the timing belt may put tight constraints to the range of usable

416

A. Gaedke et al.

belt materials. The temperature range of −40˚ to +125 ˚C is a reason to use rubber
elastomers as basis material of the timing belt. Fibreglass is used for the tensile
member. It offers not only the best tensile strength but also low thermal expansion.
Sinter materials are preferred for the serrated pulleys of modern standard EPS
applications.

15.3.2 Electric Motor

15.3.2.1 Overview/Comparison/Working Area

The power assist is supplied by the electric motor of the electromechanical
steering system. It converts electric energy, fed in by the on-board wiring, into
mechanical energy on demand. Sufﬁcient power assist in all driving situations has
to be provided through a good choice of the motor type and size. The electric
motor is crucial for the steering feel and the driver’s perception because of the
direct mechanical connection to the steering wheel.
Classiﬁcation (Lindner et al. 1999; Fischer 2006; Stölting and Kallenbach 2006)
Electric motors can be classiﬁed by the type of motion as rotational engines and
translational engines (or linear motors). Only rotational engines are used for EPS
applications, because of easy conﬁguration, high power density and uncomplicated
control. They consist of a stationary stator and a swivelling rotor, concentric to the
stator. Depending on how stator and rotor are arranged, they are further classiﬁed
as internal and external rotor motors. The type of power feed distinguishes DC,
AC, 3-phase and pulse motors. The three-phase AC motors, or polyphase motors,
can be differentiated by the rev response of the rotor to the magnetic ﬁeld of the
stator as asynchronous and synchronous motors.

Motor-power classes Brushed DC motors with permanent magnets were origi-
nally used in the ﬁrst EPS systems. They can be operated by a very easy control at
the DC wiring of automobiles. The rising power demand of middle and large
vehicle classes and the rapid development of microprocessor and inverter tech-
nology made brushless AC motors feasible, driven by a rectiﬁer and ﬁeld-oriented
actuation.

Operating range The choice of a motor has to include the notion that a steering
system is not operated at a steady nominal working point, for example, a steady
rev or torque (cf. Sect. 15.4). A typical parking procedure with high steering forces
has to be fed with the highest assistance force, up to a deﬁned steering speed. The
steering forces are much lower when driving, but then, higher steering speeds are
required, e.g., for evasive manoeuvres.

Simply said, the operating range of an electric motor for EPS can be divided
into a speed range with constant torque and another speed range with almost

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

417

Fig. 15.15 Sketch of the power demand of electromechanical steering systems to the electric
motor and typical characteristic curves of current EPS motors

constant output power (Fig. 15.15). Taking a limited supply voltage and the
highest permissible power consumption of the electric motor into account, some
typical characteristic curves of motors of currently used EPS motors are shown in
Fig. 15.15.

A comparison of the power demand with typical characteristic curves of motors
illustrates the advantage of the 3-phase motors for the use in EPS, due to their
wider speed range, achieved by ﬁeld weakening (Stölting and Kallenbach 2006).
The ﬁeld weakening enables operating the motor above the nominal speed without
having to amplify the input voltage or input power of the drive. The lesser
available motor torque in the ﬁeld weakening mode does not limit applications in
electric power-assisted steering, because the required steering forces are dropping
much at high steering speed.

Externally excited DC motors, permitting ﬁeld weakening as well, are not used
for EPS systems, because of their more complicated conﬁguration and the still
limited output power.

Technical requirements The main technical requirements for an electric motor for
EPS systems are listed in the following:

• highest output power between 150 and 1,000 W as a function of the vehicle
class (Fig. 15.16) to cover the peak capacity during parking and evasive
manoeuvres.

418

A. Gaedke et al.

Fig. 15.16 Operation range of different electric motors for electromechanical steering systems

• The highest output power has to be made available only brieﬂy, because on
average, steering forces are low and steering events are rare, so the longterm
required output power is fairly low.

• wide operating range (M/n characteristic curve) with steady output power to
supply high steering forces for parking and high steering speeds for evasive
manoeuvres.

• very high power density and good efﬁciency, because the available space is

small and the power from the on-board wiring is low.

• very high torques in the operation mode and low cogging torque to achieve a

constant uniform steering force power-assist.

• very high engine dynamics serving a stable steering control, i.e. low electric

motor response time and inertia.

• when using a PME engine: Special winding connections to prevent inadmissibly

high brake torques from short circuits in the motor winding.

• quiet motor for a good acoustic response of the steering.
• solid conﬁguration for the whole service life, because the steering is laid out as a
maintenance-free system for the service life and no exchange of the motor is
intended.

• low EMC disturbances to maintain reliable service of all electric vehicle sys-
tems, most relevant for mechanically commuting motors, because of brush
sparking.

• high ambient temperatures, between +85 and +125 ˚C, according to installation

place.

• high mechanical strength with regard to accelerations and vibrations.

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

419

15.3.2.2 DC Motor with Mechanical Commutator (see also Stölting

and Kallenbach 2006)

The stator of mechanically commuting motors (DC motor) serves to generate a
stationary magnetic ﬁeld. This magnetic ﬁeld can be generated either by perma-
nent magnets or by a ﬁeld winding (externally excited motor, inverse-speed motor,
shunt-wound motor). The rotor consists of a core with grooves that accept the rotor
winding. The power is supplied by a commutator/brush system which impresses
the current as a function of the relative position of rotor and stator in such a way
that a continuous rotation is the result. Therefore a mechanically commuting
engine can be operated with DC power.

PME engines are essential for EPS systems, as discussed in Sect. 15.3.2.1. They
can be actuated by very simply power electronics with two lines only, because of
the absent ﬁeld winding. The lack of a ﬁeld weakness range is a disadvantage of this
motor, because the PME DC motor to reach high revs is rather big. Since the motor
torque is directly proportional to the impressed motor current, the torque control
that is typical for EPS systems can be implemented with little control effort.

The rather bad cooling of the rotor windings and the high inertia of the rotor limit its
use to low-power steering systems. The accessible power density of DC motors is
lower than that of AC motors because of the loss and space demanded by the com-
mutator. In addition, sufﬁciently low wear of the mechanical commutator/brush
system and electromagnetic tolerance with the engine needs to be ensured (Fig. 15.17).
The motor housing is usually deep-drawn out of a simply sheet steel and
contains a support for the engine shaft. Cheap hard ferrite is used for permanent
magnets. They do not achieve the power density of rare-earth magnets like
samarium-cobalt (SmCo) or neodymium-iron- boron (NdFeB). The magnets are
glued or clamped into the motor housing and mechanically protected by an

Fig. 15.17 Typical EPS DC motor with mechanical commutator

420

A. Gaedke et al.

additional sheet-metal jacket. Motor housing and magnets represent the stator of
the DC motor. The rotor consists of stacked and electrically isolated electric metal
sheets to reduce iron loss from eddy currents and demagnetisation. To achieve low
torque ripple and small cogging torques, the winding is distributed to as many
grooves of a set rotor core as possible and connected to accordingly many com-
mutator bars. The commutator is completed to a commutator/brush system with
spring- supported carbon brush conductors. A cover bearing the brush system
axially closes the motor housing. Typical DC motors for EPS systems are 4-pole
engines with two or four carbon brush conductors and 22 commutator bars.

15.3.2.3 Asynchronous Motor

The asynchronous motor (ASM) is a three phase AC motor, distinguished by an
extremely robust construction, high operational safety and high strain ability. This
is achieved by the fact that the rotor is a squirrel-cage rotor, containing no addi-
tional parts like wire winding or magnets. A squirrel-cage rotor consists of con-
ducting rods arranged in parallel with the shaft in a metal plate packet. They are
short-circuited at the front by rings (squirrel-cage). The stator is usually equipped
with a three-phase winding generating a rotating magnetic ﬁeld. The rotating ﬁeld
induces currents in the squirrel-cage of the rotor which, obeying Lenz’s law,
counteract the source and therefore generate a torque on the rotor shaft (Fig. 15.18).
Due to the cooling of the stator winding and the ECU (piggyback ECU, cf. Sect.
15.3.4.1), a solid casting housing is used for the housing of the asynchronous
motor shown above. The core with the stator winding is arranged inside. The
three-phase winding is made of solid copper wire for a very robust motor con-
struction, distributed across the perimeter of the motor. The rotor also contains a
core, to reduce the eddy current loss. Aluminium moulded in its grooves make for
the squirrel-cage. The air gap between stator and rotor has to be kept very small in
this design, to achieve a low demand for a magnetisation current, hence, high

Fig. 15.18 Conﬁguration of
a robust asynchronous motor

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

421

efﬁciency. This often leads to narrow manufacturing and assembly tolerance
margins.

Asynchronous motors with squirrel-cage rotors cannot operate as generators,
because of the missing magnetic excitement from a stator’s magnetic ﬁeld. Hence,
no additional safety measures to shut down the motor power have to be included
into EPS systems. The safety concept is much easier. Lacking a magnet, the motor
is also marked by low torque ﬂuctuations and is very quiet. Compared to
mechanically commuting DC motors, asynchronous motors with higher current
and power have a higher power density. In contrast to DC motors with permanent
magnets, asynchronous motors can be operated with ﬁeld weakening.

15.3.2.4 Synchronous Motor

Like asynchronous motors, synchronous motors belong to the group of three-phase
motors, operated with sinoidally powered three-phase windings. The rotor consists
of stratiﬁed electric metal sheet and serves to generate a magnetic ﬁeld which is
independent from the stator power. EPS motors apply permanent magnets for that
(PME synchronous motor/PMSM). This permanent, non-inductive magnetic rotor
causes the rotor to turn synchronously to the applying stator magnetic ﬁeld, hence,
the name synchronous motor.

Publications use the terms, brushless DC motor (BLDC) or electronically
commutated motor (EC). This kind of motor is driven not by sinoidal but by
block-shaped currents. Including integrated power electronics and power sensors,
it is used, for example, as a self- controlled engine for actuator drives in the
automotive industry. It can be operated with DC power. Since an ideal, rectan-
gularly impressed current does not exist in reality and the distribution of the
magnetic ﬂux density would have to be very high, these motors have a rather high
torque ripple. Hence, only PMSMs with sinoidally impressed current are used, for
current electric power-assisted steering (Fig. 15.19).

Fig. 15.19 Conﬁguration of a synchronous PME motor (exploded view, cut in parts)

422

A. Gaedke et al.

The stator of a synchronous motor is basically identical to that of the asyn-
chronous motor. Instead of a distributed winding, a concentrated single-tooth
winding is preferred for EPS systems. The spatial separation of different windings
and corresponding connections help to avoid short circuits, reducing brake torques
that might occur in the generator mode. Additional measures may be taken to
disconnect the motor currents in a fault case, such as phase or star point separation,
according to motor-power class and vehicle response.

Power drains and torque disturbances due to circular currents in the motor
windings can be avoided by connecting synchronous motors in star-connections.
The windings are distributed into different stator grooves. The stator grooves and
the number of rotor poles deﬁne the motor topology. 6- , 8- and 10-pole engines
with 9 to 12 stator grooves are often used for electric power-assisted steering.

Highly energetic rare-earth magnets of neodymium-iron-boron (NeFeB) are
used as magnetic materials for the rotor. These are inserted in a very sturdy
conﬁguration as block magnets, either in individual bags of the core (embedded
magnets) or on the surface of the rotor core as ring or segment magnets. Motors
with surface magnets have an additional sleeve over the rotor to prevent the brittle
magnets from splitting off (Fig. 15.20).

Because the motor torque of a synchronous motor depends on the strength of
the stator and the rotor magnetic ﬁeld and their enclosed angle, the machine is very
well suited for ﬁeld- oriented motor actuation. This allows driving the machine
very precisely and dynamically. Modern synchronous motors can be operated in
ﬁeld weakening mode if the magnets are sufﬁciently powerful, hence, above the
nominal speed. They supply the steady output power which is typical for steering
applications across a very wide speed range (Sect. 15.3.2.1; Fig. 15.21).

Compared to the asynchronous motor, the PMSM is marked by a higher power
density and better efﬁciency. A main source of losses are the ohmic stator losses
which can be drained by the stator metal-sheet package and the motor housing.
The synchronous motor has a lower rotor moment of inertia than DC and asyn-
chronous motors. A chamfer of the rotor or stator helps to reduce the cogging
torque to a level which is ﬁtting for EPS systems.

Topology 9/6

topology 12/8

topology 12/10

Fig. 15.20 Motor topologies of PMSMs

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

423

Rotor with embedded magnets  

rotor with surface magnets

Fig. 15.21 Rotor conﬁgurations of PMSMs

15.3.2.5 Position and Rev Sensors

If a DC motor with a mechanical commutator is used, no position or rev sensors
are required for the actuation, because the individual motor windings are fed by the
commutator.

Field-oriented actuation of polyphase motors is common, as it permits a very
dynamic motor operation in a wide speed range. It needs additional sensors for the
proper impression of the stator’s currents and its magnetic ﬁeld. The rotor speed is
used for the ﬁeld-oriented actuation of the synchronous motor and the rotor angle
for that of the asynchronous motor.

Technical requirements
• without servicing or wear, therefore, touch-free measuring principle
• high resolution and accuracy
• high temperature range of −40 to +85 ˚C (interior) or −40 to +125 ˚C (engine

compartment)

ity are common

• high serviceable life and service life
• high reliability/availability, hence, redundant electronics for diagnostics capac-

• small size, easy conﬁguration and assembly
• sturdy measuring principle with regard to fouling, vibrations, EM compatibility

Two different sensor designs for the position and speed sensors of polyphase

motors have prevailed.

Resolver A resolver consists of a ﬁeld winding and usually two receiver windings,
enabling measuring the angle of a swivelling shaft. Exciter and receiver coil are
magnetically coupled by a swivelling structure. The measuring principle is based

424

A. Gaedke et al.

Fig. 15.22 Conﬁguration of a reluctance resolver for EPS systems

on the induction law and consequently works with alternating voltages and cur-
rents for excitement and analysis. The classical resolver has a rotating ﬁeld
winding and is supplied with power by brushes and slip rings. The receiver coils
are turned by 90˚ and ﬁxed in the case.

Modern resolvers of steering applications have ﬁeld winding and receiver
windings arranged on the stator. This allows measuring angles contact free and
without electric signals supplied to the resolver shaft. The magnetic coupling that
can be changed by the rotary angle is generated by a special soft-magnetic rotor
structure (reluctance resolver) (Fig. 15.22).

In contrast to magnetic measuring principles, the absolute measuring range of a
resolver can be adapted by a suitable stator and rotor conﬁguration. The sensors
can be adapted to the number of terminals of the used motors so that there is a
higher angular resolution serving as input signal of the ﬁeld-oriented actuation.
The inductive measuring principle makes the resolver resistant against interfer-
ences by external stationary magnetic ﬁelds. They are suited for transmitting
signals across medium distances (standalone ECU) and need no magnet material.
In a favourable conﬁguration, the rotor is squeezed as a core onto the engine shaft.
The rather complicated electronics and signal analysis is unfavourable, because the
carrier-frequency method needs a special demodulation. The rather complicated
conﬁguration of resolvers with stator carrier, wire-wound coils and rotor core
needs a rather wide space. They are often more expensive than magnetic mea-
suring principles.

Magnetic angle sensors The basic principle of a magnetic sensor is based on a
permanent magnet generating a stationary magnetic ﬁeld. This magnetic ﬁeld
passes one or several parts that are dependent on a magnetic ﬁeld. Angle sensors

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

425

Measurement at the end of the shaft

measurement at the perimeter

Fig. 15.23 Measuring arrangements of magnetic sensors for position and rev measurement
(Source Internet Sensitec)

are made by setting a transducer magnet on the shaft to be measured, for example,
on the engine shaft, and arranging magnetic ﬁeld sensors axially or radially.

Two different plans for EPS systems are in use. For measuring at the end of the
shaft, a 2-pole magnetic tablet is used, for the perimeter measurement, a magnet
ring (Fig. 15.23) is applied.

A measurement at the end of the shaft is preferred if the ECU is axial to the
engine (cf. Sect. 15.3.4.1). This arrangement is favourable due to its compact
package, because the evaluation sensors can be integrated into the EPS-ECU. No
other parts like sensor case or electric connections are required.

The transducer magnetic ﬁeld is analysed by Hall or magneto-resistive sensors.
From an application perspective, the most important difference is the physical
quantity that is measured.

The Hall sensor is based on a magnetic ﬂux density measurement, i.e. the
intensity of the magnetic ﬁeld is recorded. A magneto-resistive sensor, on the other
hand, measures the magnetic ﬁeld curve, i.e. the orientation of the magnetic lines
of the ﬂux (MR sensors, Zabler et al. 2001). This dependence on the direction of
the magnetic transducer ﬁeld often suggests the MR sensors as the favoured
solution, because the measuring accuracy does not depend on the absolute mag-
netic ﬁeld strength and, hence, is independent of many parameters like tempera-
ture, ageing and mechanical tolerance margins.

A disadvantage of the widespread anisotropic magneto-resistive angle sensors
(AMR) is the unambiguous measuring range of only 180˚, because only the
position of the magnetic ﬁeld can be measured, but not its orientation or polarity.
Hall sensors provide an unambiguous measuring range of 360˚, but compared to
MR sensors, they need a more sophisticated signal analysis and compensation for a
precise measurement of the angle, because the mentioned parameters affect the
measurement result. In future EPS applications the Giant MR effect might sub-
stitute the current AMR sensors, as it allows measuring an unambiguous angle for
the full range of 360˚.

426

A. Gaedke et al.

15.3.3 Torque Sensor

15.3.3.1 Requirements/Classiﬁcation

One of the most important measured variables of EPS systems is the steering
wheel torque initiated by the driver. It is measured at the input shaft of the steering
system. Based on the measured steering torque, the required power assist is
identiﬁed by the steering functions and control; the EPS motor supplies it to the
driver. The quality of the steering torque measurement has an impact on the
attainable steering feel, because the driver perceives it directly. Beside the func-
tional requirements for measuring accuracy and resolution, the steering torque has
to be measured with absolutely reliability. Otherwise, if the measurement was
faulty, the EPS motor might be unintentionally actuated and initiate an uncon-
trollable steering event.

The most important technical requirements for torque sensors of modern EPS

systems are listed in the following:

• utmost reliability
• active torque measuring range of approx. ±10 Nm
• high signal resolution and measuring accuracy
• high measuring dynamics and signal processing with little delay
• high serviceable life and service life
• interference-resistant, diagnostics-capable interface to the ECU
• temperature range −40 to +85 ˚C for interior applications (EPSc) and −40 to

+125 ˚C for engine compartment applications

• Resistant to fouling, vibrations, wear.

The torque sensors can be classiﬁed by their mechanical conﬁguration as
sensors with or without mechanical torsion rod. The torsion rod of torsion-afﬂicted
sensors convert the torque measurement into an angle measurement. The typical
stiffness of a torsion rod in modern EPS systems is between 2 and 2.5 Nm per
degree of torsion angle (2 –2.5 Nm/˚). The highest
torsion is limited by a
mechanical entrainment to ±5˚ for the protection of the torsion bar.

Torque sensors can also be classiﬁed by the basic measuring effect, differen-
tiating between measurement of the torsion angle, the surface strain and the torsion
load.

Current EPS systems apply only sensors with torsion rod, because they permit
high- precision and interference-resistant torque measuring. The following section
will therefore discuss sensors with torsion rod ﬁrst, then Sect. 15.3.3.3 will specify
the motivation and limits of the torsion-resistant torque measurement.

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

427

15.3.3.2 Sensors with Torsion Rod

Figure 15.24 shows an extract of potential principles to measure the steering
torque in EPS systems. Sensors with torsion rod apply a great number of poten-
tiometric, inductive, magnetic and optical sensors.

Potentiometer measurement The ﬁrst EPS applied only potentiometer sensors
which are very cheap because of their widespread use in industrial products and
their simple conﬁguration. These sensors are used only for low-cost systems in the
compact car segment now. The main reason is that the measurement value may be
blurred by wear of the not contact-free measuring principle, the limited mechanical
loading capacity and the sensitivity to dirt.

The measurement is based on a slider potentiometer establishing an electrically
conductive track by a sliding contact. The ‘measuring’ and, therefore, the electric
resistance change as a function of the slider’s position on the resistance track. For
safety reasons, torque sensor applications in EPS systems apply at least two
resistance tracks and several parallel sliding contacts for the signal feed. The
resistance tracks are made of conductive plastic and the sliders are shaped like
brooms to reduce the wear.

A beneﬁt of the potentiometer measurement is the ratiometric analysis. The
measurement is independent of the absolute resistance value and temperature
interferences. Moreover, the potentiometer measurement supplies a sufﬁciently big
measuring effect, so that no additional ampliﬁcation and processing of the signal is
required. That’s why the temperature requirements are unproblematic. Some
potentiometer torque sensors for EPS systems include an angle measurement to
identify the current steer-angle.

Fig. 15.24 Overview of fundamental measuring principles to measure the steering torque of EPS
systems

428

A. Gaedke et al.

Unavoidable wear and the resulting blur of the measurement values limit
modern potentiometer torque sensors to an accuracy of ±3 % over their service
life.

Inductive sensors Inductive sensors are a type of magneto-dynamic sensors,
because the basic effect assumes an alternating magnetic ﬁeld. The main advantage
of the inductive measurement is its insensitivity against external media like dirt,
oil and water. Inductive sensors can be reliably operated in adverse surroundings.
That’s why inductive sensors have chieﬂy prevailed for industrial measuring tasks,
beside the potentiometer sensors. They are supplied in many different conﬁgura-
tions and measuring arrangements (Zabler et al. 2001).

An example of torque measurement in steering systems is given by the mea-

suring arrangement in Fig. 15.25.

The sensor is based on a system of coils which is driven by an oscillator. The
voltage induced in a coil changes as a function of the torsion angle of the torsion
rod. A ﬁrst coil is arranged over two soft magnetic rings. Each ring is mechanically
connected to an end of the torsion rod (Fig. 15.25 Detecting coil). Both rings have
distinctive cogs along their perimeters. The effective air gap between both rings
changes as a function of the turning of the cogs against each other. This alters the
impedance of the coil and changes the voltage induced in the coil. A second coil
(Fig. 15.25 Compensating coil) is used because the coil impedance depends on
other parameters which are in turn dependent on temperature, for example. The
compensating coil is arranged over a magnetic circle that is independent of the
torsion angle and supplies a reference voltage which is subject only to ambient
conditions and facilitates a compensation of various parameters.

The sensor conﬁguration with wire-wound coils discussed above is comple-
mented by inductive measuring systems with planar coils (Fig. 15.26). Suitable
conducting paths on a board create transmitter and receiver coil. The rotor consists
of an electrically conductive material and provides the magnetic coupling between
transmitter and receiver coil.

An alternating current generates an alternating magnetic ﬁeld in the transmitter
coil which passes the rotor, inducing an alternating current. This rotor current leads

Fig. 15.25 Example
conﬁguration of an inductive
torque sensor for EPS
systems [Source Internet
Koyo (Yoshida 2002)]

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

429

Fig. 15.26 Example conﬁguration of an inductive measuring principle with coils made of
conducting paths (Source Internet Hella 2014)

to another electromagnetic ﬁeld which induces a voltage in the receiver coil. The
special shape and position of transmitter coil, rotor and receiver coil make the
electromagnetic coupling between transmitter and rotor independent of the rotor’s
position, while the feedback from rotor to receiver depends on the rotor’s position.
One transmitter and two receiver coils are commonly needed. If the voltage
induced in the reception coils is compared to the source voltage (ratiometric signal
analysis), the measurement is mostly independent of temperature and insensitive to
mechanical tolerances. Such processes need no separate compensation coil and
distinguish themselves by an easy conﬁguration.

Magnetic sensors Unlike inductive sensors, magnetic sensors apply a static
magnetic ﬁeld which is generated by a permanent magnet and passes one or
several sensor elements that are dependent on the magnetic ﬁeld. As discussed in
Sect. 15.3.3.1, the torque of sensors with torsion rod is determined by an angle
measurement, hence, the same measuring effects can be exploited as in the
magnetic angle measurement (cf. Sect. 15.3.2.5). The same qualities and choice
criteria apply for useful magnetic sensors as for the magnetic angle measurement.
For this reason, Hall and MR sensors have prevailed on the market for magnetic
torque sensors.

The lower absolute angle measuring range of the MR technology (180˚) in
comparison to Hall measuring (360˚) is no restriction for the application as a
torque sensor, because for the applied torsion bars only a small torsion angle range
has to be measured.

When a torsion bar with 2 Nm/˚ and a measuring range of ±10 Nm is used, an
angle measuring range of ±5˚ is required, for example. The torque measuring range
may be modiﬁed by the applied torsion bar or by the number of poles of the
transducer magnet.

430

Fig. 15.27 Magnetic torque
sensor with direct difference
angle measurement by ZF
Steuersysteme

A. Gaedke et al.

In EPS applications, two basic measuring arrangements of magnetic sensors are
currently used. The ﬁrst conﬁguration measures the torque directly via the dif-
ference angle of input and output shaft. Figure 15.27 shows that a multipolar
magnet ring is set on one side of the torsion bar, and a magneto-resistive sensor is
placed opposite of it and connected to the other end of the torsion bar.

This arrangement is favourable because of the immediate measurement by
sensors in the torsion rod. Mechanical parts and assembly tolerances that might
affect the measurement result are reduced to a minimum. If magneto-resistive
sensors are used to measure the magnetic ﬁeld, high-resolution and high-precision
torque sensors can be built because of the typical ﬁeld direction measurement (cf.
Sect. 15.3.2.5) and ratiometric signal analysis. This depends very little on extra-
neous factors like temperature and ageing. The electric contacts of the sensor
element, that is rotating in a steering event, is established by a clockspring whose
length depends on the steer-angle range. During assembly, attention is paid so that
the clockspring cassette remains in neutral position until the steer-angle is limited
by the steering system to avoid any damage or tear. For that reason, a different
conﬁguration of a magnetic torque sensor without clockspring has been
established.

The magnetic torque sensor without clockspring uses a magnet ring as a
transducer magnet as well. However, the sensor elements for measuring the
magnetic ﬁeld are ﬁxed in the case. A soft magnetic ﬂow conductor couples
transducer magnet and sensor element (cf. Fig. 15.28).

The ﬂow conductor consists of two parts which are concentrically arranged over
the transducer magnet and connected to one end of the torsion bar. The transducer
magnet is right on the other end of the torsion bar. The position of the ﬂow
conductor relative to the transducer magnet and, therefore, the magnetic ﬂux
density in the ﬂow conductor changes as a function of the applying torsion bar

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

431

Fig. 15.28 Magnetic torque sensor without clockspring for electric contacts (Jerems et al. 2004)
(Source Valeo 2004)

torque. The ﬂux density is measured by Hall sensors which are arranged at the
perimeter between both parts of the ﬂow conductor.

The process is based on an absolute measurement of ﬁeld strength or ﬂux
density. Hall sensors and transducer magnets that can be calibrated and compen-
sated for ambient temperatures are therefore required. The inﬂuence of parts and
assembly tolerances on the measurement result can be reduced because the con-
centric magnetic ﬁeld is accepted by the ﬂow conductors across the full perimeter
of the transducer magnet (integrating measurement). By comparison, the MR
technology discussed before is a measurement of the magnetic ﬁeld at a speciﬁc
point. A high measuring accuracy with low hysteresis is achieved when during the
design of the magnet circle close attention is paid to the choice of a soft magnetic
material with low remanence and to a precise adjustment of the transducer magnet
when the sensor is assembled.

Optical sensors Optical sensors consist of a light-emitting and a photosensitive
component. Both parts are separated by a suitably structured component. The
luminous ﬂux from transmitter to receiver is inﬂuenced by the torsion angle of a
torsion bar. A common conﬁguration of optical sensors are incremental encoders,
often used in automation for high-precision positioning tasks.

The optical measuring principle means that the sensors are very insensitive
against electromagnetic disturbances (EMC). Filigree code disks and optical
structures help to gain very high resolution. However, due to the very harsh con-
ditions, and because of their sensitivity to dirt and limited mechanical load capacity,
these sensors can only be used in limited circumstances. Moreover, such sensors
supply only pulses for source signals which may be added up to a relative infor-
mation on the angle. Such incremental sensors are not suitable as torque sensor,

432

A. Gaedke et al.

Fig. 15.29 Optical torque sensor for EPSc systems (TRW)

because the angle difference of the torsion bar across the desired torsion range has
to be unambiguously identiﬁed. Hence, the light intensity between transmitter and
receiver is varied and evaluated with absolutely measuring sensors by one or more
code disks. The following series of ﬁgures shows such a sensor (cf. 15.29).

The luminous ﬂux generated by an LED is conducted by a ﬁbre-optic light
guide and two lead-frame plates, arranged over a torsion rod to an integrated
photo-diode array.

The sensor in Fig. 15.29 is partially redundant, it has two independent optical
measurement modules. Optical torque sensors are used only for EPSc systems at
the moment because of the limited temperature range of optical semiconductor
parts and the general sensitivity to dirt.

15.3.3.3 Torsion-Resistant Sensors

An important factor for a good steering feel is the stiffness of the complete steering
driveline, between steering wheel and the guided wheels (cf. Chap. 3). A too low
stiffness is often perceived by the driver as an inert and imprecise steering
response, leading to frequent steering corrections. A too high stiffness may mean
that impacts at the wheels, for example from bumps on the road, can be transferred
undamped to the steering wheel. EPS systems currently tend towards a torsion bar
stiffness of above 2 Nm/˚. Assuming a constant measuring range for the torque
measurement, this leads to lower torsion angles and, hence, to higher requirements
for the absolute resolution and accuracy of the used sensor measuring principle
(angle measurement by torsion rod). For these reasons, many concepts and patents
deal with the torsion-resistant torque measurement for EPS.

Classical strain gauges, as they are used in industrial measurement for mea-
suring torques, are no option for EPS systems. Due to the fact that the ﬁligree
resistance foils are glued on the measurement shaft, which is unsuitable for large
series production, and the often troublesome calibration needed, other solutions are
researched.

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

433

A measuring system which is also based on a surface strain of the measurement
shaft is called Surface Acoustic Wave (SAW). The basis of the measuring prin-
ciple are SAW resonators. One such resonator consists of metal electrodes on a
piezoelectric substrate (quartz). Operated with an alternating voltage of suitable
frequency, the piezoelectric substrate generates a mechanical vibration which
spreads out along the material surface. External forces, e.g., from strain and
compression lead to a change of the resonator frequency. The frequency change is
therefore a direct measure of the applying torque. This process is sometimes used
to control the tyre pressure of cars (Fig. 15.30).

A measuring principle which measures not

the
mechanical load at the measurement shaft, is based on the magneto-elastic or
magneto-strictive measuring principle. The altering magnetic ﬁeld of a ferro-
magnetic shaft is measured here under torsional load (Fig. 15.31).

the surface strain, but

The magneto-elastic measuring sensitivity of common steels is very small.
A sufﬁciently ampliﬁed measuring sensitivity can be achieved in some processes
by also permanently magnetising the measurement shaft. Yet the sensitivity of a
steering torque measurement is much lower than that of current torsion-afﬂicted
sensors and requires additional insulation.

Another big challenge is to achieve a high measuring accuracy, in particular
following the overload torque speciﬁed in Sect. 15.3.3.1. That is because overload
protection by mechanical limitation of the torsion angle is not available. Hence,
both described torsion- resistant processes suffer currently a wide hysteresis fol-
lowing an overload torque, which results from the measuring principle.

Fig. 15.30 Design of an
EPS- torque sensor based on
a surface strain (Source
Internet Transense
Technologies)

434

A. Gaedke et al.

Fig. 15.31 Simpliﬁed measuring conﬁguration of a magneto-elastic torque sensor (Source
Internet NCT Engineering)

15.3.4 ECU

ECUs for EPS basically include signal-processing electronics, to compute the
currently required power assist, and power electronics, to feed the electric motor
accordingly (Fig. 15.32).

Interior and engine compartment ECUs are distinguished by their location
on-board. The following table lists the most important requirements for EPS-ECUs
(Table 15.1).

Fig. 15.32 Simpliﬁed block diagram of an EPS-ECU consisting of signal electronics and power
electronics

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

435

Table 15.1 Requirements for EPS-ECUs for interior and engine compartment
Interior
On-board location

Engine compartment

Typical supply voltage
Maximum closed-circuit power

9–16 V
\250 μA

consumption

Typical operating temperature
Thermo shock with ﬂood water
Sealing requirements

Ambient resistance
Media resistance
Mechanical vibrations
Mechanical shock
Electromagnetic tolerance

−40 to 85 ˚C
No
IP5K0 dust-proof, no water

protection

−40 to 125 ˚C
Yes
IP6K9 K dust-proof,
jetting-resistant

Damp heat
No, only in special cases
10–20 m/s2 for body-mounted parts
300–500 m/s2 for body-mounted parts
Immune against disturbances/irradiation. No interfering

Salt spray
Yes, different reagents

electromagnetic radiation
Applied standards (excerpt):
(cid:129) Conduction disturbances ISO 7637
(cid:129) Irradiated disturbances ISO 11452
(cid:129) Radio disturbances IEC CISPR25

15.3.4.1 Designs

ECUs are preferably arranged close to the EPS motor, to keep electric loss as low
as possible (piggyback ECU). Internal loss develops in the connecting lines
between the ECU and the electric motor of the EPS, they rise with increasing
length of the line. The number and conﬁguration of the electric contacts, as for
example the plug-in connectors, have to be considered in computing the distri-
bution loss as well.

The low level of distribution loss renders the piggyback ECU the common

solution for any medium or high power rack-and-pinion power steering.

EPSc systems of the compact car segment may also apply standalone ECUs
because of low power demand and limited space for installation. They are not
arranged right at the steering but connected to the electric motor by lines of about
1 m in length.

Another drawback of standalone ECUs beside the mentioned distribution loss is
the often too complex wiring of the motor and sensor connections. Additional parts
like plugs and cable connections have to be used. Sometimes, additional measures
are necessary to electromagnetically insulate the motor lines.

Figure 15.33 shows a piggyback ECU with axial mounting at the electric motor

and internal electric connection.

High-current connections between electric motor and ECU can be made
insulation-
because of the axial mounting of the ECU, either by plugging,
displacement connectors or welding. The position and rev sensors required in
three-phase motors (cf. Sect. 15.3.2.5) can be integrated on the circuit board of the
signal electronics, to achieve a measurement that is highly precise, immune to

436

A. Gaedke et al.

Fig. 15.33 Typical conﬁgurations of an EPS-ECU as piggyback (left) or standalone version
(right)

Table 15.2 Current circuit boards for EPS-ECUs and their qualities

Printed circuit
board (PCB)

Thick ﬁlm
copper (TFC)

Isolated metal
substrate (IMS)

Directly bonded
copper (DBC)

Carrier material
Conducting material Copper

Epoxide resin

Aluminium
Copper

Ceramics
Copper

Conducting thickness

35–400

35–300

200–400

Ceramics
Copper/silver
paste
15–200

(μm)

Electric conductivity High
Thermal conductivity Low
High
Coefﬁcient of
expansion

Low
Very High
Low

High
High
High

High
Very High
Low

Current load capacity Medium
Mounting varieties

Medium
High
SMD ‘bare-die’ SMD

Very High
SMD, bare-die

SMD, THC, on
both sides

Integration density

Medium

High

Medium

High

SMD Surface Mounted Device
TFC Thick Film Copper
THC Through Hole Component
bare-die Semiconductor component without case/unpackaged chip

interference and cheap. The axial mounting of electric motor and ECU is com-
plemented with a radial mounting, common for EPS piggyback ECUs
(Table 15.2).

Ceramic carrier materials and metal substrates are used as circuit boards of
modern EPS systems, beside the conventional printed circuit technology on the
basis of epoxy resin (e.g., FR4). Individual circuit boards and external ECU
connections are usually connected by punched copper rails (lead-frames), moulded
in plastic. Wire-bonding or
laser welding establish the contacts between
lead-frame and circuit board.

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

437

15.3.4.2 Signal Electronics

The signal electronics compute the power assist required in the current driving
situation. The required sensor signals are read, made plausible and used to com-
pute the power-assist torque of the EPS motor by means of control algorithms
discussed in Sect. 15.6. A motor control generates the actuating signals of the
power electronics from the requested power-assist torque.

Recent EPS-ECUs communicate with other vehicle control systems, like the
Electronic Stability Programme (ESP) or the vehicle diagnostics, by bus systems.
The CAN-bus, used in chassis applications most often with transmission rates of
500 kBit/s, is complemented with the Flexray bus, enabling transfer rates of up to
10 MBit/s. This interface helps to read data on the driving condition, as, for
example, vehicle speed and steering wheel angle, and external steering interven-
tions are set, for example, by the driver assistance systems.

The core of the signal electronics are modern micro-controllers with CPU,
RAM, ROM and additional periphery like AD converters, timer unit and serial and
parallel interfaces (Beierlein and Hagenbruch 2004; Table 15.3).

The micro-controllers are programmed in C, including some special program
directives for automotive applications (MISRA-C Rules 2004). Real-time oper-
ating systems acc. to the OSEK/VDX standard may be used for the sequence
control of functions, also providing services for network management and
communication.

The power electronics are actuated by highly integrated electric switching
circuits (ICs). They convert the pulse-width modulated signals (PWM) of the
micro-controller into voltages that may serve to control the power semiconductor.
Moreover, they provide all the required supply voltages and often include signal
ampliﬁers to measure the motor power and functions to protect
the power
semiconductors.

Beside the steering functions, various fault detection and shutdown measures
are implemented in the signal electronics. They monitor the correct function of all
the subassemblies, and in the event of a fault, the system is set into a safety mode
(see Sect. 15.5). The state-of-the-art is to monitor the correct programme pro-
cessing of the micro-controller by the second independent safety controller. It can
be either another micro-controller (mostly 8 bits) or an application-speciﬁc

Table 15.3 Recent micro-controller characteristics of EPS

Architecture
Stroke (MHz)
Arithmetics
ROM (kByte)
RAM (kByte)
A/D converter (bit)
Interfaces

Low performance EPS
Single µC with 8/16 bits
16–32
Integer
16–32
0,5–2
8
No

High performance EPS
Single µC with 16/32 bits
32–128
Integer and ﬂoating point
256–1,024
10–60
10/12
CAN or Flexray

438

A. Gaedke et al.

integrated circuit (ASIC). Continuous monitoring checks the main computer for its
time response and the contents of its arithmetic results. Other safety measures in
the ECU are, for example, the monitoring of all the internal supply voltages and
sensor signals and the issued actuation signals of the power output stage. In a fault
event,
the main controller and the safety controller can operate the electric
switch-off channels (see Sect. 15.5.2.4). A switch-off channel can be a motor relay,
for example. Upon a fault event, the power ﬂow can be interrupted in the power
electronics or in the e-motor to avoid unintentional brake torques by PME motors.
A fault management integrated into the software controls the registering, pro-
cessing and storage of fault events. Any registered irregularities are identiﬁed and
evaluated and suitable remedies are initiated. The remedies depend on the severity
of the fault and may range from switching to redundant signals via switching off
individual functions to shutdown of the complete power-assistance. The registered
events are stored in a non-brief data memory, including a unique designator, for
the subsequent vehicle diagnostics.

15.3.4.3 Power Electronics

The task of the power electronics is the control of the energy ﬂow between
on-board wiring and EPS motor. According to the motor-power class, modern EPS
systems may feature amps of up to 170 A. The DC wiring makes voltage DC-links
obligatory. First, the input voltage and the input current are ﬁltered by inductances
and condensers are ﬁltered to meet the strict EMC requirements. The DC-link is
made of several high-capacity electrolytic capacitors. Typical capacity values of
the DC-link are 1,000 to 10,000 µF, according to the EPS motor-power class.

The actuation signals, provided by the signal electronics, are converted by a
power output stage into suitable power for the EPS motor. The output stage
consists of several power transistors in bridge connection. DC motors apply a
h-bridge and three-phase motors a three-phase bridge connection.

Self-locking ﬁeld-effect transistors (MOSFETs) are the only kind of transistors
applied, marked by low-power control and low-impedance resistance in the
switched-on state. IGBT transistors, as they are used in electric drives of hybrid
vehicles, are not suitable for a 12 V on-board wiring because of their higher
on-state power dissipation.

Modern power semiconductors can be operated at a chip temperature of 175 ˚C.
At ambient temperature, they may conduct long-term currents of up to 200 A
across a chip surface of 35 mm2. In EPS systems, these transistors are imple-
mented either as housed parts on printed circuits or metal substrates or they are
mounted on ceramic circuit boards without housing (bare-die). Sometimes, the
complete bridge connection is one subassembly, moulded in plastic (Fig. 15.34).
The heat of power semiconductors is commonly dissipated by a metallic
backplate connected to the steering case or the electric motor. The layout of the
transistor cooling has to include on-state power dissipation as well as losses from
switching, because a very high power dissipation can occur brieﬂy. The dissipation

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

439

Fig. 15.34 EPS power
output stage for DC and three
phase AC motors

may be reduced and the EMC requirements met by a compact assembly of all parts
in the power ﬂow, low-impedance mounting and connection, and a symmetrical
assembly and layout of the components that should feature low inductance
(Fig. 15.35).

15.4 System Design

15.4.1 General System Requirements

This chapter discusses the essential technical requirements of electromechanical
steering (EPS) that have to be included into the system layout (see Chap. 3).

Mechanical interfaces The steering is connected on-board with the steering shaft
and the wheel by the input shaft of the torque sensor. On the output side, the tie
rods connect the mechanical interface to the guided wheels via the hub carriers.
The steering is screwed to the axle carrier of the vehicle. The structure-borne

440

A. Gaedke et al.

Printed circuit (PCB) 

Metal substrate (IMS)

Directly Bonded Copper (DBC) 

Power module

Fig. 15.35 Conﬁgurations of EPS power output stage (PCB, IMS, DBC, module)

sound transfer may be reduced by supporting the axle carrier on elastic bearings
(silent jacks).

Electric interfaces High-current plugs connect the steering system to the on-board
wiring. Modern steering systems add a connection to the communication wiring of
the vehicle. The ECUs dispose of another hardware input to activate the steering
(terminal 15). Activation by the communication network (software Wake Up) is
also possible. The supply voltage and the highest possible power consumption are
speciﬁed by the vehicle manufacturer (Fig. 15.36).

Power demand The output power of the EPS system is deﬁned by several working
points. A working point is deﬁned by the total tie rod force, the steering speed and
the steering torque. At least three working points are usually speciﬁed (parking,
slow travel, evasive manoeuvre). An important aspect of the power demand is its
basic constraints, like design temperature and voltage and the number of repeti-
tions (load group).

Functional requirements The essential function of an EPS system is the supply of
power-assist on demand. Other functional requirements are described in Sect. 15.6.

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

441

Fig. 15.36 Interfaces and parts of an EPS system

Safety requirements The electric power-assisted steering has to be laid out in such
a way that a safety-critical state of the steering can be excluded during the ser-
viceable life according to the state of the art. A safety-critical state is present when
the vehicle response deviates from the normal state so much that the driver cannot
keep control of the vehicle and a risk for body and life or real values develops (see
Sect. 15.5).

Environmental requirements Environmental requirements are the whole structure
of mechanical, electric, thermal, chemical, acoustic and other demands for the
steering which are raised because of the on-board operation of the steering system
(Table 15.4).

15.4.2 Design Parameters

The power of electric power-assisted steering is laid out along the power ﬂow. The
demanded output power and the available installation space of the steering serve to
deduce the requirements for steering parts like rack, gearbox, electric motor, ECU
and torque sensor. Depending on whether the EPS engagement is at the steering
column or the rack, different kinematic relationships and degrees of freedom result
in the system layout. All the following discussions assume stationary working
points (uniform, not accelerated motion) and lossless parts.

442

A. Gaedke et al.

Table 15.4 Excerpt from the system requirements of current EPS systems

Value range
±450 to ±650˚
±3 to ±8 Nm

Steering wheel angle range
Steering wheel torque range with

power-assistance

Steering wheel torque range upon

±200 to ±300 Nm

abuse

Steering ratio (rack path per
steering wheel rotation)
Peak tie rod force parking
Minimum steering wheel speed

44–60 mm/rev

±3 to ±16 kN
100–360˚/s

parking
Supply voltage
Maximum current bearing
Temperature range

Serviceable life

Acoustics

9–16 V
\120 A
−40 to ?85 ˚C for vehicle interior
−40 to ?125 ˚C for engine compartment
15–20 years
5,000–12,000 active hours of operation
200,000–300,000 km of vehicle endurance
Sufﬁciently low noise generation has to be proved by
objective test bench measurements at the complete
steering system. The tests are coordinated between car
and steering system manufacturer

Speciﬁcation of the output power The output power (PZ) of an EPS system is fully
described by information on the required tie rod or rack force (FZ) and the rack
speed (vZ) according to Eq. (15.1). Vehicle manufacturers usually specify not the
rack speed, but the steering speed at the wheel (nsteer) and the gear ratio (isteer)
(Eq. 15.2). A separate description of the power demand for different driving
manoeuvres is favourable (Table 15.5).

Choice of the steering system gear ratio The gear ratio is deﬁned as a ratio
between rack path and steering wheel angle. The gear ratio is speciﬁed by the
vehicle manufacturer, because together with the axle kinematics, it determines the
steering characteristics of the vehicle (see Chap. 4). A direct gear ration of, say,
58 mm per rotation of the steering wheel, reduces the effort that the driver has to
invest into steering. With a gear ratio of 44 mm/rotation, the required steer-angle
for the same rack path would be higher by a factor 1.3. Direct gear ratios are
preferred in order to reduce the effort for parking and to get a very agile steering
response from the vehicle. Nevertheless, direct steering ratios cause appreciable
lateral movements of the vehicle from small steering movements at high speed.
That’s why VGRs are sometimes used, because they allow perfecting the effort for
parking, taking into account the driving stability at high speed.

Choice of the servo ratio The working point of the electric motor (Mmotor, nmotor)
is deﬁned by Eqs. (15.2), (15.3) and (15.4) for a given output power at the rack

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

443

Table 15.5 Kinematic connections of the different EPSEPS

Steering column EPS system

(EPSc, EPSp)

Rack EPS system 

(EPSdp, EPSapa, EPSrack)

Servo
drive

Servo
drive

PZ = FZ ⋅ vZ
vZ = isteer ⋅ nsteer (2)

(1)

M

F
Z

=

2

nmotor = iservo ⋅ 

nsteer  (4)

steer

servo

motor

(3)

⋅

M

+

i
i

steer

PZ = FZ ⋅ vZ
(1)
vZ = isteer ⋅ nsteer (2)
M
i

F
Z

2

=

steer

steer

nmotor = iservo ⋅ 

vZ  (4)

+

i

servo

⋅

M

motor

(3)

δH [rad] Steering wheel angle
δH* [rad] Pinion angle
MA [Nm] power assistance torque
MH [Nm] steering wheel torque
MS [Nm] kingpin torque (sum of)
sr
iS

[m] rack displacement
[-] overall steering ratio

(FZ, vZ) and a given input power by the driver (Msteer, nsteer) over the servo gear
unit. The symbol M represents the torque and the symbol n represents the rev.

The servo gear ration is selected in the tension zone between motor torque (Mmotor)
and motor speed (nmotor). The best system layout is found by varying the servo ratio
with regard to positioning force or actuator speed. For example, for a given electric
motor (Mmotor, nmotor), a reduction of the servo gear ratio implies a lower rack force
(Eq. 15.3) and a higher steering speed (Eq. 15.4; Figs. 15.37, and 15.38).

Layout of electric motors and power electronics The demanded working points
(Mmotor x, nmotor x) suggest the layout of the EPS motor. The power demand helps
to deﬁne whether a DC or an AC motor is used (Sect. 15.3.2). This affects the
requirements for power electronics (Sect. 15.3.4.3) and control engineering (Sect.
15.6). Then the electromagnetic motor design and the winding layout are deﬁned,
yielding the overall size and power input of the electric motor.

Essential layout criteria for the power electronics are the current load capacity
and the cooling of parts. After possible power semiconductors and parts of the
DC-link have been chosen, they are evaluated together with various mounting and
connecting systems. The load of the high-power electronic parts with regard to
voltage, current and thermal absorption is evaluated by simulating circuits and

444

A. Gaedke et al.

Fig. 15.37 Typical power demand of current EPS systems

Fig. 15.38 Adaptation of the EPS operating range by varying the servo gear ratio

thermal response for different steering manoeuvres. The power consumption from
the on-board wiring is veriﬁed.

Constraints for the system layout As mentioned before, the choice of the servo
ratio deﬁnes the requirements for torque and rev of the electric motor. The servo
ratio can be selected only within certain limits. For example, the permissible peak
forces on the mechanical parts are limited because of their strength. This gives the
least possible servo ratio. On the other hand, the servo ratio cannot be increased
arbitrarily, because the engine speed will increase as well. Higher actuator speeds
produce more noise in the mechanical parts, for example during the cog
engagement of the servo gear units.

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

445

Fig. 15.39 Graphic representation of the power layout of EPS systems

The inevitable power dissipation of the parts, which also depends on their
working points, has to be considered in the system layout as well. The overall
efﬁciency of the steering has to be considered, as well as other technical functions
as installation space, inertia and EMC, or even economic factors like material use
and same-parts plans (Fig. 15.39).

15.4.3 Requirements for the Wiring System

The requirements for the electric on-board wiring can be taken from the mean
power demand and the appearing power peaks.

Mean and peak power demand The power demand describes the electric power
required from the on-board wiring as a product of supply power and consumed
voltage.

Classical long-term consumers, for example, ignition control and fuel injection,
including
have a higher mean power input
electric power-assisted steering. An electric power-assisted steering needs an input
power of less than 10 W in everyday travel. This comes mainly the power con-
sumption of the signal electronics. This is opposed by brief power peaks of
1,000 W or more during parking and turning manoeuvres.

then Power-on-demand systems,

Hence, only the peak power demand is relevant for on-board wiring require-

ments of EPS (Fig. 15.40).

446

A. Gaedke et al.

Fig. 15.40 Measured input power of EPS during parking of a middle class vehicle

Dynamic power demand The mentioned absolute power and the need of the
consumers for power over time are crucial for sizing the on-board wiring. Brief
power peaks have to be covered by the battery, for example, because of the delay
in generator control. That’s why the upward current slope is relevant for electric
high-power consumers, as is the peak current for the stability of the supply power
(Bordnetzrückwirkung).

On-board current repercussions The on-board wiring of a car consists in principle
of a generator for energy conversion, a battery for storage, lines for distribution
and the attached consumers (Bosch 2002). State-of-the-art is still the conventional
12-V on-board wiring, often called 14-V on-board wiring. The generally
advancing electriﬁcation of cars pushes the conventional on-board wiring to its
limits with regard to power load and dissipation. Rising demand by the electric
consumers and measures to reduce consumption and emissions further burden the
components of the on-board wiring. For example, voltage ﬂuctuations and power
load in the on-board wiring are rising due to start/stop function and the recuper-
ation of braking energy.

A pure 42-V on-board wiring, as it has been stipulated for a long time in ISO
21848, has not been introduced to the mass market till now. One reason is the huge
investment that a conversion of all the on-board wiring parts and consumers would
entail. Beside the known parts, like generator and battery, all the ECUs would have
to be adapted to the new voltage, for example, including sensors and actuators.

Energy management If several electric consumers brieﬂy need energy at the same
time, a safe power supply of the consumers has to be maintained even in the worst
case, when the generator rev is low or the battery is partially discharged. For
example, a very high and brief power demand may occur during an evasive

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

447

manoeuvre with electric power-assisted steering and ESP intervention. Thus
intelligent energy management systems are implemented in many modern vehi-
cles. They coordinate the response of the involved on-board wiring components.
Hence, an essential task of the energy management is to compare the power
demand of the consumers to the power supply of the on-board wiring and to
maintain balance. The battery charge is monitored as well as the energy distri-
bution by demand and priority of consumers. For example, various standby and
closed-circuit consumers are switched off when the vehicle is parked and the
battery is low, so that the vehicle may be ignited again.

15.5 System Safety

15.5.1 Normative Code

15.5.1.1 IEC 61508

The IEC 61508 is an international standard for the development of electric,
electronic and programmable electronic (E/E/PE) systems (Bosch 2002). This
standard developed in the ﬁeld of process engineering or mechanical engineering,
but it is not restricted to certain application areas, it may rather be considered a
‘fundamental standard’ for the development of systems relevant for safety. The
standard was published with the title ‘Functional
safety of electrical/
electronic/programmable electronic safety-related systems’ and was divided into
seven sections.

The whole safety life cycle is considered, including the concept phase, plan-
and

introduction, maintenance,

development,

conversion,

change

ning,
disposal/scrapping.

Systems are relevant for safety when their failure indicates a considerable risk

for persons or the environment.

The systems are arranged in safety integrity levels, or SIL. The range reaches
from SIL1 to SIL4, with SIL4 making the highest demands to the systems. In the
automotive industry, SIL4 is not relevant, the highest classiﬁcation being SIL3. It
has to be proved before mass production that
the product meets the SIL
requirements.

15.5.1.2 ISO 26262

ISO 26262 (‘Road vehicles—Functional safety’) is a standard of electric/electronic
systems relevant for safety, especially for the range of application in automobiles.
The standard was necessary because the IEC 61508 originated in facility
building, made in small or very small numbers. Their potential dangers for persons

448

A. Gaedke et al.

and environment were reduced by integrating external safety measures, such as
protective screens or emergency shutdown strategies. Therefore, no detailed
default requirements for the car industry could be taken from it.

The safety of automobiles has to be maintained by the correct conﬁguration of
the function, i.e. safety has to be an integral component of the product. In addition,
speciﬁc features, such as mass production, which distributed development etc.,
have to be considered. Therefore, ISO 26262 was written on the basis of
IEC61508. The ﬁrst edition of ISO DIS 26262 is published on Nov 11, 2011.

There is a public draft, the ISO DIS 26262, in the process of coordination since

2009, the ﬁnal international publication had been intended for 2011.

The safety integrity levels are divided by ASIL A to ASIL D (Automotive
Safety Integrity level), ASIL D corresponds to the highest requirement level and is
comparable with SIL3 acc. to IEC 61508. Requirements which are not relevant for
safety are marked QM (quality measure) and are not addressed by ISO 26262
activities. Instead, they have to be treated by the processes of quality maintenance.

15.5.2 Safety in EPS Applications

15.5.2.1 Task of the Safety Concept

The system has to be laid out in such a way that faults are safely controlled. The
following options are conceivable:

• fault exclusion according to the state of the art, e.g., by suitable mechanical

• exclusion of safety-critical fault consequences, e.g., by proving that the driver is

design

not or only slightly affected

• fault detection by a suitable safety concept and taking down the system into a

safe state sufﬁciently quickly (fail-safe principle).

The system risk or the safety integrity level (ASIL) is identiﬁed by a danger and
risk analysis, ﬁrst without considering safety measures. Then the system risk is
reduced by developing a safety concept. The task of the safety concept is to
implement safety measures to reduce the present systemic risk to a calculable,
potential rest risk. The effectiveness of the safety concept is documented by a
safety proof, see Fig. 15.41. The scope of proof is given by the safety integrity
level (ASIL).

15.5.2.2 EPS Risk Classiﬁcation

The assessment of the systemic risk has to consider the range of application and
the motor-power class of the EPS. Assessing the current steering systems for

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

449

Fig. 15.41 Safety concept to minimise the system risk

medium and superclass vehicles yields the following classiﬁcation (risk graph
from ISO/DIS 26262-3, rev. 2009-06-28):
• undesirable actuation of the servo motor → ASIL D
• heavy running of the steering system, e.g., by false actuation of the servo motor

(not mechanical causes) → ASIL D

• sudden supply of the power assist, e.g., by unintentional relaunch → ASIL A
• failure of the power assist → QM.

The above classiﬁcation classiﬁes EPS systems as ASIL D. The protective

purposes can be deduced directly:

• The steering system has to recognise faults that trigger an undesirable actuator
function and change into a safe state according to the ASIL D requirements.
• The steering system has to recognise the faults that lead to heavy running of the
steering system and change into a safe state according to the ASIL D
requirements.

• The steering system has to prevent unintentional relaunch of the power-assist

according to the ASIL A requirements.

There can be no safety integrity function for mechanical parts, therefore, faults
have to be excluded from the mechanical design. This is ensured by the processes
of mechanical development.

Constructive design has to exclude, e.g.:

• loss of the mechanical contact between steering wheel and tyres
• heavy running of the steering due to mechanical causes.

450

A. Gaedke et al.

15.5.2.3 Qualities of the Safe State

The safe state of an EPS steering can be deﬁned by the following qualities:

• The steering system may not generate a power-assist.
• The safe state can be left only by switching off and on and successful initiali-

sation of the ECU (see Fig. 15.42).

• The electric motor may not generate any torques above a safety-critical value

(depending on vehicle and steering layout).

• The mechanical steering ability has to be maintained according to ECE R79

(UNECE 2005).
A power-assistance (state ‘EPS active’) may be generated only after successful,
perfect initialisation. If a critical fault appears, the state ‘EPS system fault’ is
immediately entered. The states ‘EPS off’ and ‘EPS system fault’ set the steering
system into safe state. The switch-off channels (cf. Sect. 15.5.2.4) ensure that the
safe state is reliably entered.

Fig. 15.42 System states of the EPS system

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

451

Fig. 15.43 3-level plan

15.5.2.4 Switch-Off Channels

When a safety-critical fault is recognised, the system has to enter the safe state
with the help of the switch-off channels within a fault tolerance time. The fault
tolerance time is the time during which the system may accept faulty signals
without entering a dangerous condition. This time is required for fault detection
and the subsequent fault reaction. It depends on the layout of car and steering.

A reliable fault reaction needs switch-off channels that can be activated by

diverse and independent ways.

The switch-off channels are activated by the microprocessor unit and additional
hardware parts. These parts have to be selected in such a way that they supervise
each other all the time. This ensures that the system can be transferred into a safe
state. EPS applications use the power electronics as a switch-off channel. The
control to deactivate the switch-off of the power electronics can for example look
like in Fig. 15.44.

Fig. 15.44 Block diagram of the EPS ECU with switch-off channel

452

A. Gaedke et al.

In order to exclude undetected faults in the operation of the switch-off channels
their effectiveness needs to be checked individually before activating the steering
functions. Therefore, test routines are run before the initialisation phase. Only if
the test result was positive, the system is released and enters the state ‘EPS active’
(cf. Fig. 15.42).

The ECU is designed in such a way that the EPS remains in the safe state when

powerless.

The safety requirement to switch off the fault-afﬂicted system immediately and
to transfer it in the safe state has to be compatible with the demands on quality. An
essential quality characteristic is the availability of the power-assistance, i.e. the
amount of time when the power-assistance is present, relative to the serviceable
life for the whole service life.

v ¼

ðn (cid:3) aÞ
n

(cid:1) 100

ð15:5Þ

v Availability [%]
a
Failure time [h]
n
Serviceable life for service life [h]

This means that from the quality point of view, it does not make sense to
transfer the system immediately into the safe state after any fault event because not
all faults are safety-critical to the same extent. Therefore, it is common to cate-
gorise the faults and to differentiate the system response. The following fault
reaction strategies may apply:

• Limit EPS operation e.g., switch-off partial functions (restriction of the comfort)

e.g., reduce the EPS assist power
• Switch to signal substitute values
• Transfer

power-assistance, then switch to the safe state.

the system softly into the safe state, e.g., slowly reduce the

15.5.2.5 Safety Measures for Subcomponents of the System

To analyse potential fault sources, it is sensible to decompose the system into its
parts. The following subsystems can lead to undesirable actuation of the servo
motor:

• fault in the external signals
• fault in the sensors
• fault in the microprocessor
• fault in the ECU (including power electronics and software)
• fault in the actuation.

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

453

Faults in the following subsystems can lead to a heavy steering

• fault in the engine (e.g., short circuits)
• fault in the ECU (including power output stage and software)
• fault in the actuation.

The fault consequences are classiﬁed as ASIL D with regard to ‘undesirable
actuation of the servo motor’ and ‘heavy steering’. High requirements to the
subsystems are the result, i.e. the necessary safety measures have to achieve an
accordingly high diagnostic coverage.

Monitoring of External Signals

The safety integrity of external signals depends on the respective vehicle manu-
facturer and the model varieties of the vehicles. The safety relevance of the signals
read by the vehicle bus is evaluated by a systematic analysis.

If possible, the EPS functions are laid out so that no received signals may
impair the safety. If this is not possible, then the steering manufacturer has to
deﬁne suitable safety requirements for the concerning signals.

In addition, one or more of the following safety measures for external signals

are common:

• monitoring time-out
• monitoring message counter
• monitoring check sum
• monitoring value range
• gap monitoring.

To improve the availability (see Sect. 15.5.2.4) of the power-assistance, it
makes sense to switch external signals to signal substitute values upon a detected
fault event, if possible. Although this can diminish convenience, for example
through a higher required steering force, it entails no effects that are relevant for
safety.

Monitoring Sensors

The calculation of the desired power-assistance and the control of the servo motor
need sensors (see Sects. 15.3.2.5 and 15.3.3). Malfunctions of the sensors imme-
diately affect the resulting power-assistance, hence, a failure to meet the protective
targets cannot be excluded if no additional safety measures are taken (see Sect.
15.5.2.2). Monitoring with accordingly high diagnostic coverage has to be
installed, matching the sensor design and their signal transmission.

454

A. Gaedke et al.

Monitoring Plan of the Computer System

Generally, the EPS functions are computed on a microprocessor with a computer
core. The high diagnostic coverage demanded by the SIL classiﬁcation is often
achieved by a 3-level plan to monitor this microprocessor. This plan has proved
itself in E-gas and ESP applications. An intelligent hardware unit, called ‘safety
controller’ in the following, is added as a further monitoring level. The imple-
mented software functions are distributed on 3 levels (see Fig. 15.43).

The following functions are executed on level 1:

• the steering functions (e.g., sensor read, calculating output values, control of the

steering actuators)

• the diagnostic functions for steering (monitoring and testing of system inputs,

system outputs, sensors and actuators for speciﬁc steering functions)

• the comparison of level 2 and level 1 results (output values have to stay within a

permissible tolerance range).

The following functions are executed on level 2:

• the diverse algorithms (signiﬁcantly different algorithms to calculate the output
values) for monitoring level 1 steering functions that are relevant for safety
• the comparison of level 2 and level 1 results (output values have to stay within a

permissible tolerance range).

Level 1 and level 2 are installed on the microprocessor. The software of these
levels can use different calculation resources of the microprocessor (integer unit or
ﬂoating point unit).

The permissible tolerance range between the level 1 and level 2 results depends
on the vehicle and steering layout and has to be gained from road trials in the
target vehicle. Faults are purposefully set to identify the requirements and the
effectiveness of the level 2 functions. The worst deviation of the output values
computed from level 1 and tested on level 2 may only lead to a response of the
steering system which can be safely controlled by the driver.

The system diagnostic functions are computed on level 3. These safety mea-
sures for software and hardware parts to maintain the system integrity are inde-
pendent from the application. They include, e.g.:

• monitoring the storage areas
• operating the safety controller
• logical and temporal programming ﬂowchart monitoring
• monitoring the operating system
• monitoring the software comparative algorithm (comparing the results from

• testing the microprocessor core
• monitoring the microprocessor and the safety controller by means of a

level 1 and level 2)

question/answer game.

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

455

Level 3 is split in two. One part is installed on the microprocessor and the other
part on a separate safety controller. The results of the program parts are exchanged
between microprocessor and safety controller by an interface.

If any of the three levels detects a fault relevant for safety, the system enters the

safe state.

Monitoring Power Electronics/Actuator

The electric motor to generate the power-assistance for EPS applications differs by
power demand and cost requirements (see Sect. 15.3.2).

Malfunctions of the electric motor can immediately lead to the identiﬁed system
risks (cf. Sect. 15.5.2.2), hence, monitoring with accordingly high diagnostic
coverage needs to be provided.

To control the effects of undesirable actuations of the servo motor, the system
has to be able to deactivate the power electronics fast enough. The deactivation of
the power output stage is intended as a switch-off channel.

All electric motor concepts have to meet the requirements of the safe state (cf.

Sect. 15.5.2.3) to prevent heavy steering.

The switch-off of the power output stage may not be sufﬁcient for some electric
motor concepts, because a fault event, e.g., a short circuit in the electric motor or
in the power electronics may unintentionally induce voltages producing a current.
This unintentional current generates motor torques opposing the steering purpose
of the driver. In other words, unintentionally braking motor torques can be gen-
erated which can cause a heavy steering for some gear ratios of the electric motor
to the steering wheel. Without safety measures for these situations, the mechanical
steering ability may not be available any more.

The potential unintentional current has to be prevented either by the electric

motor used or by additional measures. Some safety measures are:

• exclude motor and inlet short circuits in the design
• avoid currents in the fault case by additional parts (engine/power electronics)
• monitor power electronics/actuator.

Safety-Related ECU Block Diagram

The ECU is responsible for executing the steering functions and all the safety
functions of the EPS. The following parts are necessary:

• microprocessor, the core of the ECU
• safety controller for microprocessor monitoring (watchdog function) and for

monitoring supply voltages

• non-volatile RAM to store non-volatile data
• quartz clock generation for the microprocessor

A. Gaedke et al.

456

stage

• output stage driver to control the parts of the power electronics of the output

• output stage to control the motor phases.

A block diagram of this conﬁguration is shown in Fig. 15.44.
From the safety perspective,

the hardware architecture is an enabled
single-channel system which is controlled by a microprocessor. This unit is
monitored by an independent safety controller, allowing good diagnostic coverage.
The necessary means for the fault response are provided by the redundant control
of the switch-off channels (release signal of the power electronics) which can be
operated by the microprocessor, the safety controller or the output stage driver.

15.6 Steering Functions and Control

As discussed in the preceding sections, EPS disposes of an electric motor that
feeds mechanical energy into the system. Now it is the task of the steering
functions to feed this energy into the system on demand. On-demand means that
the energy has to be fed in such a way that the driver’s function of driving the
vehicle is power-assisted in the best way possible. To meet this claim, the steering
functions have to respond appropriately to the driver’s intent and to the current
movement of the steering system. The driver’s intent is registered by the torque
sensor. It measures the torque that the driver applies to the input shaft of the
steering gear (see Sect. 15.3.3).

The movement state of the steering system is registered by an angle sensor. This
signal can be measured by a steer-angle sensor at the steering column, or it can be
computed by the rotor position sensor in the steering. The signal of this sensor is
notably an absolute steering wheel angle.

The tasks of the steering functions in on-demand supply of mechanical energy

can be classiﬁed as follows:

• actual steering functions
• control for the steering feel
• control of the electric motor

The torque is deﬁned by the actual steering functions that the driver has to
maintain or perform to guide the steering wheel. The response of the free steering
wheel can be inﬂuenced by steering functions, too.

The control provides the proper supply of mechanical energy. As discussed
above, it can be divided into two subclasses: the control for the steering feel and
the control of the electric motor. The control for the steering feel assumes essential
stabilisation tasks, so that the torque demanded by the steering functions is free of
undesirable vibrations and other disturbances.

The control of the electric motor, on the other hand, is responsible for highly
dynamic and precise supply of mechanical energy. The stabilisation and high

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

457

dynamics tasks are closely connected to haptics and acoustics of a steering system,
so that any shortcomings signiﬁcantly affect the system performance in these
areas. Too low dynamics of the actuation may cause a too tough response, leading
to inert handling of the whole vehicle. Insufﬁcient stabilisation can be the cause of
bad haptics, whether slight vibrations in the wheel or an audible system response.
For the control of the electric motor, see the standard textbooks, such as Schröder
(2009) or Stölting and Kallenbach (2006).

15.6.1 Steering Functions

Based on the control of the steering, it is the task of the steering functions to deﬁne
the force that the driver perceives while guiding the steering wheel. This includes
the static hold of the steering wheel and dynamic situations like steering in and out
of a corner. In addition, the response of the free steering wheel is deﬁned by the
steering functions, up to functions like automatic steering for parking.

The steering functions have to cover many aspects, so that understanding is
improved by a structuring of the steering functions according to their main pur-
pose. The following distinction can be made:

• basic steering functions
• extended steering functions
• functions at vehicle level.

The basic steering functions are those functions which represent the familiar
response of a HPS in an EPS. This response is complemented with the extended
steering functions that use the speciﬁc possibilities of EPS. Finally, in a group with
other vehicle systems, like sensors for measuring parking spots or a lane detection
camera, functions at vehicle level can be implemented into an EPS.

15.6.1.1 Basic Steering Functions

Within the scope of the basic steering functions, there are four essential functions:

• power-assistance
• friction compensation
• inertia compensation
• damping.

These basic steering functions may be made parametrisable according to speed.
In the following, the impact of these functions is outlined and complemented with
notes on the parametrisation as a function of speed.

458

Power-Assistance

A. Gaedke et al.

The most elementary and most
important basic steering function is the
power-assistance. Its task is to ensure that the driver does not have to support all
the forces applying at the rack by the steering wheel, but that the EPS motor
supports an essential part of these forces. How such a function is made and
parametrised decides how the relative strengths at the rack are presenting them-
selves at the steering wheel and, hence, to the driver.

The impact of this function is obvious from the notion that, in a ﬁrst approx-

imation, there is a quasi-stationary force balance at the rack:

Rack force = isteer torsion bar torque + iservo motor torque (see Fig. 15.45). Here,
isteer is the conversion of torsion bar torque into rack force. The corresponding
conversion of the motor torque is iservo.

The torsion bar torque is the torque which the driver has to support at the

steering wheel, the motor torque is the share of the power-assistance function.

A given value of the rack force can be offset by any combination of torsion bar

torque and motor torque (see Fig. 15.46).

The choice of the distribution of torsion bar torque and motor torque decides
how the steering feel is perceived by the driver and how much information about
force changes can be resolved in the rack. The illustration shows one possible
version. Plotting the motor torque over the torsion bar torque according to this
diagram yields the power-assist characteristic curve known from hydraulics, see
Fig. 15.47.

Information about the expectable feedback quality is gained from plotting the
torsion bar torque over the rack force. A steep slope implies that minor changes of
the rack force cause major changes of the torsion bar torque. This is perceived by
the driver as a good feedback on road condition and bumpiness.

At low speed, especially at rest, the rack forces are highest. At such speed, a
differentiated feedback about the road is unnecessary, hence, the power-assistance

Fig. 15.45 EPS with essential forces acting on the steering system. These forces keep a
quasi-statical balance

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

459

Fig. 15.46 Balance of rack
force and the sum of motor
torque and torsion bar torque.
The share of the torsion bar
torque is enlarged for clarity

Fig. 15.47 The power-assist
characteristic curve shows the
motor torque as a function of
the torsion bar torque

can be applied in such a way that comfortable steering, end-stop-to-end-stop, is
possible. Nevertheless, beyond the low speed range, attention is devoted to the
representation of the lateral acceleration or the rack forces in the steering torque,
so that the power-assistance has to be applied very differently. One challenge for
the application is to create a harmonious transition between both requirements.

460

A. Gaedke et al.

Returning to the force balance outlined above, one may notice that this model
only applies under the assumption that the steering system is without friction or
inertia. Any support of the movable parts of a steering is subject to friction,
though, and the movable parts, esp. the rotor of the EPS, have an inertia. Thus the
force balance does not fully apply as described. To match the assumptions as
closely as possible, the effects of friction and inertia needs to be compensated.

Friction Compensation

The task of a function for friction compensation is to reduce the effects of frictions
in the steering with regard to the above-mentioned force balance. This can be
achieved by supplying a suitable compensation torque as a function of the current
movement state and the torque requested by the power-assistance.

A very simple friction compensation can be acquired by assuming a ﬁxed
amount of overall friction. This hypothetical friction moment is always applied in
parallel with the current movement or, if the steering system is at rest, in the
direction of the torque requested by the power-assistance.

Such a simple way of friction compensation is not very practical, though,
because it is very susceptible to measuring noise and does not take changing
friction into account. Frictions change esp. from ageing and, even more, because of
varying temperatures.

The physical causes for friction in the steering system imply that friction

compensation should not be parametrised as a function of vehicle speed.

Inertia Compensation

Typical EPS gear ratios yield an inert mass of several hundred kilogrammes for the
movable parts in the steering, relative to the rack. The force balance discussed
above does not consider these inertia effects. This entails that dynamic excitations
in the rack do not affect the torsion bar torque, and steering movements initiated by
the driver always have to operate against this inert mass. A function for inertia
compensation has the task to reduce these negative effects of inertia on the steering
feel.

Again, a very simple inertia compensation is conceivable. The rotor accelera-
tion can be gained from a differential quotient, based on a measurement of the
rotor position or rotor speed of the EPS motor. The current rotor acceleration
gained this way can be offset against the overall inertia to yield a corresponding
compensation torque. Then it can be requested from the EPS motor in addition to
the torque from power-assistance and friction compensation. Such a simple way of
compensation is not very practical, though, because it is very susceptible to
measuring noise.

The physical causes for friction in the steering system imply again that inertia
compensation should not be parametrised as a function of vehicle speed, either.

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

461

Active Damping

A friction- and inertia-compensated steering system responds very sensitively to
disturbances in the force balance. Excitations from the road lead immediately to a
violent acceleration of the system which is perceived by the driver as a kickback.
Smallest changes of the moment that the driver applies to support the steering
wheel produce powerful movements of the system and, hence, a very nervous
steering response.

These undesirable qualities may be reduced by damping the steering system. In

an EPS this is realised by a suitable steering function.

A simple way of a damping function requests from the EPS motor a torque that
is oriented against the steering direction and proportional to the current steering
speed. This way of damping contradicts the notion, though, that the driver’s
steering manoeuvres should be supported, so that a high-quality damping function
has to be much more sophisticated.

A damping function should be parametrised as a function of vehicle speed. At
rest, only the righting and the post-pulse oscillation of the steering wheel have to
be suitably controlled. At high speed, adequate damping is necessary to prevent the
steering wheel from overshooting and the car from ﬁshtailing when the wheel is
released in a corner.

15.6.1.2 Extended Steering Functions

Based on the already described basic steering functions, power-assistance, friction
compensation, inertia compensation and damping, the EPS displays a steering
response that is comparable to that of a classical HPS. Extended EPS functions are
not included yet. This is achieved by extended steering functions.

Active Return

The design of modern front axles generates a runback response which is often
unsatisfactory, primarily in the low, in the low speed range. Sometimes the axle
designs are laid out in such a way that the forces revert well before the mechanical
end stop, pulling the steering further towards the end stop.

The task of the active runback function is to improve this response. The basic
idea is that the EPS motor adds torques in the straight-ahead direction as a function
of the steering wheel angle or the steering movement. Such a function has to guide
the free wheel as well as the driver-controlled wheel into the straight-ahead
position as desired.

A very efﬁcient variety of such a function can be a wheel rate control, with the
nominal steering speed being deﬁned as a function of the steering wheel angle and
the vehicle speed. If the peak torque that the function may feed is reduced as a

462

A. Gaedke et al.

function of the applying hand torque, then the transition from free to guided
steering wheel can be purposefully shaped.

Directional Stability Correction

The always present slope of the road towards one side means that the steering
wheel is typically not free of torques when it is running straight. The driver has to
actively correct to prevent a drift of the vehicle down the slope, i.e. the steering
wheel is turned around a small angle when driving straight. Directional stability
functions can be applied to relieve the driver from such routine tasks.

If an active runback function is already present,

its
straight-ahead course could be slightly shifted. Ideally, the straight-ahead course
should be shifted by an offset angle until the course-keeping driver can hold the
steering wheel free of torques. The setting of the offset angle is crucial for such a
function. Note that the offset angle is a dynamic variable. If the slope changes, the
offset angle has to follow.

is obvious that

it

15.6.1.3 Functions at Vehicle Level

A very speciﬁc steering feel, matching car and target group, can be achieved with
an EPS by the basic and extended steering functions. In addition, the EPS can be
integrated as an intelligent and integrated actuator into the context of functions at
vehicle level. The role of the steering in the context of some functions at vehicle
level will be discussed next.

Park Steering Assistant

The park steering assistant is a function that does not expect the driver to steer,
esp. during reverse parking in the kerbs (parallel parking). The driver’s task is
focussing on throttling and braking, while the vehicle electronics steer the vehicle
accordingly. The necessary steering movements are gained from ambient sensors,
e.g., ultrasonic sensors, identifying the parking spot and the position of the car
relative to the parking spot and other obstacles.

The task of the EPS is to perform the requested steering movements. An
internal steer-angle control may be used to achieve this, but not only the
steer-angle proper has to be controlled by the EPS. A suitable interface to the
involved functional units has to be provided,
too. Then this interface and
the control have to be secured by a whole series of monitoring functions. It has to
be ensured that the interface cannot be accessed during a motorway journey, and
an injury of the driver from intervention into the turning steering wheel has to be
excluded, to mention only two examples.

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

463

Driver Warning/Lane Departure Warning

A frequent cause for accidents on motorways is the unintentional departure from
the lane. Often, tiredness or too little attention of the driver is the reason. To attain
the attention of the driver when the road is unintentionally left, a vibration of the
steering wheel, the driver warning, can be generated by the EPS.

Such functions survey the relative position of the car in the lane using an
on-board integrated camera. If departure is imminent, the EPS receives the request
to activate the driver warning function. Then the driver warning proper is gener-
ated by the EPS applying additional steering torques with suitable frequency and
amplitude.

Tracking/Lane Keeping System

A logical advancement of the driver warning function is continuous tracking.
Tracking has the purpose not only to warn the driver, but to keep the vehicle in the
lane by an active steering control.

Current legal stipulations have to be observed which do not permit autonomous
tracking. As a result, the tracking function may assist only if the driver actually
controls the steering wheel.

An important aspect is the design of the additional torques. Account has to be
taken of the fact that the function should reliably guide the driver in the lane
without appearing irritating or even patronising. The tracking function implies that
the EPS has an interface to actively control the steering torque. Ideally, an addi-
tional torque is directly applied to the steering wheel by this interface.

The application of any additional torques can provoke safety-critical situations.
Hence, this interface has to be limited and monitored properly. The limiting has to
be made in a way that enables the driver to override the additional torques
requested by the tracking at any time.

Dynamic Steering Torque Recommendation

The functions of the dynamic steering torque recommendation is to try to motivate
the driver to a speciﬁc steering movement by applying an additional torque. When
braking on µ-split, the driver can be animated by a short torque impulse to correct
on time. The structure of the torque impulse is subject to the same stipulations as
the additional torques of the tracking. The impulses are limited so that the driver
can override them at any time and no safety-critical situations can develop.

464

A. Gaedke et al.

15.6.2 Control Plans for the Steering Feel

The preceding section presented many different steering functions. All of them are
based on an underlaid control for the steering feel, by whose help the steering
torque that these functions requested is adjusted. Two basic approaches for this
basic control of the steering shall now be discussed. The steering control
approaches discussed in Sect. 15.6.2.1 convey the principle of the HPS to the EPS.
The group of control plans described in Sect. 15.6.2.2 has given up this idea and
perceives the EPS as a mechatronic overall system focussing on controlling the
torque which the driver feels at the steering wheel.

15.6.2.1 Classical Control Plans

All classical control plans for the EPS have in common that they emulate the
functions of an HPS. The basic functional principle of the HPS can be described as
follows: a suitable assistance force is applied by the steering as a function of the
force applied by the driver. There is no simple linear connection between the
assistance force and the driver’s force but a progressive connection, see Fig. 15.47.
The force applied by the driver corresponds to the torsion bar torque.

From the point of view of control engineering, this structure may be interpreted
as a P controller with variable gain and a set point of 0 Nm (see Fig. 15.48). The
shape of the classical power-assist characteristic curves implies that the gain factor
increases with rising deviation.

A stability analysis reveals that the closed control circuit is unstable. As a
consequence, the P controller has to be extended by a stabilising component. How
this stabilisation should be made and parametrised is know-how of the steering
manufacturer. Two basic approaches are conceivable. The ﬁrst approach is based
on the idea to make the stabilisation so solid that the variable gain can be com-
pensated by the power-assist characteristic curve. The second approach exploits
the fact that the current gain is known. Thus the parameters of the stabilisation can
be guided, e.g., by tables of the current gain. The resulting control circuit is shown
in Fig. 15.48.

It is interesting that the steering feel is not the set point for the control but rather
the power-assist

the resulting residual deviation of

the P controller,

i.e.

Fig. 15.48 Control circuit with classical EPS control plan

15 Electric Power Steering Systems

465

characteristic curve. The control or stabilisation of the steering in these control
plans is very closely related to the steering feel. An adaptation of the steering feel
always means an intervention into the steering control. Examining the steering
functions on vehicle level, that try to impress additional torques at the steering
wheel, will show that the context of classical control plans does not contain a
direct way of doing so. These qualities of the classical control plans have led to
new control plans being developed, these allowed giving the driver’s torque as a
set point.

15.6.2.2 Control of the Driver’s Torque

Considering the task to provide a control for the steering feel will quickly yield the
following structure: The variable perceived by the driver, the torsion bar torque, is
the control variable, the EPS motor torque is the set variable. The forces acting by
tie rods and rack on the steering are interferences, just like the torques applied by
the driver to the steering wheel.

Thus the task of the steering control disintegrates into two parts. The ﬁrst task is
the determination of the set point for the torsion bar torque, in other words, the
application of the steering feel. The second task is the identiﬁcation of the EPS
motor torque required to adjust this torsion bar torque, i.e. the control of the torsion
bar torque. There is thus a distinct separation between steering feel and steering
control, with little interaction. This distinct separation of tasks and the structure of
the control circuit are shown in Fig. 15.49.

Such a structure demonstrates that additional torques at the steering wheel can
be added to the set point for the torsion bar torque (see Fig. 15.49) and then really
set.

The design of the torsion bar torque control can exploit the full range of known
control unit design methods. The control unit design with LQG/LTR by Hen-
richfreise and Jusseit (2003) may serve as an example. The most important
requirements for the control are performance and robustness. The necessary
robustness is profoundly deﬁned by the standard dispersion of production, ageing
and ambient inﬂuences, such as the ambient temperature.

Fig. 15.49 Control circuit of current EPS control plans based on the control of the driver’s
torque

466

A. Gaedke et al.

A main problem of the set point calculation is how to illustrate the basic
steering function of the power-assistance in these new control plans. A part of the
answer is given by the basic force balance of the steering. Classical control plans
deﬁne by the power-assist characteristics in what way the power-assist of the rack
force should be distributed to motor torque and torsion bar torque. Now it is
possible to directly set the torsion bar torque that is supposed to apply at a given
rack force. However, the answer is incomplete, because the question how the rack
force can be computed is still unsolved.

Immediate computing of the rack force on the basis of the basic force balance is
not promising, because this addition of forces always includes friction and inertia
effects as well. They lead to rack forces being computed either too high or too low.
A potential method for direct computing of the relevant forces is found in
Grassmann et al. (2003). Alternative approaches try to interpret the rack force as a
lateral force or acceleration (Pfeffer and Harrer 2007), originating in the ﬁeld of
driving dynamics.

The friction and inertia compensation functions are basic steering functions
which are no longer needed, because the control adjusts the set point right at the
torsion bar, so that intervening frictions and inertia are automatically compensated.
The other steering functions can be made as discussed in the section on steering
functions. However, the torsion bar torque will replace the motor torque here, so
that these functions draw closer to the driver, so to speak.

Superimposed Steering System

Mirko Reuter and André Saal

16.1 Introduction

The growing number of mechatronics options in the ﬁeld of steering systems
provides additional steering functions. One of them is the superimposed steering
system. A heterodyne angle is added to the driver’s steering input by a speciﬁc
superposition of the steer-angle. This enables additional steering functions, for
example, a VGR or steering dynamics and steering stabilisation functions. Com-
bined with a superposed steering torque, functions that are otherwise reserved to
steer by wire, such as freely programmable steering functions, may be enabled.

16.2 History

The ﬁrst patent application for the angular superposition of a steering system was a
US patent of the Ford Company from 1972 (Fig. 16.1).

It already contains the basic function of combining simultaneously a permanent
mechanical driving with ﬂexibly superposed steer-angles. This function is intended
for potential further steering functions (crosswind compensation was mentioned,
for example). The described functional principle corresponds closely to the active
steering that was later introduced by BMW, see Fig. 16.2. An angle is superposed
between drive shaft [steering shaft, 18] and driven shaft [steering spindle, 50] by
Fig. 16.1 Patent sketch ford from 1972 [US 3831701]

twisting an annulus [60] of a double planet drive [24, 26, 54] coupled about the
planet pinion carriers, see Fig. 16.1.

In spite of the patent application in the 1970s, this technology became manifest
in standard cars only several decades later, because back then, the mechatronics
were difﬁcult to make and expensive. A few functions (VGR by wheel angle and
vehicle speed) were introduced to some markets by Honda in 2000, applying a
purely mechanical gear ratio adjusting equipment, VGS (Variable Gear Ratio
Steering System) in the S2000 model (Shimizu et al. 1999). But this is not a
superimposed steering system proper. The large-scale production of a superim-
posed steering system according to the deﬁnition was introduced by Toyoda
Machinery Works (now JTEKT), Lexus, ZF-Lenksysteme (ZFLS) and BMW as
late as 2002.

16.3 Functional Principle

The function of the superimposed steering system can be developed in different
basic manners. An additive movement of the steering gear or a relative movement
between rack and tie rod (cf. EP 1637426 A1, DE 102 16130 A1) is conceivable,
for example. But in reality, superposition by integration of a heterodyne gearbox in
the steering driveline or the gear has prevailed so far.

The integration of this heterodyne gearbox allows superposing a freely con-
trollable engine angle (δM) over the driver’s steer-angle (δH). This adds an addi-
tional degree of freedom to the steering system on which this function is based.

16 Superimposed Steering System

471

Fig. 16.2 Patent sketch
Robert Bosch of 1990 [DE
4031316C2]

A main feature of this superposition is that, in contrast to steer by wire systems,
the mechanical coupling between steering wheel and front axle is not disrupted.
The basis of this mechanism can be described by a simple equation:

dH(cid:3) ¼ dH þ dM

ð16:1Þ

Stabilising and lane-keeping functions always need either a countertorque
supported on the driver’s side or an additional superposed steering torque to
compensate the response. This is due to the torque balance in the heterodyne
gearbox, necessary for the mechanical driving (Fig. 16.3).

472

M. Reuter and A. Saal

Fig. 16.3 Functional principle of the superposition of angles

16.4 Conﬁgurations

All superimposed steering system actuators in use consist of an electronically
commuted electric motor (brushless DC, for the basics of BLDCs, see Sect.
15.3.2.4) with accompanying position sensors, a heterodyne gearbox and a safety
lock that locks the electric motor when powerless, blocking the additional degree
of freedom in the gearbox. A direct pass between steering wheel and gear is
thereby enabled. The market currently distinguishes three different superimposed
steering systems by their principle. They differ primarily by the gearbox model
used and by the position in the steering driveline.

Regardless of the used technology, the superposition in any system is repre-
sented by a gearbox with unequal gear ratio between added angle (δM) of drive
(δH) and driven shaft (δH*). This unequal transmission ratio generates a difference
angle between drive shaft and driven shaft when the electric motor superimposes
the angles. This is the base of all the other functions (Fig. 16.4).

16.4.1 General System Conﬁguration

Other components and, in some systems, further adaptations to architecture and
interlinking have to complement the heterodyne actuator so that a complete
superimposed steering system is achieved.

16 Superimposed Steering System

473

Fig. 16.4 Heterodyne systems from top to bottom: active steering (BMW–ZFLS), dynamical
steering (Audi-ZFLS), variable gear ratio system (Lexus-JTEKT)

Fig. 16.5 Superpositioned steering, example: Audi superimposed steering system

Figure 16.5 shows some components involved in such a system. The individual

modiﬁcations are explained in the following chapters.

474

M. Reuter and A. Saal

16.4.2 Actuators and Actuator Varieties

16.4.2.1 Audi/ZFLS Dynamic Steering

The actuator integrated into the steering column consists of an electronically
commuting, permanently excited hollow-shaft synchronous motor that is con-
centric around the steering shaft (brushless DC). It includes position sensors, a
harmonic drive gear box and a locking mechanism that locks the electric motor
and, hence, the superposition when powerless, Fig. 16.6.

The concentric arrangement allows placing all rotating components (shafts,
gearbox, engine and lock ring) in a stationary case, enabling a direct attachment to
the upper part of the steering column. At the same time, this joining permits a
modular arrangement, because the location inside the vehicle makes the system
almost independent from any spatial restrictions in the engine compartment.
Lower environmental requirements (e.g., moisture, temperature) for the actuators
have to be met as well, while higher demands are made to the actuator acoustics
and the crash response (Fig. 16.7).

The angular superposition of Audi’s superimposed steering system is based on a
harmonic drive. It combines a high reduction ratio (1:50) in compact size with a
high torque capacity and torsional stiffness. For superimposing an angle, the
electric motor turns the elliptic inner rotor (wave generator, WG). A ﬂexible
thin-section ball bearing (Flex Bearing, FB) deforms a thinly walled sun gear
(ﬂex-spline, FS) that is attached to the drive shaft of the steering (at the wheel), see

Fig. 16.6 Cut-away view of the actuator in the steering column

16 Superimposed Steering System

475

Fig. 16.7 Exploded view of the parts of the actuator to illustrate the concentric conﬁguration

Fig. 16.8 Functional principle of the harmonic drive

Fig. 16.8. The sun gear engages an annulus (circular spline, CS), attached to the
driven shaft, on the vertical axles of the inner rotor’s driving ellipse.

The different cog numbers of sun gear and annulus (at the steering gear) gen-
erate a superposition when the driving ellipse is rotating. An entire rotation of the
driving ellipse produces a ratio of 100/102 cogs and a superposition of 7.2˚.

The safety concept of the overall system involves a locking mechanism as a
relapse level for serious system faults. It locks the engine shaft, removing the
additional degree of freedom from the harmonic drive, so that the continuous
mechanical driving of the gearbox from drive to driven shaft is maintained.

476

M. Reuter and A. Saal

One shortcoming of arranging the actuators in the steering column is that
interfering effects by the actuator (e.g., additional friction, repercussion and
dynamic approach effects) cannot be damped or diminished by a hydraulic steering
valve or the torque sensors of an EPS. This shortcoming affects any heterodyne
system which is arranged in front of the steering valve or the torque sensor. Hence,
these effects need to be reduced to a minimum by constructive and controlling
measures.

16.4.2.2 Active Steering BMW/ZFLS

The actuator integrated into the steering gear of this system is based on the
superposition of angles by a double planetary gearbox that is placed into the gear
between steering valve and pinion. The engine is connected to the gearbox, cre-
ating an additional reduction layer by applying a worm gear that is locked by a
lock system when powerless, see Fig. 16.9. This way, the whole gear ratio between
the electronically commuting, permanently excited synchronous motor (brushless
DC) and the heterodyne gearbox is realised.

The superposition of the active steering is based on different gear ratios of the
individual planet layers. When the planet pinion carrier, powered by the worm
gear, turns, the planetary stage 1 on the sun gear of the drive shaft revolves with

Fig. 16.9 Cut-away view of the actuator in the steering gear. Source ZFLS

16 Superimposed Steering System

477

Fig. 16.10 Functional
principle of the superposition
gearbox. Source ZFLS

the transmission ratio i1 (For example, i1 = 15/12). The rigid coupling passes the
rotation directly to the planetary stage at the pinion. Now this rotation is trans-
mitted to the drive shaft attached to the valve with the transmission ratio i2 (for
example, i2 = 13/14), see Fig. 16.10.

In this example, each rotation of the planet pinion carrier turns the pinion shaft
by 1.34 rotations relative to the drive shaft. Both planetary stages have to be
spring-loaded, which may cause more friction in the gearbox, to keep potential
free travel of the gear as low as possible.

In the safety concept, the self-inhibiting worm gear between engine and planet
pinion carrier signiﬁcantly reduces the undesirable back rotation in the passive
state. Additionally, an interlocking slide spline locks worm gear, when it is
deactivated. This enables the direct driving between steering valve and pinion.
However, since the gear ratio is more direct in that state, one chooses an adapted
steering ratio for the fault case when designing the overall system.

Arranging the actuators in the steering gear (‘arrangement behind the steering
valve (HPS) or behind the steering torque sensor (EPS)’) allows damping—or at
least reducing, for the sake of the steering feel—of some interferences of the
actuators by the power-assistance of the steering (e.g., additional friction, reper-
cussion and dynamic approach effects). However, a fundamental drawback of the
planetary gearbox with several cog interventions is that the reset of the steering
and the road feedback are decreased by the higher friction.

16.4.2.3 Lexus/JTEKT VGRS

Like the dynamics steering, the VGRS (Variable Gear Ratio System) is based on a
superposition of steer-angles by a harmonic drive, although a harmonic drive with
double circular spline (CS) is used in this version. While the CS-D on the driver’s
side has 100 cogs, the CS-S on the side of the gear has 102 cogs. An offset of 2
cogs is generated for each full rotation of the electric motor, attached to the wave
generator (WG), between driver and steering gear. Therefore the whole gear ratio
between engine angle and heterodyne angle is 1:50, see Fig. 16.11.

The internal conﬁguration of the other components is slightly different from
Audi’s superimposed steering system. Electric motor and locking mechanism are
not hollow shafts but centrally arranged in the midst of a rotating overall case.

478

M. Reuter and A. Saal

Fig. 16.11 Source harmonic drive GmbH

Fig. 16.12 Cut-away view of the actuator in the steering column. Source Toyota

For this system, the power ﬂow across the halves of the casings entails that the
whole case is rotating with the steering movement, see Fig. 16.12. This requires
sufﬁcient free space on the side of the package.

On account of the arrangement in front of the steering valve or the steering
torque sensor, measures to reduce repercussions on the steering feel are also
integrated here. In comparison to other variants, an additional damping plate
serving this purpose is integrated into this system between actuator and steering
wheel. This reduces the haptic repercussions and the structure-borne sound
transmission by the steering driveline, see Sect. 16.4.3.2.

Another type of this system by the manufacturer is now integrated into the
steering gear, similar to the BMW–ZFLS system. The heterodyne unit, though, is
still accommodated near the driver and in front of the steering torque sensor.

16 Superimposed Steering System

479

16.4.3 Adaptations in the Steering System

In a superimposed steering system, higher demands to the steering system design
are set by the pinion rate, which may be higher during parking and evasive
manoeuvres or because of the dynamic steering stabilisation interventions. These
higher demands require a larger servo pump for hydraulic power steerings, to meet
the higher demand for volumetric ﬂows. Higher energy consumption of the larger
pump often entails the installation of ECO controllers (ECO = Electrically Con-
trolled Oriﬁce; see Sect. 13.1.2.1). When the demand for steering is low (e.g., at
motorway speed), the volumetric ﬂow and the resultant circulation pressure may
be reduced to save energy and fuel. The dynamic adaptation of the volumetric ﬂow
at medium and low speed (e.g., on country roads) enables the best steering
performance.

Larger dynamics and volumetric ﬂows often require additional adaptations at

the tubing and the engine oil cooler.

above-mentioned situations.

Vehicles with electric power-assist also have a higher demand for power in the

16.4.3.1 Steering Ratio

The steering gear used is designed very directly to minimise the acoustic reper-
cussion of the heterodyne system during parking and at low speed. The acoustics
can thereby be improved, because relative to a symmetrical design of the steering
ratio (Fig. 16.13a), there is less noise emitted (proportional to the heterodyne
activity).

In the design of the steering gear ratio, however, the mechanical relapse level of
a superimposed steering system must be controllable over the whole speed range,
if a fault occurs. Any potential jumps of the steering ratio due to deactivation and
the ability to control the whole steering ratio in the case a fault occurs, need to be
considered.

Fig. 16.13 Acoustic design of the basis steering system. a Symmetrically. b Acoustically
optimised

480

M. Reuter and A. Saal

Fig. 16.14 Acoustic decoupling by absorber disk in the steering column (JTEKT system, source
Lexus)

16.4.3.2 Adaptations to Meet NHV Requirements

The acoustic repercussion of the superposition is sometimes further reduced by
installing absorbers in the steering column (e.g., ‘Hardy disks’) or entire enclo-
sures of the actuators in the vehicle, Fig. 16.14.

The main purpose is to reduce the structure-borne sound transmission (ab-

sorbers) and the airborne sound transmission (enclosures).

A drawback of the absorbers is the resulting lower stiffness of the steering
driveline that has a tendency to impact steering feel, steering response and steering
precision. The integration of an enclosure, on the other hand, requires additional
package space. Therefore, these secondary acoustic measures need to be consid-
ered in the context of the general requirements.

16.4.3.3 Adaptations Due to Steering Stabilisation

The steering dynamics are high when a steering stabilisation is used and, hence,
the necessary fault latent times are low. The stability control systems are adapted
when steering stabilisation functions are added.

For example, in the implementation of Audi’s superimposed steering system,
the sensors for steer-angle, yaw speed and lateral acceleration are redundant. This
redundance is necessary to provide the required reaction times in case of faults.
Model-based monitoring of the input signals does not yet achieve the accuracy and
latency time that would be necessary for fault detection.

16.4.3.4 System Network

Using the functions of the superimposed steering system needs a complicated
system network of different subsystems in the vehicle structure.

Figure 16.15 shows an example of a network of Audi’s superimposed steering
system. Some functions are distributed to different ECUs and interlinked by

16 Superimposed Steering System

481

Fig. 16.15 Network of the superimposed steering system, example: Audi superimposed steering
system

several bus systems. The steering control unit (SCU) controls the actuators and
coordinates the function of the dynamic steering, but the steering stabilisation
functions are accommodated in the ESP. Both control devices are redundant via
the sensor and dual-suspension CAN to ensure the necessary integrity of the
exchanged signals, see Fig. 16.15.

Another component of the overall system is the body control module (BCM),
which is the interface to individualise the dynamic steering by mode (drive select)
and to control the speed-sensitive power-assist (servotronics).

16.5 Functions of the Superimposed Steering System

16.5.1 VGR

The possibility to freely control the angle of a superimposed steering system
allows making steering ratio characteristics that signiﬁcantly depend on the
steer-angle or the car speed. This superposition of angles entails a perfect solution
to the basic compromise between agility and handiness (direct gear ratio) and
stability (indirect gear ratio) in a deﬁned mechanical steering ratio. It is therefore
possible to ﬁnd a suitable gear ratio for every speed or requirement range. Three
different typical speeds may be mentioned as basic corner points for the design of
the steering ratio. These are parking and manoeuvering at low speed, the medium
speed range (e.g., city and country road travel) and high speed (e.g., motorway
travel), see Fig. 16.16.

482

M. Reuter and A. Saal

Fig. 16.16 Principle curve of the steering ratio over vehicle speed

16.5.1.1 Low Speed

To facilitate parking and manoeuvering, the demand for a steering wheel angle in
such situations is reduced to a minimum. The driver should be able to guide the car
in the low speed range without shufﬂe-steering. The steering ratio in this range is
designed very directly. However, the driver’s adaptation to this gear ratio and the
acoustic constraints need to be considered (see Sect. 16.4.3.1).

The whole gear ratio curve at low speed has the main purpose of reducing the

driver’s steering effort.

16.5.1.2 Medium Speed

In the medium speed range, the desired response with regard to handiness and
agility can be achieved by the VGR. The yaw gain is typical for this agility. In
contrast to a conventional mechanical steering, a superimposed steering system
allows the yaw gain to build up much faster with rising driving speed, see
Fig. 16.17. The results are better handiness and agility at medium range, and this
can be sustained across a wide speed range, too.

16.5.1.3 Stability at High Speed

For the medium to high-speed range and bigger cornering radii, the steering ratio
has to permit a quiet and gentle vehicle guidance. This condition can be realised by
a much more indirect gear ratio than in the lower speed range.

For this driving response,

the most
high-speed range is the gain of the lateral acceleration, see Fig. 16.18.

important describing variable in the

16 Superimposed Steering System

483

Fig. 16.17 Yaw gain with and without superimposed steering system

Fig. 16.18 Gain of the lateral acceleration with and without dynamic steering

The gain of the lateral acceleration can be considered a quantifying parameter
of the vehicle response for changing the track at high speed. Hence, a lesser and
steadier gain enables quieter and safer vehicle guidance, resulting in sturdier
driveability. When the steering ratio characteristic curves are designed, special
attention is paid to a harmonious transit between the requirements of the various
speed ranges. This facilitates the driver’s adaptation to the changed gear ratio.

484

M. Reuter and A. Saal

16.5.1.4 Varieties of Characteristic Curves According to the Driver’s

Request

Because the characteristic curves (steering ratio and support torque) of a super-
imposed steering system can be freely controlled, their individuation can be
provided to the driver by a suitable operating element for controlling the vehicle
response
the
characteristic
above-mentioned design directives in different forms and weighting. They can
signiﬁcantly change the gain response of yaw and lateral acceleration, as the driver
desires, see Figs. 16.17 and 16.18.

desired. These

consider

should

curves

as

16.6 Steering Stabilisation

The steer-angle superposition permits active stabilising steering corrections that
are almost independent from the driver. It can stabilise the vehicle in dynamically
critical situations not only by triggering the ESP to brake individual wheels, but
also by additional overlaid tyre steer-angles. Two main beneﬁts are the result:

• The overall stability of the vehicle is improved by concurrent braking and
steering interventions. This applies in particular to high speeds ([100 km/h),
because the superimposed steering system then offers obvious advantages in
contrast to a brake stabilisation, on account of the very fast response time.
• In some less critical driving situations, braking interventions can be renounced
in part or even completely, so that the vehicle stabilisation is more harmonious
and comfortable. Less braking interventions mean that especially on roads with
low friction (e.g., snow) but the same driving stability, the vehicle will drive
perceptibly more agile than a car which is stabilised only by braking interven-
tions (Fig. 16.19).

The effectiveness of stabilising steering interventions is generally dependent on
the available useful steering performance. For the superimposed steering system,
the gradient of the stabilising superposition angle can be considered a measure of
this performance. Figure 16.20 shows that a rise of this gradient can signiﬁcantly
reduce the stabilising steering wheel angle that the driver has to add in unstable
situations, and even the drop of speed during the stabilisation can be signiﬁcantly
lowered.

Indeed, it can also be seen that braking interventions are still necessary for yaw
damping and lower speed, according to the degree of instability. To achieve the
best agility and concurrent stability, the best distribution of the stabilisation torque
on brake and steering is made by an arbitrating concept.

16 Superimposed Steering System

485

Fig. 16.19 Stabilisation with and without superimposed steering system intervention

Fig. 16.20 Steering stabilisation during a simple lane change

16.6.1 Steering Stabilisation at Oversteering

Speciﬁc, active countersteering of the superimposed steering system in an
over-steering vehicle can quickly and precisely reduce or fully compensate the too
high yaw response of the vehicle. Its low yaw inertia by which it responds to the
changed tyre steer-angles enables a very fast stabilisation, especially at high speed,

486

M. Reuter and A. Saal

Fig. 16.21 Steering stabilisation during a simple lane change

see Fig. 16.21. The stabilisation steer-angle that the driver requires can be sig-
niﬁcantly lowered by this engagement. A further beneﬁt is the much lower number
of brake interventions that make the overall stabilisation look very harmonious.

16.6.2 Steering Stabilisation at Understeering

The heterodyne engagement of a front-axle steering in an understeering vehicle is
quite naturally not very effective. In this case, the strongest grip at the front axle is
already passed, and a rectiﬁed additional steer-angle cannot build up any more
lateral force. However, the point of highest positive engagement may be fully
that opposes the driver’s
exploited. This requires a heterodyne engagement
steer-angle, so that the typical oversteering by the driver in such a situation is
limited. A partial compensation is the best solution to maintain the driver’s typical
steering feel without corrupting the tactile information on the grip state at the front
axle. This can be achieved, for example, by a more indirect steering ratio
according to the situation.

Figure 16.22 shows the functional principle of this understeering function.
A vehicle without steering stabilisation passes the point of highest positive
engagement at the front axle, due to a too great steer-angle. The vehicle’s front
wheels push out of the corner. In a car with steering stabilisation, the understeering
situation can be recognised, and a speciﬁc change of the gear ratio can limit the
driver’s oversteering.

16 Superimposed Steering System

487

Fig. 16.22 Understeering function of the superimposed steering system

16.6.3 Steering Stabilisation During Braking on Roads
with Different Friction Values (μ-split)

μ-split surfaces are marked by the fact that the road friction value is high on one
side of the vehicle (e.g., asphalt) and low on the other side (e.g., ice). Braking on
such a road generates a yaw torque from the higher braking powers on the side
with more friction, this pulls the vehicle that way (oblique pull). To continue
driving straight, the driver of a vehicle without superimposed steering system has
to set a steering wheel angle that compensates the interfering yaw torque and, by
consequence, the oblique pull of the vehicle.

In a vehicle with steering stabilisation, the stabilisation system can control this
steer-angle autonomously, so that the driver can leave the steering wheel essen-
tially in its straight-line position, i.e. towards the desired way. The interfering yaw
response can be prevented early-on by this yaw torque compensation while a rise
of the total brake pressure slightly shortens the braking distance for
this
manoeuvre. Figure 16.23 shows such a μ-split manoeuvre.

16.7 System Safety

The ECU of the superimposed steering system does not only have to meet func-
tional requirements, such as the superposition and control of the part of the
variable steering ratio function and the externally computed stabilisation part, but

488

M. Reuter and A. Saal

Fig. 16.23 Stabilisation of a vehicle with network steering stabilisation during a μ-split braking
manoeuvre

it also has to electronically prevent malfunctions. The derived safety requirements
for the ECU of the superimposed steering system for any malfunctions to be
prevented are:

• avoid reversible and irreversible actuating errors that can be caused by the

ECUs, the electric motor or the engine position sensor;

• monitor the externally computed stabilising interventions and take suitable
measures, so that the highest actuating errors are not reached, see also Neukum
et al. (2007).

• ensure that in the fault case, the limit for the highest permissible gear ratio jumps

is not exceeded, see also Neukum et al. (2007).

• prevent a free steering situation (i.e. missing or insufﬁcient conversion of the

driver’s wheel angle into the tyre steer-angles).

An assessment and requirement concept was worked out by the Association of
the German Automotive Industry (VDA), dealing with individual fault patterns of

16 Superimposed Steering System

489

superimposed steering systems. For further information, see ‘Assessment of the
Fail-Safe response of active steering systems’, see also Neukum et al. (2007).

Safely controlling these fault patterns requires a suitable safety concept and a
process of development for superimposed steering systems compliant with (or at
least based on) IEC 61508/ISO 26262. Basic facts of these safety standards are
discussed in Sect. 15.5.

The safety concept resulting from these requirements needs a reliable moni-
toring and veriﬁcation concept, when the system is built, to maintain the necessary
fault response times and, hence, to limit the highest possible actuation errors.
Figure 16.24 shows a monitoring level concept of the ECUs of Audi’s superim-
posed steering system.

On level 1, any software modules which are necessary from a functional point
of view are integrated. This includes the signal veriﬁcation and the fault strategy.
All critical paths which can lead to a malfunction are diversitarily computed on
level 2. This ensures that systematic fault sources (e.g., programme errors) or
sporadic RAM errors cannot lead to a malfunction. Level 3 maintains, e.g., the
programme run and the correct execution of the command set.

The challenge of diversitary computing is to generate on the diversitary path the
same result as on the main path, using other algorithms. This shall be explained by
two examples:

In a faultless state, the variable steering ratio function permits to achieve the
same result by applying either the main function or the diversitary function
without any relevant time delay, because this is not a regulation but a servo
control. Even for a diversitary implementation, the deviation of the two paths can

Fig. 16.24 The 3-levels safety concept of Audi’s superimposed steering system

490

M. Reuter and A. Saal

Fig. 16.25 Examination of the position control

be kept low, because both functions can be written regardless of other interfering
variables, in spite of different calculation paths.

The monitoring of the position control, including sensor analysis, shall serve as
the second example. Both paths are monitored on level 2 by back-reading and
controlling of the engine position signal against
its nominal angle, seen in
Fig. 16.25. A permissible deviation when comparing intermediate and ﬁnal results
of the nominal and the fault path needs to be allowed. This tolerance range is
needed on account of the different algorithms and back reference variables on
either path.

The system functions are gradually degraded as a function of the occurred fault.

High availability is maintained as follows:

• actuate a steady steering ratio if information on driving speed is missing,
• block external stabilising interventions if low performance is predictable, e.g.,
by ﬂuctuations in the on-board power system or failure of the steering power
supply,

• deactivate the system in the zero passage of the steering angle if a fault is

suspected, to avoid an obliquely positioned steering wheel,

• deactivate the system completely if any serious fault is present.

Other than preventing malfunctions,

the ECU has to continuously supply
safety-relevant signals for other vehicle systems whose ECUs rely on status and
position data of the superimposed steering system (e.g., ESP and other chassis
control systems).

16 Superimposed Steering System

491

16.8 The Future

Connecting the superimposed steering system with an active steering torque
superposition helps to complement the advantages of both systems, so that addi-
tional functions are made accessible. Superposing a steering torque, for example,
allows compensating or even partially complementing the repercussions of
superimposed steering system interventions by targeted torque interventions.

These possibilities can be realised by a combination of superimposed steering
system and EPS (cf. Fig. 16.26, BMW 5, model year 2010) or by combining the
superimposed steering system with an additional active torque actuator
(cf. Fig. 16.27, JTEKT).

Fig. 16.26 Active front
steering with
electromechanical power
assist in the BMW 5. Source
BMW

Fig. 16.27 Active front
steering with reactive torque
contol unit. Source JTEKT

492

M. Reuter and A. Saal

Extended networking of both systems leads to an imitation of steer by wire-like
functions. These systems may act like an enabler technology for completely new
deﬁnitions of steering functions, due to the option of a partial decoupling of
steer-angle and steering torque (cf. Sect. 18.3).

An advantage of this version is the immanent mechanical relapse level and the
quick shutdown time in the fault case. However, these functions are restricted in
comparison to full steer by wire with regard to performance and the decoupling of
the repercussion, because of the control accuracy and resultant system repercus-
sions. Yet electric steering and superimposed steering system represent important
steps towards future steering systems. Especially the intelligent linkage of both
may one day make new steering functions accessible.
All-Wheel Steering

Peter Herold and Markus Wallbrecher

17.1 Introduction, History, Basics, Objective

Various steering systems that apply a steer-angle at the front wheels to perform
their driving task were described in the preceding chapters. All-wheel steering also
provides the possibility to make the back wheels steerable, in addition to the
steering at the front axle.

The application of pure back-wheel steering, on the other hand, is known only from
applications for forklifts, lawn mowers or similar vehicles. Here the task can be better
accomplished by steering the back wheels, usually together with very big steer-angles.
Passenger cars used in standard road trafﬁc would suffer several drawbacks

from a pure back-wheel steering, though:

1. The driveability is unstable beyond a critical driving speed. This complicates
the steering task and the burden of the driver. Especially at high speed, the
vehicle is almost uncontrollable.

2. Legal stipulations require that the steering equipment has to actively righten the
wheels into the centre position at any conceivable speed, see ECE R79. A pure
back wheel steering has no righting moment, though.

3. Moving forward out of a parking space leads to bumping into the kerbs.

Hence, pure back-wheel steering is not suitable for passenger cars and trucks,

the standard choice is the combination with a steering at the front axle.

The ﬁrst all-wheel steering was already built in the mid-1930s. The bucket car
107 VL (W139) by Mercedes-Benz was equipped with a mechanical all-wheel
steering as early as 1936. Nevertheless, this vehicle was made in small numbers,
only 42 copies were delivered to the Wehrmacht (Oswald 1987) (Fig. 17.1).

All-wheel steering has been used in several kinds of automobiles during the last
decades. First, Nissan developed an appreciable number of all-wheel steering
systems to series production in the 1980s. All-wheel steering can be developed and
designed acc. to different technical plans. A huge number of technical solutions is
possible. This chapter will give an overview of the construction methods, the
technically feasible plans and the active principles.

17.2 Construction Methods

Three basic concepts of
hydraulic and electromechanical.

rear-wheel steering are distinguished: mechanical,

The following table gives an overview of which manufacturers have already

developed and introduced all-wheel steering to the market (Table 17.1).

17.2.1 Mechanical Systems

Mechanical all-wheel steering systems have a mechanical connection between
front axle and rear-wheel steering, shaped like a shaft with corresponding step-up
gear. This direct mechanical connection locks the steer-angles of the front and rear
axle in direct dependency; a deﬁned steer-angle at the rear axle is assigned to every
steer-angle at the front axle (Fig. 17.2).

495

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

)
˚
(

4

5
1

5

2

1

1

5

8

5

7

8
0

.

5
1

.

17 All-Wheel Steering

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
n
u
F

s
e
s
o
p
r
u
p

)

R
D
F
(

)

R
D
F
(

S
F

)
2
9
9
1
(

n
w
o
r
C

,
)
1
9
9
1
(

r
e
r
a
o
S

S
F

,

R
K
W

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h

,

p
m
u
p

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
H

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h
-
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

)
7
9
9
1
(

a
t
s
e
j
a
M

,
)
7
9
9
1
(

o
t
s
i
r

A

,

x
o
b
r
a
e
g

,
r
o
t
o
m
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
m
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

)
5
9
9
1
(

r
e
s
i
u
r

C

a
g
e
M

R
K
W

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h

,

p
m
u
p

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
H

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h
-
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

)
9
8
9
1
(

a
n
i
r
a
C

,
)
0
9
9
1
(

a
c
i
l
e
C

R
K
W

l
e
e
h
w

t
n
o
r
f

e
h
t

o
t

n
o
i
t
c
e
n
n
o
C

l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
M

a
t
o
y
o
T

s
e
l
c
i
h
e
V

e
l
g
n
a
-
r
e
e
t
S

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
g
ﬁ
n
o
C

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

r
e
r
u
t
c
a
f
u
n
a
M

)
5
0
0
2
W
M
B

(

s

m
e
t
s
y
s

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

l
e
e
h
w

-
l
l
a

f
o
w
e
i
v
r
e
v
O

1
.
7
1

e
l
b
a
T

d
o
h
t
e
m

)
8
9
9
1
(

a
e
g
a
t
S

,
)
4
9
9
1
(

c
i
r
d
e
C

,
)
7
9
9
1
(

l
e
r
u
a
L

,
)
3
9
9
1
(

Z

y
d
a
l

r
i
a
F

,
)
3
9
9
1
(

a
i
v
l
i
S

,
)
3
9
9
1
(

e
n
i
l
y
k
S

)
3
9
9
1
(

l
e
r
u
a
L

,
)
2
9
9
1
(

o
r
ﬁ
e
C

,
)
9
8
9
1
(

Z

)

R
D
F
(

S
F

,

x
o
b
r
a
e
g

,
r
o
t
o
m
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
m
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

y
d
a
l

r
i
a
F

,
)
9
8
9
1
(

X
S
0
8
1

,
)
8
8
9
1
(

a
i
v
l
i
S

,
)
5
8
9
1
(

e
n
i
l
y
k
S

)
S
V

(

S
F

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h

,

p
m
u
p

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
H

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
H

n
a
s
s
i
N

)
4
0
0
2
(

)

R
D
F
(

a
g
u
F

,
)
2
0
0
2
(

a
e
g
a
t
S

,
)
7
0
0
2
(

7
3
G

,
)
8
0
0
2
(

0
5
X
F
y
t
i
n
ﬁ
n
I

5
1

.

.

x
o
r
p
p
A

S
F

,
)
S
V

(

S
F

,

x
o
b
r
a
e
g

,
r
o
t
o
m
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
m
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

)
0
9
9
1
(

d
r
o
c
c
A

,
)
7
8
9
1
(

e
d
u
l
e
r
P

R
K
W

t
n
o
r
f

e
h
t

h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
c
e
n
n
o
C

l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
M

a
d
n
o
H

)
1
9
9
1
(

)
4
9
9
1
(

a
n
r
e
t
E
/
r
e
c
n
a
L

,
)
4
9
9
1
(

e
d
u
a
r
e
m
E

,
)
3
9
9
1
(

y
l
t
n
a
l
l
a
G

)
S
V

(

S
F

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h

,

p
m
u
p

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
H

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h
-
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

T
G
0
0
0
3
/

O
T
G

,
)
8
8
9
1
(

a
n
r
e
t
E
/
r
e
c
n
a
L

,
)
8
8
9
1
(

y
l
t
n
a
l
l
a
G

0
5
1

.

)
S
V

(

S
F

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h

,

p
m
u
p

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
H

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h
-
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

i
h
s
i
b
u
s
t
i

M

)
1
9
9
1
(

e
n
o
y
c
l
A

)
S
V

(

S
F

x
o
b
r
a
e
g

,
r
o
t
o
m
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
m
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

u
r
a
b
u
S

)
5
8
9
1
(

7
-
X
R

,
)
2
9
9
1
(

0
0
8
s
o
n
u
E

)

R
D
F
(

S
F

c
i
r
t
c
e
l
e

,

p
m
u
p

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
H

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
H

)
1
9
9
1
(

e
d
u
l
e
r
P

)
S
V

(

S
F

,

R
K
W

e
v
i
r
d

e
l
d
n
i
p
s

,
r
o
t
o
m
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

y
l
l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
m
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

)
7
8
9
1
(

6
-
X
M

,
)
8
8
9
1
(

6
2
6

)
S
V

(

S
F

c
i
r
t
c
e
l
e

,

p
m
u
p

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
H

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
H

a
d
z
a
M

s
r
o
t
a
u
t
c
a

g
n
i
r
t
n
e
c

,
s
e
v
l
a
v

s
r
o
t
a
u
t
c
a

g
n
i
r
t
n
e
c

,
s
e
v
l
a
v

x
o
b
r
a
e
g

,
g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

e
v
i
r
d

e
l
d
n
i
p
s

s
r
o
t
a
u
t
c
a

g
n
i
r
t
n
e
c

,
s
e
v
l
a
v

x
o
b
r
a
e
g

,

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

l
e
e
h
w

e
v
i
r
d

e
l
d
n
i
p
s

e
v
i
r
d

e
l
d
n
i
p
s

s
r
o
t
a
u
t
c
a

g
n
i
r
t
n
e
c

,
s
e
v
l
a
v

s
r
o
t
a
u
t
c
a

g
n
i
r
t
n
e
c

,
s
e
v
l
a
v

x
o
b
r
a
e
g

,
r
o
t
o
m

x
o
b
r
a
e
g

,
r
o
t
o
m

496

P. Herold and M. Wallbrecher

)
˚
(

7

7
1

.

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
n
u
F

s
e
s
o
p
r
u
p

S
F

,
)
S
V

(

)

R
D
F
(

S
F

,
)
S
V

(

)

R
D
F
(

)
0
1
0
2
(

5

,
)
9
0
0
2
(

T
G
5

,
)
8
0
0
2
(

7

5
2

.

3

S
F

,

R
K
W

e
v
i
r
d

e
l
d
n
i
p
s

,
r
o
t
o
m
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
m
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

)
2
9
9
1
(

i
s
c
0
5
8

,
i
0
5
8

)
S
V

(

S
F

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h

,

p
m
u
p

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
H

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h
-
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

W
M
B

)
2
9
9
1
(

a
r
i

M

R
K
W

t
n
o
r
f

e
h
t

h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
c
e
n
n
o
C

l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
M

u
s
t
a
h
i
a
D

x
o
b
r
a
e
g

,

g
n
i
r
e
e
t
s

l
e
e
h
w

s
r
o
t
a
u
t
c
a

g
n
i
r
t
n
e
c

,
s
e
v
l
a
v

s
e
l
c
i
h
e
V

e
l
g
n
a
-
r
e
e
t
S

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
g
ﬁ
n
o
C

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

r
e
r
u
t
c
a
f
u
n
a
M

d
o
h
t
e
m

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
.
7
1

e
l
b
a
T

)
8
0
0
2
(

e
p
u
o
c

a
n
u
g
a
L

,
)
8
0
0
2
(

T
G
a
n
u
g
a
L

5
3

.

S
F

,

R
K
W

,

x
o
b
r
a
e
g

,
r
o
t
o
m
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
m
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

t
l
u
a
n
e
R

)
2
0
0
2
(

o
d
a
r
e
v
l
i
S

,
)
2
0
0
2
(

a
r
r
e
i
S

C
M
G

2
1

)
S
V

(

S
F

,

R
K
W

,

x
o
b
r
a
e
g

,
r
o
t
o
m
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
E

l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
m
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

M
G

e
v
i
r
d

e
l
d
n
i
p
s

e
v
i
r
d

e
l
d
n
i
p
s

)
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
s

c
i
n
o
r
t
c
e
l
e
(

n
o
i
t
a
s
i
l
i
b
a
t
s

g
n
i
v
i
r

D

,
)
R
D
F
(

)
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

t
o
l
i
p
(

n
o
i
t
a
s
i
l
i
b
a
t
s

g
n
i
v
i
r

D

,
)
S
V
(

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

e
l
c
r
i
c

g
n
i
n
r
u
T

,

R
K
W

S
F

S
F

17 All-Wheel Steering

497

Fig. 17.2 Mechanical all-wheel steering of Honda Prelude (Honda Accord Forum 2009)

The mechanical all-wheel steering of the Honda Prelude (1987) is designed so
that for small front-axle steer-angles, the back wheels are turned in the same
direction. Stability at high speed is gained that way, because the yaw impulse is
smaller. With higher steer-angles (beyond a steering wheel angle of 127˚), the
mechanical gear ratio changes in such a way that the back wheels turn in the
opposite direction of the front wheels. This improves the agility in the low speed
range, e.g., when manoeuvering, see Fig. 17.3. At about 450˚ of steering wheel

498

P. Herold and M. Wallbrecher

Fig. 17.3 Active principle of the back wheel steering gear (Honda Accord Forum 2009)

angle, the back wheels have a highest steer-angle of 5.3˚ (Honda Accord Forum
2009; Zomotor and Reimpel 1991; Sano et al. 1987).

The drawback of this gearbox principle and the rigid mechanical connection
with the front axle is that ﬁrst, the effects of initial co-steering at small steer-angles
have to be compensated (reduced agility), before countersteering takes over at
higher steer-angles. If big steer-angles are required at high speed, though, this
switch produces a “counteraligned” steer-angle and an oversteer response.

Honda developed an electromechanical system for the successor of the Prelude
in the 1990s. It helped to remove the rigid coupling of the steer-angles at front and
rear axle (see also Sect. 17.2.3).

17.2.2 Hydraulic Systems

The standard use of hydraulic systems, e.g., in the Nissan Skyline ‘HICAS’ (High
Capacity Actively Controlled Suspension, 1985) or in the Mitsubishi Gallant
(Active-Four, 1987) has been subject to different plans, see (Zomotor and Reimpel
1991). They have in common that hydraulic pressure in an actuator, consisting of
cylinder and piston, builds up the necessary force at the rear-wheel steering. Very
high actuating forces can be achieved by hydraulic actuators, so that even heavy
vehicle classes can be steered at rest. The hydraulic cycles are very complex,
though, because a system with high demands has to be developed, consisting of

17 All-Wheel Steering

499

Fig. 17.4 BMW 850i with active rear-axle kinematics (AHK) (BMW 1991/2008)

lines, pump, reservoir and actuator. Hydraulic all-wheel steering can be either
purely hydraulically or electronically controlled.

An example for an electronically controlled all-wheel steering is the active
rear-axle kinematics, AHK, used by BMW in the 8 models from 1992. The pur-
pose of the development of active rear-axle kinematics was the improvement of
active safe driving in the whole range of potential steering manoeuvres. For this
purpose, active steering of the rear axle has to control the side forces acting on the
rear axle at high lateral acceleration with regard to amplitude and phase (Wal-
lentowitz et al. 1992) (Fig. 17.4).

The system conﬁguration of the active rear-axle kinematics can be divided into
three subsystems, shown in Fig. 17.5: hydraulic power supply and actuators,
system control and monitoring, as well as the tractable construction of the integral
rear axle (Wallentowitz et al. 1992). The hydraulics of the system consist of a
radial piston pump that is mechanically coupled with the vane-type pump of the
front-axle power steering. The third cycle of the pump, another radial piston pump,
is responsible for the level control system of the vehicle. A pressure supply unit
with hydraulic accumulator, accumulator valve charging and pressure sensors
keeps the operational pressure for the hydraulic actuator unit in the deﬁned
operational range (Wallentowitz et al. 1992).

A control device uses the input quantities driving speed and steering wheel angle to
calculate the preset steer-angle of the rear wheels. The sensors for driving speed,
steering wheel angle, set position of the rear-wheel steering and the microprocessors in
the control device are redundant, to meet the safety requirements.

500

P. Herold and M. Wallbrecher

Fig. 17.5 Active rear-axle kinematics (AHK) (BMW 1991/2008)

The arrangement of the hydraulic setting unit in the middle of the rear cross
beam at the rear axle is shown in Fig. 17.5. The linear movement of the centring
actuator is transferred by a double axial joint to an interlever which receives the
internal bearing point of the spring drive and supports the wheel load at the
rear-axle support. The interlever deﬁnes the gear ratio between actuator stroke and
moving spring drive over the actuating points of double axial joint and spring drive
(Wallentowitz et al. 1992).

17.2.3 Electromechanical Systems

Electromechanical systems asserted themselves in the course of development,
because of the high complexity of the hydraulics and limited functions of the
mechanical systems.

The beneﬁts of these concepts are:

• any steer-angle can be set at the rear axle, independent of the wheel angle at the

front axle

• less complicated construction
• less weight
• lower fault susceptibility.

The rear wheels of electromechanical systems are steered by an electrome-
chanical actuator. An ECU calculates an actuator value from various input values,
and an electric motor is accordingly actuated. BLDC motors are prevalent, because
opposed to brush engines, they are free of wear and easier controlled by the safety
system. Sensors monitor the correct positioning of the motor. The rotation of the
electric motor is converted into a stroke movement by a suitable mechanical gear
ratio (e.g., ball-recirculating gear with nut or spindle drive). This stroke movement

17 All-Wheel Steering

501

Fig. 17.6 Actuator of the rear-wheel steering of a Honda Prelude 1991 (Honda Accord Forum
2009)

is transferred to the rear wheels by corresponding drives. Electromechanical
rear-wheel steering systems provide a variety of possibilities to develop dynamic
designs. Any input values can be used, e.g.: vehicle speed, steering wheel angle,
yaw rate, lateral acceleration etc. They are not limited to the conversion of basic
speed-sensitive steering functions, like parallel steering and countersteering, which
had been common in the past, but complicated dynamic control functions can be
integrated as well.

As mentioned above, Honda developed an electromechanical

rear-wheel
steering as early as 1991. Figure 17.6 reveals the quite complicated system con-
ﬁguration. An electric motor transfers its movement to a ball-recirculating gear
with nut that transfers the rotation into a translation of the steering shaft spindle.
The electromechanical rear-wheel steering is equipped with redundant steer-angle
sensors for safety reasons. In case of a system failure, the rear wheels are rightened
into their central position by the return spring.

The

supplier, Kayaba

Industry, developed another

electromechanical
rear-wheel steering which was used especially for the Japanese market in many
Nissan applications, such as the Nissan Skyline. Figure 17.7 shows the interesting
mechanical concept to transform the rotation of the electric servo motor into a
steering movement of the rear wheels.

The electric motor transfers its rotation to a hypoidally interlocked crown
wheel. A plug is eccentrically mounted on a spherical support at the crown wheel.
The plug is also fastened in the tie rod shaft and can move it translationally.

502

P. Herold and M. Wallbrecher

Fig. 17.7 Active principle of the Nissan rear-wheel steering from 1993 (Kayaba 2005)

Fig. 17.8 Arrangement of
the steering actuator in the
rear axle of the BMW 7
(BMW 1991/2008)

A steering movement of the rear wheels can then be executed by the tie rod and the
hub carrier.

After their high tide in the 1990s, almost all the all-wheel steering systems
disappeared from the market again. The reasons were the high add-on costs and
functional deﬁcits in the driving dynamics. These are described in detail in
Sect. 17.3. Another reason was the availability of cheaper brake control systems,
like ESP, that could realise the purpose of driving stabilisation in the upper limit
range for much less costs. As mentioned above, the Japanese market and appli-
cations for light trucks are an exception.

Currently (as of March 2010), three manufacturers all over the world are using
all-wheel steering in passenger cars. Electromechanical systems are found in the
Renault Laguna GT (2008), the BMW 7 (2008), 5 GT (2009) and 5 (2010) as well
as in the Nissan Inﬁnity FX50 and G37 [Make it four manufacturers? What about
the Audi A4/A6 Quattro, still produced in 2013?]. The depictions in Figs. 17.8 and
17.9 show the integration of the rear-wheel steering into the integral V rear axle of
the BMW 7 and 5.

17 All-Wheel Steering

Fig. 17.9 Arrangement of
the steering actuator in the
rear axle of the BMW 5
(BMW 1991/2008)

503

17.2.4 Central Actuator Versus Single Wheel Actuators

In the cars of Nissan Inﬁnity, BMW and Renault, the actuators of the rear-wheel
steering are concentrically arranged at the rear axle. A central actuator is steering
two wheels by a rigid connection; the same steer-angles are set at both wheels.
Such a central actuator concept needs a continuous space from left to right, which
is not available in some vehicle structures. For cases like that, technical designs of
single wheel actuators have been supplied as an alternative to the central actuator
principle, as for example the active rear-axle kinematics by ZF Lemföder (AKC
(R)), Schäfﬂer or Continental.

These are technical solutions where each rear wheel has its own mounted
actuator (Fig. 17.10). Single wheel actuators also enable the adjustment of sepa-
rate toe-ins for every wheel, this can be useful during assembly of the axles and
when realising dynamic control functions.

The above-mentioned beneﬁts of single-wheel actuator plans are opposed by
more complexity in comparison to a central actuator concept. Not only actuators,
but also sensors and actuating electronics have to be installed twice.

Additionally, mutual communication of the current steer-angles has to be
maintained to keep synchronous control, and in the fault case of one actuator, the
other one has to be shut down (example: private CAN concept Continental).

Single wheel actuator systems are almost twice as expensive during production,
because of higher complexity and the double use of hardware. Moreover, the

504

P. Herold and M. Wallbrecher

Fig. 17.10 Single wheel actuator, fair prototype by ZF Lemförder (Wiesenthal et al. 2008)

danger of potential system faults during operation in the customer vehicle is
higher, and this can affect the service costs.

With regard to weight, there is not much difference between single-wheel and
central actuators, the weight of the second actuator in the single wheel-concept is
about as high as that of the mechanics (e.g., levers and drives) required for the
central actuator.

17.3 Effects of an All-Wheel Steering on Vehicle Dynamics

The purpose of all the conﬁgurations of all-wheel and rear-wheel steering dis-
cussed in the preceding chapters is the improvement of the lateral dynamic driving
characteristics of the respective vehicle.

While the ﬁrst applications, made in the 1930s, were intended to support agility
and manoeuverability, the later realisations aimed not only for agility but essen-
tially for an improvement of actuating response and driving stability. A mechani-
cal all-wheel steering describes the rear wheel steer-angle δh as a simple function
of the front wheel steer-angle δv or the steering wheel angle δH:

dh ¼ f ðdvÞ

For the ﬁrst electronically controlled all-wheel steering systems, the rear wheel
steer-angle δh is described as a function of the car’s (forward) speed and the
front-wheel steer-angle δv or the steering wheel angle δH:

17 All-Wheel Steering

505

Fig. 17.11 Opposite direction steering: kp \ 0, parallel direction steering: kp [ 0

ð
dh ¼ f vx; dv

Þ

In the course of development, the pure pilot control of a rear-wheel steering was
lately extended by including the all-wheel steering in the Electronic Stability
Programme of the vehicle. This was made possible by reasonable dynamic sensors
becoming available that monitor yaw rate, longitudinal and lateral acceleration etc.

dh ¼ f ðvx; dv; Ddv; dh; ax; ay; w; b. . .Þ

This chapter will discuss the dynamic effects of controlled all-wheel steering.

17.3.1 Kinematic Qualities of an All-Wheel steering

The transmission ratio of an all-wheel steering is described by the coefﬁcient kp as
a quotient of the steer-angle at the back wheels and the steer-angle at the front
wheels.

kp ¼ (cid:3)

dh
dv

For all-wheel steering, two active principles are generally distinguished: parallel
direction and opposite direction steering (Fig. 17.11).

kp \ 0: In opposite direction steering, the rear wheels are turned against the
steering direction of the front wheels. The instantaneous centre of the vehicle
moves forwards, this has an effect as if the wheelbase was shortened. The
cornering circle shrinks, the rear axle of the vehicle moves on another trajectory,
this makes the vehicle handier and more agile (Fig. 17.12 top).

kp [ 0: If the rear wheels are steered in the same direction as the front wheels of
a vehicle, the instantaneous centre moves to the back. The virtual extension of the
wheelbase increases the stability (Fig. 17.12).

506

P. Herold and M. Wallbrecher

Virtual wheelbase shortening

Reduced cornerning radius or cornering circle 
(relative to vehicle CG)

Virtual wheelbase extension

Fig. 17.12 Change of the cornering circle and virtual change of the wheelbase (simpliﬁed
kinematic representation)

17.3.2 Inﬂuence of an All-Wheel Steering on the Stationary

Vehicle Characteristics

The effects of an all-wheel steering on the stationary vehicle characteristics shall
be examined in a more thorough discussion of the steady-state circular driving.
The highest accessible lateral acceleration is almost the same for vehicles with and
without all-wheel steering, but the biggest difference is in the development of the
car’s side slip angle.

If kp [ 0, then the side slip angle in the vehicle CG decreases according to size
of the steer-angle at the rear axle. In some past applications, kp was selected in a
way that theoretically the side slip angle was always compensated to zero. The
reason was the view that as long as the side slip angle was zero, this would force a
stable driving state.

It had been overlooked that a stable driving state is also the product of further
input values, such as load change response, transitional response from the linear to
the limit area etc. (Fig. 17.13).

Every now and then, the side slip angle was overcompensated by a steering
intervention at the rear axle, so that negative side slip angles developed even at
high speed and lateral acceleration ranges. The result was a very stable yet sig-
niﬁcantly understeering and subjectively unfamiliar driving experience.

17 All-Wheel Steering

507

Fig. 17.13 Changing side slip angle of a vehicle with all-wheel steering (middle to higher lateral
acceleration range)

17.3.3 Inﬂuence of an All-Wheel Steering

on the Nonstationary Vehicle Characteristics

The effects of an all-wheel steering on the nonstationary driving response will be
discussed in the following by examining the response characteristics during a jump
of the steer-angle and the driving response in an ISO lane change.

Figure 17.14 shows on the left side how a dynamic steering input, such as a
jump of a steer-angle, quickly and steadily builds up a lateral force at the front and
rear axle. This reduces the yaw response of the vehicle to a minimum, the yaw
speed is building up slower while the lateral acceleration is building up faster. The
transfer function of steer-angle to lateral acceleration has a lower phase shift. This
produces a—for the driver—better predictable driveability at high speed.

The opposite steer-angle at the rear wheels produces an initial build-up of the
lateral force at front and rear axle in the opposite direction. This produces a yaw
gain, the initial lateral acceleration is lower. A more agile driveability is the result,
desirable especially in the low speed range.

A driving manoeuvre like an ISO lane change demonstrates objectively how an
all-wheel steering improves the driveability. The lower side slip angle is obvious
(Fig. 17.15). The otherwise typical excession of the side slip angle in the third lane
of the ISO lane change is much lower. Yaw speed and lateral acceleration are
much more loyal to phase (Herold et al. 2008), relative to the entered steering
wheel angle.

508

P. Herold and M. Wallbrecher

Fig. 17.14 Vehicle response to a deﬁned instationary steer-angle, left side kp [ 0, right side
kp \ 0

Fig. 17.15 Simulation ISO lane change (kp [ 0), blue all-wheel steering, yellow conventional
steering (Herold et al. 2008)

17.3.4 Combination of a Rear-Wheel Steering

with a Superimposed Steering System at the Front
Axle

Those applications of an all-wheel steering that permit a free choice of the rear
wheel steer-angle make it dependent on the driving speed and on the front wheel
steer-angle:

17 All-Wheel Steering

509

Fig. 17.16 Integral active steering in the BMW 5 (2010)

dh ¼ f ðvx; dvÞ or kp ¼ f ðvxÞ

If the side slip angle is compensated by selecting kp so that it is zero, the vehicle
will understeer much more than if it did not have an all-wheel steering. Any
all-wheel car that has an aligned steer-angle applied at higher speed will display
this pronounced tendency to understeer. According to Zomotor and Reimpel
(1991), not only the nonstationary vehicle characteristics but also the stationary
ones have to be considered to perfect the driveability with the help of a rear-wheel
steering. If the stationary vehicle characteristics of speed-sensitive driving char-
acteristics should remain unchanged, the front-axle ratio has to be speed-sensitive,
too (Zomotor and Reimpel 1991).

BMW was the ﬁrst to introduce an all-wheel steering in 2008, the ‘integral
active steering, IAS’, which can meet these requirements for a system. Fig-
ure 17.16 shows the components of the integral active steering in the BMW 5. An
electromechanical power steering is combined with the already known superim-
posed steering system at the front axle. At the rear axle the electromechanical
rear-wheel steering is applied, with the actuating points situated at the hub carriers.
The ECU group in the Integrated Chassis Management is not shown.

Nissan has supplied the 4WAS system in the Inﬁnity G37 since 2007, another
combination of a rear-wheel steering with a superimposed steering system at the
front axle. The 4WAS system provides for a coordinated aligned steering inter-
vention at the front and rear axles only in the high speed range, while in the low
speed range, the rear-wheel steering does not move.

The steer-angles at both axles can be selected independently from the driver’s
input by combining a superimposed steering system (see Chap. 16) with a
rear-wheel steering. The integral active steering achieves an almost linear rise of
the yawing movement over the driver’s input when the rear wheels are turned at
low speed. The better agility due to the virtual shortening of the wheelbase was

510

P. Herold and M. Wallbrecher

Fig. 17.17 Stationary yaw
neutrality of an integral active
steering

already described in Sect. 17.3.1. The direct gear ratio of the superimposed
steering system in this speed range improves convenient driving, no shufﬂe is
needed, even in narrow corners.

Beyond 50 km/h, the rear wheels are turned in alignment with the front wheels.
The stabilising steer-angle is continuously increased as a function of speed and
steering wheel angle. The higher demand for a steer-angle developing then is
compensated by the superimposed steering system at the front axle. The all-wheel
steering is applied so that for the same speed, the cornering radius of a car with
conventional steering relative to its CG is the same as the cornering radius of a car
with integral active steering, see Fig. 17.17. Stationary yaw neutrality therefore
results from:

w ¼

v
r

are

also

These

present

characteristics

driving manoeuvre
‘quasi-stationary articulation’. For vx = const., the steering wheel angle is slowly
and consistently increased to the upper limit of the lateral acceleration. Shown in
Fig. 17.18, the rear-wheel steering and the superimposed steering system at the
front axle are coordinated so that the yaw rate builds up over the lateral acceler-
ation like in the basis model.

the

in

The beneﬁt of more driving stability, as discussed in Sect. 17.3.3, is fully
preserved. With a lateral acceleration of 8 m/s2, the side slip angle in the CG of a

17 All-Wheel Steering

511

Fig. 17.18 Integral active steering in the BMW 750I, quasi-stationary articulation at vx = 100
(km/h), (Herold et al. 2008). Beta (basis) Side slip angle β of a vehicle with conventional
steering; STWA (basis) Steering wheel angle δH of a vehicle with conventional steering; YAW
(basis)Yaw speed ψ of a vehicle with conventional steering; beta (IAS) Side slip angle β of a
vehicle with integral active steering; STWA (IAS) Steering wheel angle δH of a vehicle with
integral active steering; YAW (IAS) Yaw speed ψ of a vehicle with integral active steering

car with integral active steering is less than half than that of the basis vehicle,
rising almost linearly, even when the lateral acceleration increases even further.
The design conﬂict of all-wheel steering systems between driving stability and
understeering, troubling driveability, described by Zomotor and Reimpel (1991), is
completely resolved now.

Steer by Wire

Pei-Shih Huang and Alfred Pruckner

18.1 Introduction

Steer by Wire is an automotive system that electrically transmits a steering com-
mand from an operating element (steering wheel) by an ECU to an actuator
executing the steering command at the driven wheels. These systems do not have
any mechanical connection between steering wheel and driven wheels. To improve
handling, the driving state delivers a haptic response to the driver by an active
operating element.

The hardest challenge of Steer by Wire systems is to meet the safety and reli-
ability requirements with reasonable effort. A short overview of the state-of-the-art
and the pros and cons of Steer by Wire systems will be given in the following. Then
the components and especially the properties of the operating element will be more
thoroughly discussed. Finally, an example of a possible functional design will be
shown and aspects of safety and reliability picked out as a central theme.

18.1.1 State-of-the-Art

X-by-Wire is now used in different
(analogous)
Fly-by-Wire system for civilian aircraft was made for the Concorde in the 1970s.
Airbus introduced the A320, a commercial aeroplane with Fly-by-Wire technology
and without mechanical backup system, in 1987.

technical areas. The ﬁrst


Drive-by-Wire (an electronic accelerator pedal) is a standard X-by-Wire system
in the automotive business whose engine responds faster to accelerator pedal
commands, according to the change of the pedal angle and a speciﬁc intervention
into the traction control if the traction slip is too high.

Steer by Wire was installed so far only in special and prototype vehicles. One
example is shown in Toyota’s concept study Fine-X, using single-wheel steering at
all four wheels (Fig. 18.1).

18.1.2 Pros and Cons

Table 18.1 shows an overview of the pros and cons of Steer by Wire systems,
compared with customary systems. One essential advantage of Steer by Wire is the
easy conversion of different additional steering functions, like driving dynamics
stabilisation, VGR, variable steering feel or even autonomous driving (e.g., for
autonomous parking). Another beneﬁt is the free design of the front end. Space for
the engine unit and improved correspondence of left- and right-hand driven
vehicles (less variety) can be achieved, since there is no intermediate steering shaft
(steering column). Because of that, requirements for passive safety (crash) can be
addressed more purposefully as well.

18 Steer by Wire

Fig. 18.2 Interior design
with stick controls (BMW
Group Research and
Technology)

515

Separating input and response allows falling back on simpler structures for the
development of front-axle systems, because desired vehicle responses can be set by
the software, and interfering factors can be suppressed. Finally, new input devices,
such as sticks, create the space for innovative interior design (Fig. 18.2). In addition,
the Steer by Wire can be used for the application of driving assistance funtionality,
e.g., the so-called electronic pole in the autonomous driving. (Seewald 2008).
Especially utility vehicles can save fuel and help to conserve the environment.

As for any disadvantages, note that high safety requirements and reliability to
satisfy the customer are placing high demands to the redundancy of Steer by Wire
systems, increasing costs and weight in turn. The costs are produced by the fault
tolerance required in a purely electrical transmission. The driver must be able to
control any possible fault that can occur in an electric system in any driving
situation (Winner et al. 2004). This asks for a sophisticated safety concept (see
Sect. 18.4).

In contrast to a fault-tolerant system, a fail-silent system includes a mechanical
relapse level (Kilgenstein 2002). Other than electronic components, a mechanical
system can be designed and sized with the help of expertise and empirical values,
so that it will by all likelihood not fail within the intended lifetime, as long as the
speciﬁed stress limits are observed. In this case it is sufﬁcient if the electronic
components are fail-silent units that switch off when a fault is registered while the
steering function is maintained by the mechanical relapse level (Heitzer and
Seewald 2004). One example of Steer by Wire with a mechanical relapse level is
the heterodyne steering supplied by some vehicle manufacturers (Chap. 16).
Active steering systems of this kind can assume many qualities and functions of
pure Steer By Wire systems (Fleck 2003), but no space is saved. The steering
column may either be retained as a mechanical relapse level or replaced by
hydraulics (Heitzer and Seewald 2000).

The conditions for the approval of automotive steering equipment, including

assembly and testing speciﬁcations, are gathered in ECE-R 79.

516

Pei-Shih Huang and A. Pruckner

Operating element

Steering 
sensor

Dynamic 
measured vehicle 
variables

Response actuator

ECU

Fig. 18.3 Steer by Wire concept

18.2 Components

Figure 18.3 shows a schematic conﬁguration of a Steer by Wire system. The input
module, including an operating element (e.g., steering wheel or stick), response
motor and steering sensors, is responsible for the registration of the driver’s input
and for suggesting a steering feel. The steering gear module with steering gear,
steer-angle actuator and wheel sensors implements the lateral dynamic conversion
of the driver’s input. Both modules are just electrically controlled by an ECU.

The response motor should be able to counteract the usual manual force of a
driver, corresponding to a torque of about 10 Nm (cf. Sect. 15.4). Even an e-motor
with gear ratio can hardly counteract a potential abusive torque when the driver
continues to turn by force when the full steer-angle is already reached. It is useful
then to integrate passive construction elements, like stop units and dampers. One
condition of an ideal control is that the steering sensors measure travel and angle
as well as force and torque.

18 Steer by Wire

Fig. 18.4 By-Wire per wheel
‘Corner modules’

517

General dynamic measured variables are available for the ECU in the Elec-
tronic Stability Program, beside Steer by Wire data from steering and wheel
sensors, such as driving speed, yaw rate and lateral acceleration.

The steering angle actuator at the steering gear module should fulﬁll the power
and dynamic requirements of an electric power-assisted steering system (cf.
Sect. 15.4). In other words, the steering force at standby must be available in any
situation, while the steering velocity of up to 500 ˚/s input by the driver should be
translated to the wheel with the support of the steering actuator dynamically.

As an alternative to a steering gear, the connection of the two front wheels can
be separated into single-wheel steering systems. This may even invoke a ‘corner
module’ concept (Gombert 2007), performing the chassis functions (steering,
driving, braking, vertical dynamics) at the individual wheels; the beneﬁts are more
functions, immanent redundancy and saved space (Fig. 18.4).

As for any disadvantages of the ‘corner modules’ concept, note the costs and
the strong required forces at the steering actuators. They have to support the
mutual, constantly acting radial forces of toe-in, camber and inclination angle at
the respective wheel. An adapted axle design can at least reduce these forces in
comparison to current wheel forces.

18.2.1 Operating Element Quality

Steer by Wire systems imply high versatility for designing the interaction of driver
and car. Hence, the qualities of the operating element as a man-machine interface
shall be discussed more precisely in the following (Huang 2004).

Passive operational controls are a very easy and cheap way to transmit the

driver’s intention. Figure 18.5 compares various passive designs.

518

Task

Driver

optic
acoustic
kinesthetic
haptic

Passive operating 
element

Force /
Travel

Force and/or 
travel  sensor

Pei-Shih Huang and A. Pruckner

Control path 
(vehicle)

Result

Vehicle motion

Task

Driver

optic
acoustic
kinesthetic
haptic

Task

Driver

optic
acoustic
kinesthetic
haptic

ISOMORPHIC (spring-centred)

Passive operating 
element

Force sensor

Force

Control path 
(vehicle)

Result

ISOMETRIC (without travel)

Vehicle motion

Travel

Passive operating 
element

Travel sensor

Control path 
(vehicle)

Result

ISOTONIC (without force)

Vehicle motion

Fig. 18.5 Comparison of different passive operating elements

The driver sees or feels the qualities of vehicle movement and the operating
element and sets either force or travel at the operating element. The haptic feed-
back to the driver is a result of the passive quality of the operating element, which
can be isomorphic (spring-centred), for example. If the spring stiffness should
become very high, this is called an isometric operational control (without travel).
If the spring stiffness is approaching zero, that is an isotonic operating element
(without force).

A driver’s input into a merely passive operating element is not suitable, on
account of the non-linear vehicle qualities and the high sensitivity of automobiles
to ambient inﬂuences. An essential component of safe guiding is the feedback of
the current driving state to the operating element, esp. in situations when the
driving dynamics are critical. Producing this feedback makes the presence of an
active operating element obligatory (Huang 2004).

In contrast to passive operational controls, active controls can improve the
manual control power signiﬁcantly when interferences occur and the closed-loop
controlled system changes. The driver may just grip the active operating element

18 Steer by Wire

Task

519

Force

Active operating 
element

Force sensor

Driver

optic
acoustic
kinesthetic
haptic

Control path 
(vehicle)

Result

Measured variables

Travel

Vehicle motion

Travel
servo

Force setting/ 
position feedback

Task

Driver

optic
acoustic
kinesthetic
haptic

Travel

Active operating 
element

Travel sensor

Control path 
(vehicle)

Result

Measured variables

Force

Vehicle motion

Force
servo

Position setting/ 
force feedback

Fig. 18.6 Active operational controls with different control concepts

tighter when an interference occurs, and thus suppress it. The network of driver,
vehicle and operation is displayed in Fig. 18.6 by means of an active operating
element.

In contrast to passive operational controls, the force of the Force setting/po-
sition feedback concept is applied to the operating element of the vehicle’s closed-
loop controlled system and the car response is mirrored to the driver as information
on the travel. The Position setting/force feedback concept correspondingly has the
travel of the operating element applied to the car, while the car response (cornering
curvature, yaw rate or lateral acceleration) is reported to the operating element as a
force. Ideally, both concepts would be equal, but in real applications, especially in
the lateral dynamic limit range, there are differences which will be discussed in the
following Sect. 18.3.

‘Reciprocal dynamics’ prevent any concept that would provide for the con-
version of a force set by the driver into a position set at the actuator, reconverting
its force response into a position of the operating element. As unsuitable is the
reverse case: a position set at the operating element that would be converted into a
force set at the actuator, which would reconvert its resulting position into a force at
the operating element.

520

Pei-Shih Huang and A. Pruckner

α

Fh

.
ψ

a y

FG

δ

Fig. 18.7 Processes of a Steer by Wire control

18.3 Steering Functions

The stiffness requirements of customary steering systems can be achieved by a Steer
by Wire steering when sensor and actuator dynamics are suitably chosen. A little bit of
steering clearance should be included in the functional software, so that the
responding properties will not be too aggressive. The good steering feel of an elec-
tromechanical power steering may even be excelled by Steer by Wire systems, in spite
of the mechanical decoupling (Koch 2009). The reason is that the friction response of
the overall steering system can be almost arbitrarily tuned. The ideal way to do so is to
measure the tie rod forces, but good results can also be achieved by an accurate
estimate of these forces. Cybernetic attempts to design the steering feel of a Steer by
Wire steering like that of customary, power-assisted steering are shown, e.g., in
(Odenthal et al. 2003). A control that is resistant against external ambient inﬂuences
means an improvement of the driving dynamics in the lateral dynamic limit area
(Bünte et al. 2002). One observes that the exploitation of forces at the individual
wheels allows the driver to perfectly control the lateral dynamic driving state.

The following discussion presents an approach to the interaction of driver and
car by the previously discussed operating element qualities for stable driving or the
lateral dynamic limit area for all speed ranges. In addition, the inﬂuence of the
operating element’s qualities on the compensation of interfering variables and the
interaction with a combined longitudinal guide will be shown.

Figure 18.7 shows the process of a Steer by Wire control in a car by means of
an operating element (e.g., a stick). The driver enters a force Fh or an angle α into
the operating element. A force FG is generated at the gear and a steer-angle δ at the
wheel. Dynamic parameters, like lateral acceleration ay and yaw rate ψ′, appear at
the vehicle as well.

The development of the steering function of a Steer by Wire systems poses the

question: How does a driver control a car and which parameters are involved?

At low speed the driver regulates the curvature or the curvature difference
between the driving path and the predicted vehicle motion. The driver speciﬁes the
desired yaw rate and controls it with the curvature difference (feedback control).

18 Steer by Wire

521

Table 18.2 Input and return variables for different speeds (Huang 2004)
Speed range
low (\25 km/h)
medium to high ([45 km/h)

Input value
yaw rate ψ′desired
Lateral acceleration ay desired

Feedback value
Curvature κ actual
yaw rate ψ′ actual

At medium to high speed, the driver reduces or controls the yaw angle error
through yaw control. The driver gives a desired lateral acceleration and regulates
with the yaw rate feedback, which is equivalent to a lateral acceleration feedback
control loop (Table 18.2).

In the transient speed range between 25 and 45 km/h, the driver uses the
curvature and the yaw angle error simultaneously as control values. Input and
return in the transitional area between both speed ranges are achieved by changed
weighting.

18.3.1 Discussion of the Normal Driving Mode

The design described above has effects on the normal driving mode that are
considered for both different feedforward/feedback plans of Fig. 18.6 with the help
of an accelerated circular driving on a steady radius.

The force feedforward/position feedback concept needs a constant steer-angle
at low speed (the curvature is constant) while the steering torque is rising (yaw rate
rises with driving speed). Medium and high speed result in a linearly rising
demand for the steer-angle (yaw rate = driving speed by curvature), the steering
torque is a function of the lateral acceleration. This allows constructing convenient
designs that involve direct steering ratios for the low speed range and indirect
steering ratios for the high speed range.

The position feedforward/force feedback concept needs a rising steer-angle and
a steady steering torque for accelerated circular driving at low speed. Medium and
higher speed indicate a demand for a steer-angle as a function of the accelerated
circular driving, as
linearly rising. The position
feedforward/force feedback concept supplies a speed-sensitive steering ratio
already at low speed. It rises signiﬁcantly in the medium and high speed range.
This concept is not recommended for the normal driving mode or a steering torque
proportionally to the yaw rate in the middle and high speed range.

the steering torque is

18.3.2 Discussion of the Lateral Dynamic Limit Range

The control concept for lateral driving in the dynamic limit range will be discussed
for steady driving speed and small slip-angles or a low slip-angle rate. Assuming
this, the curvature κ in Table 18.2 is shown as a quotient of yaw rate and speed.

522

Pei-Shih Huang and A. Pruckner

Table 18.3 Simpliﬁed input, reduced to the yaw rate—return values
Input value
Speed range
yaw rate ψ′ desired
Low (\25 km/h)

Medium to high
([45 km/h)

Lateral acceleration

ay desired ≈ ψ′desired (cid:1) v

Return value
Curvature κ

actual ≈ ψ′actual/v

yaw rate ψ′actual

The lateral acceleration is computed from the product of yaw rate and speed.
Table 18.3 shows the inﬂuence of this conversion on feedforward and feedback
values. The feedforward is proportional to the desired yaw rate in any speed range,
the feedback is proportional to the actual yaw rate.

This implies for the Force feedforward/position feedback concept that the
operating element will turn ‘lighter’ in the case of oversteering response (actual
yaw rate is larger than desired yaw rate). That means that the force in the operating
element is lowered when the position is ﬁxed, and accordingly, the desired yaw
rate is decreasing. This is equal to stabilisation. The driver does not need to react
and can tell from the diminished force at the operating element that the vehicle is
in the lateral dynamic limit range. Since the desired lateral acceleration is present,
the driver will not readjust the steering. In case of an understeering response
(actual yaw rate is smaller than the desired yaw rate), the force at the operating
element rises if the position is ﬁxed. The driver is warned by the rising force
against approaching the dynamic stability limit. At the same time, this rising force
prevents the driver from non-promisingly increasing the steer-angle.

In case of position feedforward and force feedback, the force at the operating
element increases when the response is oversteering while the position is ﬁxed. To
counteract this critical driving situation, the driver has to reduce the input angle
(according to the rising force). This requires a certain amount of practise. In case
of an understeering response, the force at the operating element decreases. The
driver tries intuitively to compensate the lessening force by increasing the input
angle (because the desired lateral acceleration was not achieved), but in this sit-
uation, that is of no use.

Altogether, the Force feedforward/position feedback concept is again better
than the Position feedforward/force feedback concept, including in the dynamic
limit range. In spite of that, an overall examination has to include superior stability
interventions, e.g., by individual braking interventions.

18.3.3 Compensating Interferences

Electronic systems can automatically compensate HF interferences. LF interfer-
ences in a range between 0.2 and 0.4 Hz that the driver can easily adjust are ideally
fed back by the active operating element. The driving stability can be maintained
thereby, the driver is informed by the operating element about the altered ambient
conditions while the driving is getting more convenient.

18 Steer by Wire

523

For example, a vehicle that drives straight ahead may feel a rotation from
interferences like crosswind or changing friction values. The position of the
operating element is changed by interferences in the control concept that applies the
lateral acceleration as a force feedforward and the yaw rate as a position feedback.
As soon as the driver grabs the operating element tighter, a force feedforward is
automatically generated which exactly counteracts the interferences. The driver
thus very intuitively suppresses or compensates the interferences.

When the lateral acceleration is the position feedforward and the yaw rate is the
force feedback at the operating element, interference generates again a force at the
operating element. In this case, though, the driver has to ‘give way’ to this rising
force and to ‘countersteer’ with the operating element, to compensate the inter-
ference. These correcting interventions are less intuitive than in the above dis-
cussed case of force feedforward/position feedback (Huang 2004).

18.3.4 Combined Longitudinal–Lateral Guidance

The cutoff frequency of the driver/car control circuit is approx. 0.05 Hz to keep the
distance to the vehicle ahead in the longitudinal dynamics (Donges 1982). An
active operating element is not suitable for such LF controlled systems (Boller and
Krüger 1978).

The interference or mutual effect (e.g., the changed lateral guidance during a
powerful deceleration) at a stick-like operating element for concurrent longitudinal
and lateral guidance needs to be observed. Any isometric or non-travelling, passive
operating element is suitable for longitudinal guidance (Eckstein 2001). This force
feedforward should ideally be combined with another force feedforward for lateral
guidance. Longitudinal force feedforward combined with a lateral position feed-
forward is not recommendable for a combined input operating element.

18.4 Safety Concepts

If a customer buys a product, he or she should expect that it will work reliably.
Reliability is deﬁned as the ability of a unit to produce a demanded function under
given conditions for a given time (DIN EN 50129). This means that the product has
to be safe and available. Figure 18.8 shows the conﬂict zone of safety, availability
and costs. A system which is perfectly safe will shut down at once whenever a fault
occurs, and it is not available any more. A system with high availability is operated
at some risk when a fault occurs, and it is therefore not safe any more. Redundancy
increasing safety and availability has negative effects on the costs.

The basic condition for operating a Steer by Wire steering is the presence of a
fault-tolerant system architecture (Heitzer and Seewald 2000). Beside the safe
power supply, the ECU has to be fault-tolerant, e.g., equipped with two identical

524

Pei-Shih Huang and A. Pruckner

Cost
(€, weight, package, 
developing expenditure...)

Fault 
management 
system

,

,

safety
System is o.k.
or in (emergency) 
operation mode

Restrictive warning and
degradation plan

Availability 
(customer can 
use system as 
desired)

Fig. 18.8 Conﬂict zone safety, availability, costs

Degradation 
of the 
function

perfect

Fault 
State 1 
(system-
fault) 

Fault 
state 2 
(functional
error)

Emergency 
function

functional
failure

Restriction or 
warning
State of the 
driver or 
vehicle

Normal

Warning
without 
restriction

Warning 
with
restriction

“Limp 
Home“

Shutdown

e.g. warning lamp 
and display 
‘ABS failure’ 

e.g. limited
maximum 
speed

e.g. at 5 km/h

Fig. 18.9 Degradation plan with possible restrictions

fail silent units. If the self-monitoring of the ECU notes a fault, it has to switch off
fast enough and leave the transfer of the vehicle into a safe mode to the other ECU
(e.g., vehicle shutdown). Relevant sensors have to be three times redundant (two
identical signals outvote a faulty third) to be able to isolate a faulty sensor signal.
Actuators of a fault-tolerating conﬁguration have to be at least twice redundant,
meaning that one actuator can be set free of force when a fault is detected. The
correct data transfer can be maintained by especially developed, time-triggered
protocols, for example, FlexRay (www.ﬂexray.com).

18 Steer by Wire

525

A redundancy management

is deﬁned with an operational strategy, fault
management and a suitable warning and degradation plan to reduce the costs for
redundancy and to keep the car ready in spite of a present fault. Figure 18.9 shows
a possible degradation plan.

This way the car is still safely operatable when the wheel speed sensors fail, for
example. A warning light informs the driver about the fault, and speed-sensitive
steering functions are not available any more. If the active feedback motor fails,
only a few steering functions can be executed by the then purely passive operating
element, in this case, a reduced top speed can still sustain a safe operating mode. If
only one steering actuator is available on account of another steering actuator
failing, then an emergency function can be maintained at very low speed (‘limp
home’). If another actuator fails, the vehicle can still be safely brought to a halt by
individual brake engagement.

18.5 The Future

A major part of the steering functions enabled by Steer by Wire is already available
for a heterodyne steering (Wallbrecher et al. 2008). To exploit the additional
advantages of a ‘pure’ Steer by Wire steering for a reasonable expenditure, all the
available sensor data, actuators (steer in front, steer behind, individual brake
engagement, active vertical dynamics ...) and power supply units (low voltage
accumulator, high voltage accumulator, generators ...) need to be integrated into an
operation and failure strategy. The commonness of electriﬁed vehicles and more
desire for steering functions, up to driver assistance systems beneﬁting from Steer
by Wire technology, offer a chance to use technical synergies to reduce costs. The
absence of Steer by Wire systems in modern standard cars shows that these syn-
ergies are not big enough yet.

Overview: Driver Assistance System
Functions

Stefan Brosig and Markus Lienkamp

19.1 Overview of Selected Driver Assistance System

Functions Concerning Steering

The continuing increase of road trafﬁc and rising demands to the driver have
produced a huge number of assistance systems during the last years. They all
support the driver’s task of driving. There are systems for keeping the course which
engage the brake or the driveline. It seems reasonable to include the steering into
this purpose as well.

Possibilities for steering interventions do not exist only in future ‘Steer by Wire’
systems (Chap. 18), they are present already in the electromechanical steering (EPS
—Electronic Power Steering) and the heterodyne steering (Chap. 16). In either case,
the power assist is generated by an electric motor. In electromechanical steering
(Chap. 15), additional steering torques can be applied to the steering wheel by a
proper actuation of the electric motor. They recommend to the driver to adapt the
steer-angle input to that steer-angle which suits the driving situation best. The
system requires a mechanical connection between steering wheel and the front
wheels, hence, the driver is able at any time ‘to outvote’ the steering recommen-
dation by another steering command. Hence, the level of the additional steering
wheel torques is chosen in the conﬂict zone between best function and highest
possible safety. In a heterodyne steering (active steering), free additional angles can
be set independently from the driving input.
One focus of development is the interaction of the system with the driver. The
steering wheel torques or angles should support the driver in controlling demand-
ing, difﬁcult or unfamiliar driving situations, without taking over the task of vehicle
guidance. Moreover, the interactions with other driving dynamics systems and the
improvement of handling and convenience are the most prominent duties of
development.

Driverless steering interventions can be basically distinguished by two different

areas of responsibility.

Driving stability interventions (Sect. 19.2) and assistance functions for
lane-keeping, the latter being distinguished again by lane assistance (Sect. 19.3) and
parking assistance (Sect. 19.4).

19.2 Driving Stability Interventions

The function described in the following determines the current driving situation on
the basis of steer-angle, steering torques, lateral acceleration, yaw rate sensors and
internal ESP-computed values (Brosig 2006; Dreyer et al. 2007). The best
steer-angle for the present driving situation is identiﬁed. A steering wheel torque
signal is computed and superimposed to the steering wheel, meeting requirements
of safety and ergonomics—in other words, the interaction between driver and
support function. This should motivate the driver to adapt the self-chosen steering
wheel angle to the ideal one. Driving stability interventions with superimposed
wheel torque of an electromechanical steering should assist the driver in unusual
situations that cannot be practised in everyday trafﬁc, increasing the efﬁciency of
ESP/ABS systems. Manoeuvres described in the following (yawing and µ-split
situations) can be supported in the driving response or with the help of a heterodyne
steering, when an additional steer-angle is applied to the driver’s input.

19.2.1 Function ‘Steering Recommendation’

The steering recommendation and, hence, the driverless wheel intervention should
support the driver in driving—as mentioned at the beginning—both in an µ-split
situation and in the cornering response of the vehicle. The improvement of handling
and braking distance, combined with high acceptance by the driver, are the most
important targets of steering recommendations.

19 Overview: Driver Assistance System Functions

529

Fig. 19.1 Oversteering of a
vehicle

19.2.1.1

‘Steering Recommendation’ at Yawing

‘If the car oversteers, it pushes its rear outward and turns into the corner,’ writes
Laumann (2007). In this case, the driver has to compensate the yawing movement
by countersteering (see Fig. 19.1).

An unskilled driver can be overwhelmed in such a situation: too long, too late or
too low countersteering aggravates the situation. To safely control the vehicle, the
‘steering recommendation’ provides a superimposed steering wheel torque to the
driver, pointing where to steer. The driver’s countersteering movement is optimised
and ESP interventions can be avoided or reduced.

19.2.1.2

‘Steering Recommendation’ in the µ-split Situation

Driving situations which support the driver in braking manoeuvres when there are
asymmetrical friction values on the road are described by the generic term, µ-split.
Braking on a road that is slippery on one side turns the vehicle towards the high
friction value. The driver has to steer towards the low friction value to counteract
the pull towards higher friction (see Fig. 19.2). The ‘steering recommendation’
function recognises this situation, computes—based on the yaw rate of the vehicle
and the brake pressure difference at the front wheels—the corrective steering wheel
angle. This is applied to the steering wheel as a superimposed wheel torque, to
make a recommendation. The effective correction by the negative scrub radius, in
the same direction, begins later and is weaker, but it is acting in the same sense,
positively. Beside improving the driveability, which the driver may positively

530

S. Brosig and M. Lienkamp

Fig. 19.2 Vehicle in μ-split situation

notice by less yawing, the car will also have a shorter braking distance, because the
better yaw response on the part of the ABS permits stronger brake pressure dif-
ferences between the left and the right side.

19.2.2 Ergonomics Requirements

The requirements for the ergonomics of a steering result from the qualities of the
haptic senses. The driver can access response times of about 0.1 s over the haptic
sensory channel (Fausten and Folke 2004). This is the fastest sensory channel of
humans. A person receives this sensory information subconsciously and processes
it. The only thing faster than the subconscious level are reﬂexes (Chap. 7).

The electromechanical steering is coupled directly to the steering wheel. The
driver perceives superposed torques at the steering wheel very quickly. Hence, the
level of the additional wheel torques has to be selected very carefully (Schmidt
2009; Neukum et al. 2009). The feel of steering is processed at the subconscious
level and has therefore a considerable inﬂuence on:
(cid:129) driveability of the vehicle
(cid:129) safety perception
(cid:129) acceptance of the vehicle
(cid:129) vehicle brand.

19 Overview: Driver Assistance System Functions

531

Different requirements on the steering recommendation are the result:

(cid:129) Steering wheel torque interventions may never surprise the driver and have to be

always understandable in any driving situation.
– Hence, steering wheel torque interventions have to be always continuous, i.e.

they may not include any jumps.

(cid:129) The driver has to perceive that curve and phase of the applied wheel torques
agree with the feeling of proper driving or the steering movement, according to
the driving situation. In other words, the characteristics of the vehicle may not
be changed too much.
– Hence, development has to create the possibility to control the steering

characteristics by parameters

(cid:129) furthermore, the driver has to be able at any time to outvote the steering wheel

torque and to keep control of the vehicle in every situation.
– This requires a limitation of the highest additional steering wheel torques. If
the driver does not agree with the recommended steering wheel torques, this
has to be recognised and the function deactivated, if necessary.

19.2.3 Safety Requirements

Safety requirements of a system intervening into the steering can be maintained by
the development section with the proven and accepted methods (Chap. 15). System
and signal interfaces have to be intrinsically safe, meaning that the driver should be
able to control the driving situation whenever an additional steering wheel torque is
applied. This assumes monitoring and limitation of the steering wheel torques and
their gradients (Rohlfs et al. 2009).

19.3 Lane Assist

Figure 19.3 charts fatal accidents outside of town areas. About two thirds of all
accidents in Germany develop from a collision with another object or vehicle on the
road. Collisions with pedestrians account for 8 % of all accidents and departing
from the lane for approx. 15 %. 21 % of all fatal accidents result from a collision
with an oncoming vehicle. 34 % of all fatal accidents develop out of departing from
the lane.

The lane assist registers any unintentional departure from the lane and supports
the driver, for example, with a correcting steering intervention (see Sect. 19.3.1).
Unintentional departure from the lane can be avoided in particular cases. The

532

S. Brosig and M. Lienkamp

Fig. 19.3 Fatal accidents outside of town by type of accident (source Federal Statistical Ofﬁce of
Germany)

reasons for accidents listed above, such as unintentional departure from the lane,
show that the lane assist can contribute to avoid accidents.

There are different kinds of warning and support for the lane guidance of
vehicles. This chapter will discuss some examples of systems that support the driver
in keeping the lane, in connection with the steering (Winner et al. 2009).

Lane Departure Warning systems (LDWs) merely warn the driver by an optical,
acoustic or haptic signal that the lane was left, but they do not interfere into the lane
guidance. Lane Keeping Systems (LKS) support the driver in keeping the lane by
intervening with a correcting wheel torque. They represent a functional extension of
an LDW system.

19.3.1 Lane Keeping System: LKS

This chapter will discuss the function and conﬁguration of the lane keeping system
—Lane Assist—, as it is called and applied by Volkswagen. The ﬁnal subsection
examines comparable systems available on the market. The same safety and
ergonomics requirements as discussed in Sect. 19.2.3 apply.

19.3.1.1 Technical Realisation

Availability of a suitable steering system is an essential condition for the realisation
of a lane keeping system. The electromechanical steering is such an actuator. This
development created the precondition to superimpose additional steering wheel

19 Overview: Driver Assistance System Functions

533

Fig. 19.4 ‘Lane assist’ system components

torques on the steering very easily. A comparison in Chap. 11 shows that hydraulic
steering is generally not useable for driver’s assistance.

Efﬁcient image processing and camera technology help to construct very good
lane recognition systems for a reasonable price. Figure 19.4 shows the system
components of the lane keeping system.
(cid:129) camera and ECU (1)
(cid:129) electromechanical steering (2)
(cid:129) multi function steering wheel (3)
(cid:129) instrument cluster (4).

The lane keeping system can be switched on and off by a caliper at the steering
shaft switch. Whether the system is switched on or off is shown by the multi
function display in the menu ‘Assistant’. If the lane keeping system is switched on,
a pilot light (system passive-yellow or active-green) in the instrument cluster
indicates the status of the system.

A mono camera attached near the rear-view mirror traces the lane by its road

markings, the signals are analysed by the interior ECU.

The electromechanical steering applies an additional wheel torque as a recom-
mendation to the driver when the lane is unintentionally left. This steering

534

S. Brosig and M. Lienkamp

Fig. 19.5 Function—lane keeping support

recommendation, too, can be outvoted by the driver any time (as described for the
function ‘steering recommendation’ (see Sect. 19.2).

19.3.1.2 Functioning

The lane keeping system is designed for use on well developed country roads and
highways. The system only switches to the ‘active’ state when the following criteria
are met (for example: Lane Assist):
(cid:129) lane recognised
(cid:129) lane is wide enough
(cid:129) curvature of the lane is small enough
(cid:129) vehicle is in the lane
(cid:129) speed is faster than 65 km/h.

A camera module in the area of the inside mirror records the road markings, and
the position of the vehicle is evaluated. If the vehicle deviates from his lane, the
lane assist will countersteer (see Fig. 19.5). If the highest steering wheel torque is
not sufﬁcient to keep the lane, or if the speed drops below 60 km/h, the ‘Lane
Assist’ informs about the fact by a vibration of the steering wheel, indicating to the
driver that the lane keeping support cannot fully support him or her and that the
driver has to keep full control of the steering wheel.

19.3.1.3

In Practise

If the lane keeping system is activated, a yellow controlling symbol depicting a road
is on. As soon as the camera has located suitable road markings, this symbol
changes to green (see Fig. 19.6). Now the system is fully active. If the vehicle
should leave the ideal line, the lane keeping system countersteers softly and in a
continuous motion.

The system continuously analyses the driver’s steering activities to ﬁnd out
whether the driver still takes active part in the driving process or has yielded to
being driven by the system. If the driver has yielded to the system, a note is given in
the multi function display (see Fig. 19.7).

19 Overview: Driver Assistance System Functions

535

Fig. 19.6 Request to the driver

Fig. 19.7 Activity display in
the estate car

If this state does not change, the system immediately switches to passive and the
driver does not receive power assist any more. The system reactivates only after
renewed steering activity.

19.3.2 Lane Departure Warning: LDW

The lane departure warning—discussed here for the example of the ‘Audi lane
assist’—traces the road markings with an optical sensor (mono camera) and indi-
cates upon leaving the lane by sound and a haptic signal, informing the driver by
means of a vibrating steering wheel (see Fig. 19.8).

The driver can for example associate the vibration—in an Audi car generated by
a vibrating engine in the steering wheel—for the rippled curb rattling. Alternatively,

536

S. Brosig and M. Lienkamp

Fig. 19.8 Function lane departure alert, example: ‘Audi Lane Assist’

the vibration can be generated by means of an electromechanical steering—pro-
vided that any is on-board. The power of the wheel’s vibration can be adapted to the
driver’s needs (Vukotich et al. 2008).

Like the lane keeping system, this system should support the driver especially
when driving on highways and country roads. The same speed limits apply to the
activation of the system, and the same two-colour status display is found in the
instrument cluster.

19.3.3 Selected Systems on the Market

Lane Keeping systems—LKS—and Lane Departure Warning systems—LDW—
are presented with some basic data in the following (alphabetically sorted by car
manufacturers). This list does not claim completeness, but shall give an overview of
currently available systems on the market, in addition to those described above:
(cid:129) LDW: “Audi lane assist” of Audi (A4, A5, A6, A8, Q5, Q7).
– Camera-based (located in the foot of the inside mirror)
– Approaching and crossing the lane → haptic warning by vibrating steering

wheel (above 65 km/h)

– Time and intensity of the vibrating wheel adjustable.

19 Overview: Driver Assistance System Functions

537

(cid:129) LDW: “Lane departure warning” of BMW (5, 6, 7).

– Camera-based (located in the foot of the inside mirror)
– Departing from the lane → haptic signal by vibrating steering wheel (above

70 km/h).

(cid:129) LKS: ‘Lane Keeping Assist System’ (LKAS) of Honda (Accord).

– Camera-based (in the area of the inside mirror)
– Active lane return upon approach of the edge of the lane.

(cid:129) LDW: “Lane Departure Warning”/“Lane Departure Prevention” (LDP) of

Inﬁniti (M, EX, FX—NAR).
– Camera-based (located in the foot of the inside mirror)
– Acoustic, optical warning shortly before leaving the lane (above approx.

70 km/h)

– LDP active: Return to the lane upon departure by ESP intervention.

(cid:129) LKS: Lane keeping system, “Driving Advisor” of Lancia (Delta).
– Camera-based (near infrared, located above inside mirrors)
– Active when crossing the lane → short countersteering wheel torque (in the

range of 65 to 180 km/h).

(cid:129) LKS: ‘Lane Keeping Assist’ of Lexus (LS460).

– Camera-based (near infrared, located above the inside mirror)
– Active lane return upon approach of the edge of the lane (above 70 km/h)
– Analysis of the driver’s steering activities with potential passive switching of

the system.

(cid:129) LKS: ‘Lane Assist’ from Volkswagen (Passat CC, Passat).

– Camera-based (mono camera, located above the inside mirror)
– Active lane return upon approach of the edge of the lane (above 65 km/h)
– Analysis of the driver’s steering activities with potential passive switching of

the system when lack of activity is detected (Sect. 19.3.1.3).

19.3.4 The Future of Lane Keeping Support

Since electromechanical steering has become widespread, it is much easier to
control the steering and, hence, driver and driving response. Automatic or auton-
omous driving that fully excludes the driver from the control circuit is technically
feasible without major problems, but not yet qualiﬁed for the mass market, due to
the complicated setting of current trafﬁc situations and surroundings. Technical
problems with detecting the environment are not yet mastered and juridical ques-
tions not yet answered. One step towards automatic driving might be the merger of
assistance systems in longitudinal and lateral functions (Eigel 2010).

538

S. Brosig and M. Lienkamp

A combined longitudinal and lateral guiding assistance, as it was worked out in
the active project (BMWi), tries to integrate longitudinal and lateral guidance into
one system. An essential condition to enable the integrated longitudinal and lateral
guidance to control various trafﬁc situations is a precise detection of the environ-
ment. The trafﬁc situation in front of the vehicle is recorded by different sensors,
and their data is merged by the system into a consistent general view (Aktiv-Büro
and Scholl 2008).

When a wide truck is passed on the other lane, the assistant can provide for
sufﬁcient lateral space. And, if this occurs at a road construction site, the speed can
be adapted accordingly. Driving can become even more comfortable, and safer, too.
A common consideration of lateral and longitudinal guiding can adapt the support
to the respective trafﬁc situation and the driver’s response.

19.4 Parking Assist

The preceding chapters have discussed assistance systems related to steering
interventions that recommend to the driver a steering wheel torque which matches
the respective driving situation. The parking assist does not only recommend, it can
also support the driver by independent steering into a parking spot. The condition
for independent steering into a parking spot is the correct detection of the sur-
roundings. The most common sensors to detect a parking spot are ultrasonic. In
Fig. 19.9, ultrasonic sensors survey the parking spot when driving past. The sensors

Fig. 19.9 Parking spot detection by ultrasonic sensors

19 Overview: Driver Assistance System Functions

539

are in front, on the left and on the right, at the sides of the vehicle, to detect parking
spots on both sides of the street. Surveying parking spots by cameras would be
conceivable acc. to Schulz et al. (2007), for example, using an evaluating algorithm
called ‘Structure from motion’ (Wook et al. 2007).

Parking by autonomous steering (semi-automatic) into a parking spot is only one
version of various parking assist systems commonly in use (Winner et al. 2009).
(cid:129) informing systems, for example, inform the driver by acoustic and/or visual
indication how far away the driver still is from an object within the driving
space.

(cid:129) controlled parking assist systems suggest to the driver speciﬁc measures based
on evaluated information on the surroundings. Semiautomatic parking is marked
by the full adoption of a function—usually the lateral guidance (steering)—by
the system.
In fully automatic parking, which is currently still in the research stage, the
driver gives only an initial command to park when a parking spot has been detected
and allocated, and the vehicle parks automatically in the parking spot.

19.4.1 Parking Assist System Requirements

There are different requirements for environmental detection and, hence, for sensors
and algorithms of the parking assists, according to system version and amount of
support (Brandenburger 2007; Lee et al. 2004).

The following requirements for parking assist systems can be named with regard
to the environmental sensors:
the system has to be resistant against external
inﬂuences (humidity, dirt) and detect the position of the parking spots with high
resolution and accuracy. The data have to reach the ECU quickly. For a standard
use it is inevitable that the system achieves low costs and low need for space.
Furthermore, a comprehensible user interface has to be implemented. For systems
surveying parking spots, the highest possible speed to pass by should not be too low
(Blumenstock 2007).

Additional requirements have to be considered for controlled and semiautomatic
parking assist systems. The parking should operate like a human driver to establish
a high acceptance of the system. This means that the vehicle has to achieve a
suitable ﬁnal position, matching the parking situation, and the time needed for
parking should be very short. The vehicle may not collide with any object, other-
wise the driver has to be warned during the manual longitudinal guidance. Easy and
obvious operation also contributes to the acceptance of the system.

540

S. Brosig and M. Lienkamp

Fig. 19.10 ‘park assist’ function

19.4.2 Technical Realisation

The different versions of parking assist systems were discussed in Sect. 19.4. Only
semi-
steering.
Semi-automatic parking assist systems will be the subject of this subchapter.

and fully automatic parking systems directly affect

the

Semi-automatic parking is distinguished by the fact that the system assumes a
function completely—usually the lateral guidance (steering). The parking assistant
(semi-automatic—see Sect. 19.4.3) supports the driver by automatically carrying
out the best steering wheel movements to park the car on the ideal line, in one
backward pull, in a longitudinal parking spot on the kerb (see Fig. 19.10). The
system automatically assumes the survey of the parking spot and the steering
movements. The driver remains responsible for clutch, gas and brake. The system
includes additional ultrasonic sensors in front and behind and gives acoustic
warnings when an obstacle is drawing near. A manual intervention into the steering
process or braking to standstill shuts off the power assist immediately.

ECE regulation 79 stipulates precise defaults for interventions at the steering

equipment acc. to ECE regulation (2006):

In addition the driver assist steering controls shall be designed such that the
driver may, at any time and by deliberate action, override the function. Whenever
the Automatically Commanded Steering function becomes operational, this shall be
indicated to the driver and the control action shall be automatically disabled if the
vehicle speed exceeds the set limit of 10 km/h by more than 20 % or the signals to
be evaluated are no longer being received. Any termination of control shall produce
a short but distinctive driver warning by a visual signal and either an acoustic signal
or by imposing a tactile warning signal on the steering control.

To meet the ECE regulation, status announcements about steering interventions
have to be communicated to the driver. There is no demand to give the driver
instructions about the nominal steer-angle, as controlled parking assist systems
require. Figure 19.11 shows one way of a design that meets the ECE regulations.

19 Overview: Driver Assistance System Functions

541

Fig. 19.11 Example of a user interface for semiautomatic parking

Since the control of the vehicle is completely automatic, the driver can focus on the
observation and supervision of the environment.

Using a semi-automatic parking assist system requires to network a huge number
of components. This needs an intensive communication which is performed in most
cases by a CAN Bus. The relevant components, for example, for the ‘park assist’ of
Volkswagen are, acc. to Schöning et al. (2006), a parking ECU (function), calipers
for activation, sensors for rev, lateral, longitudinal acceleration and steer-angle to
identify the position, lateral ultrasonic sensors to survey the parking spot, front and
rear ultrasonic sensors to measure the distance to other objects, a ﬂasher to choose
the side of the parking spot, an ECU for trailer detection, a warning buzzer of the
parking assist, speed information of the brake ECU and of course an electrome-
chanical steering for the lateral control.

The ﬁrst semi-automatic parking assist systems are already mass-produced
(Nunn 2003) (Schöning et al. 2006). Four of these systems are listed in the fol-
lowing chapter.

19.4.3 Selected Systems on the Market

Parking steering assistants, including some basic data, are presented in the fol-
lowing (alphabetically sorted by car manufacturers). The listing does not claim
completeness, but shall give an overview of currently available steering assist
systems on the market, in addition to the one described above:
(cid:129) ‘Active Parking System’ by Lancia (Delta).

– Measuring the parking spot by ultrasonic sensors
– Active steering by electrical intervention into the parking spot (7 km/h or

less)

– Semi-automatic (driver has to operate accelerator pedal and brake).

542

S. Brosig and M. Lienkamp

(cid:129) ‘Active park assistant including PARKTRONIC (PDC)’ by Mercedes-Benz (A,

B class).
– Measuring the parking spot by ultrasonic sensors (up to 35 km/h)
– Active steering by electrical intervention into the parking spot
– Semi-automatic (driver has to operate accelerator pedal and brake).
(cid:129) ‘Intelligent park assistant’ by Toyota/Lexus (LS460, LS600 h, Prius).

– Measuring and choosing the parking spot by ultrasonic sensors and navi-

gation display

– Choice of lateral or longitudinal parking spot
– Fully automatic parking invoked by loosening the brake
– Deactivation of the parking by manual steering intervention or pressing the

accelerator pedal.

(cid:129) ‘Park assist’ by Volkswagen (Touran, Golf, Passat CC, Passat, Tiguan).

– Measuring the parking spot by ultrasonic sensors
– Active steering by electrical intervention into the parking spot
– Semi-automatic (driver has to operate accelerator pedal and brake)
– Deactivation of the parking by manual steering intervention.

19.4.4 The Future of Parking Assists

The technical components of modern vehicles (electronically controllable engine,
brake and steering) permit an extensive control, so that, purely technically speaking,
fully automatic parking would be possible. An automatically parking car was
already presented in 1990 (Walzer and Grove 1990). Yet there are so far no fully
automatic parking assist systems in mass-production, only research projects indicate
their technical feasibility (Schanz 2005). Juridical considerations block a standard
use of fully automatic parking systems. In such a case, the driver is completely
released from vehicle control and the vehicle has to safely respond to any
unforeseen situation. For example, the oncoming trafﬁc has to be observed when
reversely parking into a longitudinal parking spot, because the vehicle will swivel.
Modern sensors can only incompletely detect trafﬁc situations and they are much
inferior to the human ability of perception (Pruckner et al. 2003). Systems which
force the driver to supervise the parking actively are conceivable. A safety circuit
could be imagined (e.g., in the remote control of the central locking or on-board)
which requires that the driver activates the parking by the push of a button which
has to be kept pushed while the parking procedure continues. The parking is
cancelled as soon as the button is no longer pushed. The responsibility would
remain with the driver who still has to supervise and observe the environment,
inside or outside the car (dead man’s handle—Fig. 19.12).

19 Overview: Driver Assistance System Functions

543

Fig. 19.12 Fully automatic parking with remote control

Nevertheless, semi-automatic parking assist systems offer much potential for
advancements on the way to fully automatic parking. Their usability could be
extended, for example, by lateral or longitudinal parking in several pulls or by
assisted leaving from a parking spot. As for longitudinal guiding, automatic braking
near obstacles when parking might be possible (Knoll 2005).

Outlook: The Future of Steering Systems

Manfred Harrer and Peter Pfeffer

The authors ﬁrmly believe that in spite of increasing constraints, individual driving
and steering of cars will still be prevalent in 2025 and beyond, and that the joy of
driving will continue to be of primary importance. This means that current functions
in the steering system technology will remain in focus for long term development
within the dedicated development departments of vehicle and steering system
developers, so that the brand speciﬁc steering feel which the driver and customer
expects will be maintained in the future as well. To conclude, the authors want to
assess various aspects of automotive construction connected to steering system
response.

20.1 Autonomous Driving

An increasing amount of vehicle sensors, electromechanical actuators and on board
computing power makes it possible to provide the driver more assistance functions.
This makes travelling in trafﬁc much safer and more comfortable. Progress in the
detection of what is going on around the car seems to put the vision of autonomous
driving as the primary development focus. Reduced driver stress and safer and
smoother trafﬁc conditions with fewer trafﬁc jams are generally mentioned as the
advantages of autonomous driving. The assistance functions available today are still
limited to support the driver in a speciﬁc situation. Indeed the current systems focus
on signiﬁcant deviations from rather easily detectable vehicle signals. Real time
information regarding the vehicle surroundings in order to set the immediate course
of travel is more complicated to detect and interpret though. Not only the car’s own
motion, but also other active and passive road users, be they close of distant, need
to be detected and predicted. Such an automated process needs to be even better
than the human one. However, the current state-of-the-art in vehicle situation
analysis and detection is still a far cry from human performance. More information
and recommendations coming from a higher number of more reliable systems are to
be passed to the driver in the mid-term, but they will never assume full responsi-
bility for driving safety. Assistance systems supporting the lateral control of a
vehicle by means of electromechanical steering systems as Lane Departure
Warning, Lane Keeping and Closeness to the Limit Warning for the driver to move
away from danger by stabilizing the vehicle will become more common and con-
tribute to safer driving. Nevertheless, assistance systems able to fully autonomously
trigger and control vehicle movement will remain science ﬁction within the fore-
seeable future.

20.2 Steer by Wire

Up to now, all production cars embody a steering system featuring a mechanical
connection between steering wheel and tyres. This means that in any operational
condition of the vehicle, the driver has direct mechanical access to the tractable
wheels and can control the course by acting on the steering wheel even after the
steering systems has failed.

Steering system development in the last years or decades has been based on
advancements to support the required steering force and wheel angle, switching to
direct mechanical transmission should the steering system fail. Particularly in case
of a Fail Safe for electromechanical actuators, this connection is a good backup
function because it still allows transferring driver’s steering input to the wheels.

This does not apply when switching to a Steer by Wire steering system. In this
case, the driver’s steering effort would be electronically transferred to a steering
system which is not physically connected to the steering wheel. If Steer by Wire
fails, turning it off is not enough. A redundant spare system to control vehicle
course needs to be installed. This means that the greatest advantage of Steer by
Wire, namely more ﬂexibility in using construction space made possible by not
having steering shafts, and a standardization of left/right-hand driven systems,
makes it impossible to meet the requirements for safe operational readiness of the
steering system. Steer by Wire does not have any other functional advantages in
comparison to mechatronic systems with a mechanical backup, which are today’s
standard. Indeed electro-mechanical power steering combined with wheel angle
actuators offers the same capability to keep steering angle and torque under control.
In short, Steer by Wire will not become standard, as it has no real advantage on
current mechatronic steering systems.

20 Outlook: The Future of Steering Systems

547

20.3 All-Wheel Steering

Progress in basic chassis development is limited to a certain amount of improve-
ment per generation. Bigger improvement steps in vehicle dynamic response are
only possible by mechatronic system development. The use of all-wheel steering
will become indispensable to get better vehicle agility and driving stability.

The advantage of all-wheel steering systems is their ability to control both the
turning circle of a vehicle in the low-speed range, and the side slip angle together
with the build-up of rear axle side forces as a function of speed. At present, systems
with central mechatronic actuators are used by Japanese and European manufac-
turers for rear-wheel steering.

It may be expected that vehicle manufacturers whose brand poses high demands on
dynamics will bolster the development of mechatronic actuators aimed at controlling rear
axle kinematics. The already visibly increasing use of all-wheel-steering in the medium
to luxury car segments will turn it to be a widespread system in the coming years.

20.4

Integrated Chassis Control

Many new chassis control systems have been developed and successfully been
integrated in production cars during the last years. A characteristic of these new
systems is their focus not only on controlling the car near the limit, but also on
embedding more functions to inﬂuence drivability in everyday use.

The system architecture of most vehicles is marked by peaceful coexistence of
different electronic stability control systems, regardless of how many they are: this
is possible if independently developed systems feature functionalities which only
partially overlap. However, if the outlook is to have a higher and higher number of
control systems, peaceful coexistence becomes difﬁcult and ultimately limited.
These difﬁculties are due to the following circumstances: on one hand, driver input
and control system intervention are deﬁned individually for each system indepen-
dent of the others. On the other hand, the fact that the vehicle is a complex system
with many interacting parameters is overlooked in the design of individual con-
trollers. This means that the potential of individual systems is not sufﬁciently
exploited by the currently available system architecture. An improvement by
peaceful cooperation of all automatic control systems is therefore not possible under
the peaceful coexistence approach. Nor is an actor substitution feasible without
losing performance in other areas which are relevant to customer.

The increasing number of electronic stability problems requires designing their
interaction in a way that functional synergies are exploited as much as possible.
This becomes possible by multiplying the interconnections between the individual
systems. There is a lot of room for improvement in the area of lateral dynamics: the
reason behind this is that while the steering intervention at the front or rear axle has
only an effect on lateral dynamics, other types of intervention—braking on the

548

M. Harrer and P. Pfeffer

single tyre, or varying drive or aligning torques—initially developed for longitu-
dinal or vertical dynamics purposes, are more and more developed with the aim of
affecting lateral dynamics, too.

In the future, electromechanical steering systems will receive requests for
additional steering torques from further control devices by means of signal inter-
faces that are already available. Haptic feedback of driving states to support driver
decisions will gain in signiﬁcance, for instance by reducing steering wheel torque
when the friction limit of the front wheels is reached. The calculation of the
additional or subtractive steering torque as a function of the driving situation could
be performed by a central driving state monitor.

20.5 Modules and Modularization of Steering Systems

For hydraulic power steering, a strongly standardized technology has developed for
decades and can be found in most production vehicles nowadays. The vane-type
pumps and hydraulic steering gear are produced in such quantities that no further
signiﬁcant cost reductions are feasible, as their degree of maturity is very high.

The challenge that all OEMs face now is the switch to mechatronic steering
systems. This switch means rising costs in comparison to established hydraulic
systems, especially when it comes to high end electromechanical steering systems.
The main factors for higher costs are the brushless DC motor, the ECU, the sensor
set and the mandatory output reduction gear.

The most important European steering system manufacturers prefer to develop
modular electromechanical steering systems. This enhances ﬂexibility by giving the
possibility to get scalable systems. Expensive components can be carried over to dif-
ferent product lines with little or no modiﬁcations. This relies a lot on generating
standardized mechanical and electronic interfaces. It is also clear that for non brand
speciﬁc steering system features, OEM-wide standards with uniﬁed goals will establish
themselves. Ultimately, one-time investments for development and production will be
lower, and signiﬁcant cost saving will make high end steering systems accessible.

It should be noted that similar standardized development approaches appear for
other parts, such as the steering column, the intermediate steering shaft and the
steering wheel with its many subcomponents. System and vehicle manufacturers
put a major effort
into pursuing standardizing strategies to reduce one-time
investments and product costs.

20.6 Future Markets

Future markets in the BRIC states (Brazil, Russia, India and China) will support a
primarily cost efﬁcient development of parts, components and systems. These
markets will be mainly driven by small, compact and medium sized vehicles. These

20 Outlook: The Future of Steering Systems

549

segments have typically low gross margins and are highly cost sensitive. Vehicle
manufacturers and system developers face the options of either optimizing estab-
lished products or downgrading them, if they want to meet the continuously rising
inexpensive parts or components. The conventional
demand for effective yet
hydraulic power assisted steering will keep a signiﬁcant share in these new markets
in the foreseeable future, because of its low price and the reduced quality
expectations.

20.7 Changes in Steering Technology

Electromechanical power steering has been in use for production cars for the last
twenty years. Since the beginning of its use, the focus of development was to
improve steering comfort while parking. As the power to weight ratio of the ﬁrst
generation was very low, the use of the system was limited to compact cars. Even at
the end of the last millennium the electromechanical power steering only had a 2 %
share of the global market. The second generation of electromechanical steering
systems could gain a signiﬁcant market share at the beginning of the new millen-
nium: thanks to higher power output, production car use was possible for the
compact and medium sized segment. The global market share of electromechanical
steering systems was more than 30 % in 2008. Stricter legislation aimed at reducing
petrol consumption of vehicle manufacturers’ ﬂeets let the development of elec-
tromechanical power steering systems gain momentum because of their lower
power consumption in comparison to hydraulic systems. Remarkable improvement
rates could be achieved in Europe and Japan in the most recent years. The intro-
duction of parallel or concentric systems made it possible to install electrome-
chanical steering systems also on medium and luxury vehicles. In another stage of
development these steering systems would eventually require currents of more than
100 A and voltage of more than 36 V to work properly. Nowadays the technology
available allows any passenger car or light commercial vehicle to be steered
electrically. There are more aspects which will lead to further and quicker spreading
of electromechanical steering systems and a consequent decline of conventional
hydraulic power steering:
(cid:129) Increasing customer attention towards climate change related topics, higher
petrol costs to account for the steadily rising demand and, as a consequence,
towards vehicle mileage.

(cid:129) Higher cost-effectiveness and safety demands from customers, requiring a more
extensive use of assistance functions. Only electromechanical steering systems
can be used to add lateral dynamics functions like parking assist or a given
recommended steering torque.

(cid:129) Electrical and hybrid vehicles are becoming more and more common, and the
electromechanical power steering is the best option to be coupled with these
kinds of powertrain.

550

M. Harrer and P. Pfeffer

All these aspects contribute to the electromechanical power steering taking the
lion share of the market, making it possible through cost plummeting effects
originated by rising sales to reach a global EPS market share of 50 % in 2020.

20.8 Steering Wheel Developments

Customers’ expectations regarding vehicle quality will continue to rise with any
new vehicle generation. This will be reﬂected in higher requirements for the car and
its single components as well, the steering wheel being no exception. The target
values for steering wheel natural frequency and steering wheel to steering column
joint stiffness will rise further so that as little idle vibration as possible is achieved.
The tendency towards a higher degree of customisation will continue. More
steering wheel colour and material options will be available to the customer. The
range of steering wheel customisation will span from an inexpensive basic wheel to
a very modern though reasonably priced one featuring a great number of
multi-functional commands, heating and customer speciﬁc leather covers and
decorations. Offering so many options to choose from obviously introduces a lot of
variety, and might let product costs go out of control. To avoid that, a thorough
component and subassembly strategy using standardization must be put in place.
The tendency regarding vehicle safety and airbag units is towards smaller, more
compact items keeping the same airbag volume. Furthermore, the airbag systems
will become adaptive, and eventually be combined with single-stage of two-stage
gas generators.

Since the beginning of vehicle development, the steering wheel has been in use
to control vehicle course. It has proved itself as an effective element in all opera-
tional conditions and it is familiar to the drivers today. Replacing it with alternative
devices like a joystick is and will remain hardly conceivable. However, the idea to
display information for the driver on the steering wheel will spread. Indeed some
vehicles already indicate the vehicle conﬁguration selected by the driver on a
steering wheel display. Shifting point displays are also becoming popular among
sport cars. Current studies also focus on showing important navigation information
on a separate display which for instance is integrated in the steering wheel rim. In
short, the steering wheel will develop into an important operating and communi-
cating on board unit.

20.9 Steering Column Developments

Keeping in mind that the ongoing tendency towards more car weight should be at
best stopped or even reverted, it is mandatory to have demanding weight targets for
the steering column. This obviously means that the use of lightweight materials like
aluminium, magnesium and composites will spread.

20 Outlook: The Future of Steering Systems

551

The number of requirements for the steering column will also be higher, cov-
ering aspects like ergonomics, adjusting range, adjusting qualities like actuating
force and acoustics. Structural stiffness targets like the natural frequency are
expected to become stricter both for the steering column and the intermediate
steering shaft. Virtual development by means of CAE will become more important
because of the need to develop cars more efﬁciently and with shorter time to market.
When it comes to the steering column this involves more detailed models for crash
response analysis, models which take longitudinal and lateral forces as well as part
and production tolerances into account. The modularization of parts, already
mentioned as a key point for future steering system development, will also progress
further for the steering column.