Purpose and function of piston rings

Piston rings fulﬁll the following important tasks for engine operation:

■  Sealing off the combustion chamber, in order to maintain the pressure of the combustion 

gas. The combustion gas must not enter the crankcase (also known as blow-by) and lubri-

cating oil must not enter the combustion chamber.

■  Transfer of heat built up in the piston to the cylinder surface

■  Controlling the oil balance, where a minimum oil quantity needed to form a hydrodynamic 

lubricating ﬁlm must reach the cylinder surface, while oil consumption needs to be kept as 

low as possible

The  piston  ring  pack  usually  consists  of  three  piston  rings:  two  compression  rings  (also 

known as the ﬁrst and second piston rings) and an oil control ring (third piston ring).

The piston rings perform the following functions:
1st piston ring:  compression of combustion air or gas mixture, and support of gas pressure 
in the operating cycle, dissipation of generated heat to the cylinder surface 

(see also Section 1.3), and, to a slight degree, scraping of the residual oil from 

2nd piston ring:  support of the remaining gas pressure due to blow-by past the ﬁrst piston 

ring, throttling piston land pressures and control of pressure ratios in the ring 

belt, scraping of oil from and dissipation of generated heat to the cylinder 

the cylinder surface

surface

3rd piston ring:  homogeneous distribution of the oil for lubrication of the piston group/cylin-

der bore tribological system and scraping of excess oil

The following issues, however, must be considered in the design of piston rings: 

■  Scufﬁng: partial seizure process leading to severe wear, poor sealing, increased oil con-

■  Ring ﬂutter or radial collapse: incidence of radial or axial instabilities that lead to leakage 

sumption, and increased blow-by value

and therefore to increased blow-by

that the piston rings get stuck in it.

■  Ring sticking: at excessive piston temperatures, the oil in the ring grooves carbonizes, so 

■  High oil consumption: determining factors are the ring conformability (see Section 1.5.1.4) 

of  the  piston  rings,  deformation  and  honing  of  the  cylinder  bore,  and  the  gas  pressure 

ratios in the piston land region.

■  Friction: the piston rings have a large part in the friction of the piston group. 

1 Piston rings

Figure 1.1:  
Forces acting on a piston ring in the 
piston ring groove
Light blue: piston ring groove
Medium blue: piston ring
Dark blue: cylinder
Arrows encompassing the piston 
ring: forces acting on the piston ring
po: gas pressure above the piston 
ring
pu: gas pressure below the piston 
ring
FSrad: radial force and counterforce
FSax: axial force and counterforce 
caused by friction
MT Twist: countermoment of the 
piston ring

The arrow shows the direction of 
positive twist.

Compression rings are mostly single-piece, with a spring force. Their basic shape is a thin-

walled, axially short circular cylinder. To generate the necessary contact pressure against the 

cylinder wall, the piston rings are in the shape of an open circular spring. The spring force 

acting radially in the installed state is greatly ampliﬁed by the gas pressure behind the piston 

ring. Axial contact with the ring groove ﬂank is substantially generated by the gas pressure 
applied to the piston ring side face (Figure 1.1).

When the piston is installed in the cylinder, the piston rings are compressed at their ends to 

their gap clearance. In the piston, they are guided in piston ring grooves corresponding to 

their dimensions and therefore follow the piston motion. This type, invented in 1854 by John 
Ramsbottom, is known as a self-tightening ring and has proved itself from the beginning in 

pistons for steam locomotives. It became a basic invention in engine technology, because 

reliable sealing of high gas pressures in the combustion chamber was ﬁrst made possible by 

this type of ring—up to more than 260 bar today.

The force with which a piston ring presses against the cylinder wall depends mainly on the 

difference in diameters of the prestressed piston ring and the cylinder. This prestressing is 

designed in such a way that the piston ring meets the particular requirements arising from 

the working process and operating conditions. When the piston ring is installed in the cylin-

der, a tangential force is created that in turn generates the contact pressure.
■  The radial distribution of the contact pressure is achieved by the shape of the piston ring—

for example, by CNC turning or coiling.

■  The radial distribution of the contact pressure depends on the shape of the running sur-

face—cylindrical or conical—and the proﬁle geometry of the piston ring (barrel shape).

■  The contact pressure is determined by the working process.

1.2 Functional principles

3

The radial pressure applied by the piston ring to the cylinder bore is small in comparison to 

the gas pressure applied by the ring groove in the piston to the inner side of the piston ring 
(Figure 1.1). In diesel engines, with their high gas pressures, the piston ring is, in many cases, 
shaped against the running surface such that the gas pressure acts from here against the 

one on the inner side, which reduces the contact pressure on the cylinder surface. Owing 

to the ring gap dictated by the assembly process, the piston ring cannot provide complete 

sealing, which leads to leakage at this point.

Piston ring materials require
■  good running and boundary lubrication capability;

■  elastic behavior;

■  mechanical strength;

■  high strength at elevated temperatures;

■  high heat conductivity; and

■  good machinability.

Materials used include untempered and heat-treated gray cast iron, cast iron with nodular 

graphite (heat-treated), and tempered steel or nitrided stainless steel.

To improve running-in characteristics, reduce wear, and prevent scufﬁng, special measures 

are taken in coating and reinforcing (protecting) the running surfaces.

Operating behavior depends on many inﬂuence variables, which often makes the optimiza-

■  Combustion  process,  combustion  sequence,  pressures,  pressure  gradients,  aftertreat-

■  Engine block and cylinder design, cylinder material and ﬁnishing (e.g., honing)

tion of piston rings complex:
■  Type and design of the engine

ment technology, etc.

■  Fuel and lubricant

■  Piston technology

■  Piston ring type, material, and running surface

■  Operating conditions

1.2  Functional principles

As part of the moving boundary of the engine operating space, the piston ring fulﬁlls various 

tasks. For the course of the thermodynamic process, it must ensure that the gas pressure 

in the cylinder is maintained and does not drop off. This is the task, in particular, of the ﬁrst 

piston ring. One premise is that lubrication, acting as a “gas-sealing oil pressure barrier,” is 

present. Tests by Felix Wankel had demonstrated that without such a ﬂuid layer, higher gas 

4

1 Piston rings

pressures cannot be sealed against moving parts. The motion of the piston ring develops a 

hydrodynamic pressure that is greater than the gas pressure. This is why it is so important 

for the function of the piston ring that the cylinder surface is sufﬁciently wetted with lubricat-

ing oil. The main distribution of this oil quantity is performed by the oil control ring, while ﬁne 

control is achieved by the ﬁrst piston ring through oil control. 

The arrangement of several piston rings in series forms a system of throttle chambers, in 

which  the  pressure  of  leaking  gases  is  further  decreased  by  throttling  and  swirling.  It  is 
unavoidable, however, that a small portion of combustion gases, compressed mixture, or air 

will pass by the piston rings and enter the crankcase (blow-by gas). The width and tolerance 

of the ring gap has a signiﬁcant effect on the blow-by value. The piston ring seals against the 

side faces like a valve. Leakage points are most noticeable at the running surface, because 

the blow-by gas breaks through the oil ﬁlm. In general, the blow-by value should be as low 

as possible, because the combustion gases cause increased oil aging and component wear. 

A certain blow-by value is desirable, however, in order to prevent oil transport into the com-

bustion chamber.

1.3  Forces and stresses

Forces and temperatures on piston rings

Piston rings are highly stressed mechanically, thermally, tribologically, and corrosively.

Piston  rings  must  fulﬁll  their  task  at  high  combustion  gas  temperatures  and  combustion 

pressures of up to 260 bar.

Depending on the design, up to 20% of the heat absorbed by the piston can be transferred 

to the cylinder wall by the piston rings.

The limit of the temperature load on the ﬁrst piston ring is reached when the oil in the top 

ring groove starts to carbonize as a result of excessive temperature. The motion of the ﬁrst 

piston ring, which is a requirement for its reliable function, is thereby limited. It can no longer 

maintain  its  proper  contact  with  the  cylinder  surface,  resulting  in  ring  sticking.  One  ring-
based solution is the keystone ring (Figure 1.2), developed in the early 1930s by the English 
engine manufacturer Napier.

Effective piston cooling is critical, as it signiﬁcantly reduces the thermal load on the piston 

rings. Depending on the type of piston cooling, the heat ﬂowing into the piston rings can be 

reduced.

During one revolution of the crankshaft, the piston moves from the top to the bottom (BDC) 

and  back  to  the  top  dead  center  (TDC).  It  travels  twice  the  stroke  distance.  During  this 

1.3 Forces and stresses

5

Figure 1.2: Rectangular ring (left) and keystone ring (right), axial clearances

motion, it is accelerated and decelerated. Owing to its inertia, the piston ring moves in the 

ring groove relative to the piston. Because of friction forces at the cylinder surface, it tends 
to tilt as it moves ( Figure 1.1). Upon impact, it can exert forces on the side faces of the ring 
groove. In diesel engines, this effect is increased further by the high gas pressure.

Wear  on  the  groove  ﬂanks  degrades  the  function  of  the  piston  ring,  until  it  causes  ring 

scoring, ring failure, and, as a result, piston seizure. The introduction of aluminum pistons 

for diesel engines used in commercial vehicles at the beginning of the 1930s nearly failed 

because of this type of damage, until Ernst Mahle created an effective solution with the ring 
carrier as a groove protector (Figure 1.3).

The high gas temperatures to which the ﬁrst piston ring, in particular, is subjected, even if 

only for a short time, make its function more difﬁcult, since together with the action of gas 

pressure, they impair the lubrication ﬁlm between the ﬁrst piston ring and the cylinder sur-

face. This puts the ﬁrst piston ring into a tribologically critical operating condition.

The piston rings, piston, cylinder surface, and lubricant form a tribological system, where all 

sliding partners are responsible for proper operation. For the piston ring, inﬂuence factors are 

the type, design features, tangential force, prestressing, material, and coating; for the piston, 

the type and materials, cooling, and constructive design details; and for the cylinder surface, 

it is the material, ﬁnishing (honing), and contour accuracy (see Chapter 5). The lubrication 

depends on the lubricant itself (base oil, additives, viscosity class), sufﬁcient wetting of the 

running surface, and temperatures within the system.

6

1 Piston rings

Figure 1.3:  
Ring carrier piston

Depending on the type of combustion and fuel quality, combustion gases contain corrosive 
components, the worst of which is sulfur dioxide (SO2). Sulfur dioxide promotes corrosive 
wear of the cylinder surface, mainly in the region of the TDC. The ring running surface is 

also corroded. Poorer fuels (heavy fuel oils) used to run large-bore engines (medium-speed 

four-stroke and slow-running two-stroke engines) intensify this problem and require special 

measures on the ring, piston, and cylinder.

The motion of the ring pack generates friction and thus mechanical losses. Between 10 and 

20% of the total engine friction power loss is caused by the ring pack. Friction is determined 

mainly by the following factors: 

■  Contact pressure (tangential force and gas pressure)

■  Ring width

■  Coefﬁcients of friction of the contact surface (coating)
■  Running surface design (barrel shape)

■  Surface condition of the counterpart (cylinder surface)

Reduction of friction losses can be achieved primarily by minimizing contact pressure, i.e., by 

reducing the tangential force and ring width.

1.4  Types of piston rings

The various tasks of the piston rings can no longer by met by a single ring type. Thus, it 

made sense to classify the piston ring types in use today. This classiﬁcation was made in 
DIN ISO 6621, Part 1, corresponding to Figure 1.4.

1.4 Types of piston rings

7

Figure 1.4: Classification of piston rings per DIN ISO 6621 Part 1, Section 4, p. 13

8

1 Piston rings

In recent years, the width of the piston rings has been drastically reduced. Today’s compres-

sion rings in passenger car gasoline engines are typically 1.2 to 1.0 mm. For comparison: 

in the 1930s, the ring width was two to three times greater. Lower piston rings have lower 

mass, require less installation space, and allow a lower compression height of the piston. 

They also demonstrate better operating behavior in terms of friction, ring ﬂutter, and blow-

by. Precise machining of the piston ring grooves is therefore tremendously important. For 

extreme ratios of radial piston ring width to axial piston ring width, the piston rings become 

unstable.

Individual  engine  types—passenger  car  gasoline  engines,  passenger  car  and  commercial 

vehicle diesel engines, as well as medium-speed four-stroke engines and slow-running two-

stroke diesel engines—are ﬁtted with piston ring packs where the overall efﬁciency is matched 

to the speciﬁc operating conditions by combining and matching different piston ring types.

The ﬁrst piston ring is closest to the combustion chamber. This means that it is exposed to 

very high mechanical and thermal loads. In order to ensure good temperature resistance, 

nodular cast iron or steel materials are used as the base material in these piston rings. They 

are also coated or specially treated, in order to reduce friction and wear. Piston rings are 

allowed to cause only minimal wear on the cylinder bore.

The ﬁrst piston ring for commercial vehicle diesel engines subject to high stress generally has 

a keystone shape (see Section 1.4.5.). The running surface can be barrel-shaped and either 

symmetrical  or  asymmetrical  (see  Section  1.4.6).  Asymmetrical  proﬁles  can  reduce  radial 

wear and improve oil consumption.

Even if the squareness of the ring groove has slight deviations, the piston ring remains in its 

line of contact with the cylinder surface. When the piston ring changes direction at the end 

of the stroke, contact is maintained between the running surface of the piston ring and the 

cylinder. Barrel-shaped piston rings cause less wear in the region of the cylinder surface, 
where the ﬁrst piston ring changes its running direction. The barrel-shaped piston ring can 

be furnished with an internal bevel on its top edge, in order to achieve a positive distortion 
(also  known  as  positive  twist,  see  Figure  1.1).  Strict  requirements  regarding  lubricating  oil 
consumption, however, have led to the ﬁrst piston ring taking on part of the oil control task 

as well. In this regard, the running surface is given an asymmetrical barrel shape. Owing to 

the asymmetry, the center of the barrel shape is shifted in the direction of the lower half of 

the ring width. This improves engine run-in and oil control.

The second piston ring has a double function, depending on its type: it must seal against 

gas pressure while stripping oil off the cylinder wall; at the same time, sufﬁcient lubrication 

of the ﬁrst piston ring must be ensured. The second piston ring features a reinforced design 

with regard to its stripping effect, based on its additional function as an oil control ring. Its 

effectiveness is based on the contact pressure, the shape of the stripping surface (land), and 

the method of removal of stripped oil. This requires good ring conformability, i.e., the ability 

1.4 Types of piston rings

9

to adapt as smoothly as possible to the continuously changing cylinder deformation while 

maintaining the required contact pressure against the cylinder wall. Friction and wear need 

to be kept to a minimum.

1.4.1  Rectangular ring

The basic shape of the ﬁrst piston ring is a rectan-
gular  ring  with  a  cylindrical  running  surface,  also 
known  as  an  R-ring  (Figure  1.5).  Its  task  is  to  seal 
against the gas pressure in the combustion cham-

ber. Rectangular rings are used for normal operating 

conditions, primarily as ﬁrst piston rings in gasoline 

engines.

Figure 1.5: R-ring

1.4.2  Rectangular ring with conical running surface

A  slight  taper  (conicity)  to  the  outer  surface  of  the 

piston  ring  increases  its  effectiveness.  Contact 

between  the  piston  ring  and  the  cylinder  wall  is 

reduced to a narrow line. This line contact increases 

the  contact  pressure  of  the  piston  ring  against  the 

cylinder bore and ensures that contact is maintained 

with the bore, even if the cylinder is deformed. The 

run-in  phase  is  thereby  shortened.  It  also  provides 
a downward stripping effect, which supports the oil control function of the oil control rings. 

This type of ring, also called a taper-face ring or M-ring, is typically employed as a second 
piston ring (Figure 1.6).

Figure 1.6: M-ring

1.4.3  Piston ring with internal bevel or internal step (top)

Because of a chamfer on the top inner side of the piston ring (internal bevel IF), the forces 

of the piston ring are modiﬁed such that its cross section tilts about its axis, as a result of 

compression during installation of the piston in the cylinder.

This distortion (twist, i.e., a tilted position of the piston ring under tension) provides a line con-

tact of the bottom oil scraper edge against the cylinder surface, as well as between the piston 

ring side face and the piston groove ﬂank. The latter reduces the passage of combustion 

10

1 Piston rings

gases as well as engine oil. When the internal bevel 

is at the top, it is referred to as a positive twist. Taper-

face rings (second ring) can also be designed with a 

positive twist. In the past, this design was used as a 

measure for further reducing blow-by.

Piston rings of this type, also known as R-rings with 

top IF, are used both as ﬁrst and as second piston 
rings (Figure 1.7). 

Figure 1.7: R-ring with top internal 
bevel

1.4.4  Piston ring with internal bevel or internal step (bottom)

In  contrast  to  Section  1.4.3,  moving  the  internal 

bevel to the bottom provides a negative twist. These 

piston  rings  with  bottom  internal  bevel  (IFU),  also 

called M-rings with bottom IFU, make contact at the 

bottom with the cylinder and at the top inside with 
the groove ﬂank (Figure 1.8). Such piston rings are 
preferably installed in the middle ring groove and are 

part of the group of oil control rings. With regard to 

Figure 1.8: M-ring with bottom 
internal bevel

oil control, contact of the lower part of the running 
surface  against  the  cylinder  surface  is  desired.  Oil  control  rings  with  greater  conicity  are 

therefore used to compensate for the twist. The negatively twisted piston ring creates a good 

seal at the bottom against the cylinder surface, thanks to its linear contact, and prevents oil 

from entering the ring groove. This is especially important for low pressures in the combus-

tion chamber, such as can occur when the mixture is throttled in gasoline engines or at gas 

exchange. In addition, a second ring with a negative twist can bring about a controlled axial 
motion in order to control the pressure ratios in the second groove and thus the oil transport 

mechanisms. The superior oil control of the negative twist in the second piston ring comes 

at the cost of slightly higher blow-by rates. The high gas pressures under full load deform 

both types of twisted piston rings in such a way that they are nearly ﬂat at the bottom groove 

ﬂank. Under partial load, the piston ring deformation is not as severe, making the behavior 

of the rings more effective.

1.4.5  Keystone ring

Keystone rings are divided into half and full keystone types. On a half keystone ring, also 

known as an HK-ring, only one side has a conical design; on a full keystone ring, also known 
as a K-ring, both sides do (Figure 1.9). 

1.4 Types of piston rings

11

Figure 1.9: HK-ring (left) and K-ring (right)

These piston ring geometries reduce carbon buildup in the ring groove. The radial motion of 

the piston ring in the ring groove keeps it clear of oil carbon. Keystone rings of both types are 

mostly used as ﬁrst piston rings in commercial vehicle diesel applications.

1.4.6  First piston ring with barrel-shaped surface

In the early days of engine technology, it was com-

monly believed that the ﬁrst piston ring would seal 

even better, the more precisely it matched the geo-

metric  rectangular  shape.  Despite  great  effort  to 

obtain  the  greatest  dimensional  accuracy  in  man-

ufacturing,  the  operating  performance  of  the  ﬁrst 

piston  ring  did  not  improve;  rather,  it  got  worse. 

Practical experience demonstrated that the sealing 
behavior of the ﬁrst piston ring improved over time, when the sharp square corners had been 

worn off. This wear state was then anticipated, ﬁrst by chamfering, then with a barrel-shaped 

Figure 1.10: R-ring B

running surface. 

With the barrel shape, better hydrodynamic lubricating conditions are achieved, and the axi-

ally shorter contact surface at the cylinder surface improves sealing. In addition, the negative 

effects of cylinder deformations during engine operation can be better compensated. Piston 
rings of this type, also known as R-ring B, are used as ﬁrst piston rings (Figure 1.10).

1.4.7  Napier ring with conical running surface

Thanks  to  a  conical  running  surface,  the  run-in 

period  of  the  taper-faced  Napier  ring  is  shortened 

and its oil-stripping effect is ampliﬁed. The hook of 

the taper-faced Napier ring acts as an oil reservoir 

for scraped oil and prevents it from entering the ring 

groove. This type of design, also known as the NM-
ring, is used as a second piston ring (Figure 1.11).

Figure 1.11: NM-ring

12

1 Piston rings

1.4.8  Ring gap configuration

The gap of the piston rings generally has a straight shape. Other types of gaps are used in 

engines for special requirements. 

In two-stroke and opposed-piston engines, in which rotation of the piston rings is undesired, 

an inner or ﬂank recess is made in the ends of the ring, where a safety dowel pin is located in 

the piston. This secures the piston ring in its location in the piston, which prevents damage 
to intake and exhaust slits and to the ring ends in two-stroke engines (Figure 1.12). In an 
opposed-piston engine, this prevents the ring gaps from all being located at the same place 

on the piston circumference, which would produce increased blow-by, for example.

Figure 1.12: Flank recess (left) and inner recess (right)

Rings that are meant to seal rotating shafts and for which the piston ring side face acts as 

a  sealing  element  are  designed  with  an  overlapping  joint  (only  for  uncoated  piston  rings) 
(Figure 1.13). Another alternative is the piston ring with an interlocking joint (only for uncoated 
piston rings).

For high blow-by quantities, a taper-faced Napier ring is employed in the middle ring groove 

(see Section 1.4.7) with a gap in the groove. The gap in the groove at the joint reduces the 

passage of combustion gases.

Figure 1.13: Overlapping joint (left) and interlocking joint (right)

1.4.9  Slotted oil control ring

The slotted oil control ring is a single-piece ring, which contacts the cylinder surface with 

two lands. Penetrations are cut into the middle area of the ring body between the two lands, 

acting as oil drainage points and ensuring good conformability of the ring. The smaller total 

1.4 Types of piston rings

13

contact surface (land width) increases the contact pressure against the cylinder surface. This 

is necessary, as no gas pressure can build up behind the slotted oil control ring. The contact 

pressure of the oil control rings thus arises from their tangential force. Further reduction in 

the size of the land surfaces resulted in the beveled ring (D-ring), with chamfers on the lands, 

and the double-beveled oil control ring, with uniformly aligned chamfers on the lands (G-ring) 

(see Section 1.4.10.1, but here with coil springs). Single-piece oil control rings are assembled 

in the bottom ring groove, but are seldom used in original equipment manufacturer applica-

tions, where the majority of the designs use spring loading.

1.4.10  Spring-loaded oil control ring

1.4.10.1   Oil control ring with coil spring

To improve ring conformability and homoge-

neously distribute the contact pressure, two-

piece oil control rings are preloaded with a 

cylindrical spring (coil spring) on the inside 

of the ring (SSF-ring). The ends of the spring 
support each other (Figure 1.14). 

Owing  to  the  ﬂat  characteristic  curve,  the 

spring preload changes very little, even after 

long  periods  of  operation.  Narrow  (axially 

low)  piston  rings  are  intended  to  improve 

Figure 1.14: SSF-ring

ring conformability. Smaller piston ring axial 
widths also have a direct effect on the compression height, and thus on piston weight, with 

all  the  associated  advantages.  Typical  oil  control  ring  axial  widths  for  diesel  applications 

range between 2.0 and 3.5 mm, depending on the application (passenger car, commercial 

vehicle). As with springless piston rings, there is a beveled ring with coil spring (DSF-ring) and 
a double-beveled oil control ring with spring (GSF-ring) (Figure 1.15). 

Figure 1.15: DSF-ring (left), GSF-ring (right)

14

1 Piston rings

In  most  gasoline  engines,  three-piece  oil  control  rings  are  used  mainly  for  cost  reasons 

and  on  account  of  their  axial  sealing  capability  in  the  partial-load  range.  In  view  of  their 

required engine service life, diesel engines also require higher durability, which can normally 

be achieved more easily with two-piece oil control rings.

One of the most important characteristics of oil control rings is the speciﬁc contact pressure. 

Overall,  the  consumption  of  lubricating  oil  is  lower,  the  higher  the  speciﬁc  contact  pres-

sure (because of better oil control). In order to reduce consumption of lubricating oil during 
engine  run-in,  a  taper  can  be  applied  to  both  contact  lands.  The  angled  running  surface 

reduces the contact zone with the cylinder surface, thus providing greater contact pressure 

during run-in, which reduces the normally higher lubricating oil consumption in this stage. 

After a certain running time, the angled proﬁles wear down and take on a cylindrical shape. 

I-shaped oil control ring

The  I-shaped  oil  control  ring  is  a  two-piece  design  and  uses  steel  as  the  base  material 

(Figure  1.16).  In  contrast  to  oil  control  rings  made  of  cast  iron,  these  rings  are  produced 

from a preformed steel wire with an I-shaped cross section. This is coiled, cut to length in 

the appropriate shape, and then ﬁnish machined. In order to increase wear resistance, the 

I-shaped oil control rings are usually nitrided. 

I-shaped  oil  control  rings  are  recommended 

particularly  for  high-speed  diesel  engines,  as 

well as for highly stressed diesel engines, which 

are expected to last at least one million kilome-

ters  in  commercial  vehicles.  In  special  cases, 

they  are  also  used  in  high-performance  gaso-

line engines. This piston ring design is also used 
as an oil control ring in the bottom ring groove.

One step toward reducing tangential force and 

thus friction power loss with two-piece oil con-

Figure 1.16: I-shaped oil control ring 
made of steel

Figure 1.17: X-taper design (left) and V-shape design (right) for oil control rings with optimized friction 
power losses

1.4 Types of piston rings

15

trol rings, while maintaining sufﬁcient oil control, has been the development in recent years of 

new land designs that have led to additional reductions in land width. Examples include the 

MAHLE X-taper or V-shape designs, which combine a small land width (less than 0.15 mm) 
with a large taper angle to reduce the inﬂuence of wear (Figure 1.17).

1.4.10.2  Three-piece oil control ring (expander ring)

Three-piece steel ring (3-S-ring)

It is made of two steel rails that are held in position by a spacer 

spring  and  are  radially  preloaded.  The  running  surfaces  of 

the rails are typically coated (e.g., chrome-plated, nitrided, or 

PVD-coated) to protect against wear. The spring is part of the 
load-bearing piston ring construction (Figure 1.18). 

The  rails  strip  off  the  excess  oil  from  the  cylinder  surface. 

There  are  different  types  of  three-piece  oil  control  rings. 

Their  functional  principle  is  substantially  the  same,  namely, 

Figure 1.18: 3-S-ring

two  steel  rails  are  pressed  against  the  cylinder  wall  by  an 
expander.  These  expanders  of  varying  shape  must  fulﬁll  the  following  tasks:  they  need  to 

press the rails against both the cylinder surface and the groove ﬂanks, and thus seal them 

off. Oil entering between the two rails is returned to the crankcase.

Oil penetration into the combustion chamber from the piston ring groove is reduced. The oil 

collected between the rails can also enter the piston interior through slots.

Such piston rings are often used as third piston rings in gasoline engines. This is mainly for 

cost reasons, but also because of the oil consumption beneﬁts in the partial-load range due 

to good lateral (axial) sealing of the piston ring groove with the rails.

1.4.11  U-flex ring

The U-ﬂex ring is a one-piece, closed ring whose ends touch. The ring is made of elastic 
spring steel. It is stamped, then bent into a U-shape and coiled (Figure 1.19). The U-ﬂex ring 
is generally installed with a coil spring (for assembly purposes only). 

Its  special  shape  and  manufacture  give  the  U-ﬂex  ring  very 

good  properties  with  regard  to  ring  conformability,  allowing 

good oil control with low tangential forces, and therefore low 

friction. Its good ring conformability makes the U-ﬂex ring very 

well suited for engines with higher-order bore deformations. 

Today,  the  U-ﬂex  ring  is  used  in  both  gasoline  and  high-

speed diesel engines.

Figure 1.19: U-flex ring

16

1 Piston rings

1.5  Design details

1.5.1  Analysis and simulation

1.5.1.1  Numerical analysis

The design of new piston rings and creation of design and production drawings is based on 

databases in which all the important dimensions and properties are collected and stored. On 

the basis of these ﬁles, which are continuously updated, piston rings are drawn directly using 

computer-aided engineering (CAE). In addition to dimensions, piston ring drawings also con-

tain certain functional characteristics, such as the speciﬁc contact pressure, tangential force, 

and cross section of the piston ring.

1.5.1.2  Stress analysis

Piston rings are subjected to the greatest stress during installation, when they are stretched 
over the piston. The installation stress during the expansion (Sa) needed for assembly and 
the stress that arises in the cylinder in the installed state (Sw) can be calculated as follows:

(1–1)

=

S

w

 

=

S

a

8
⋅

π

⋅

3

8
⋅

π

⋅

3

⋅

−

⋅
E t m s
)
(
1
−
2
a
)
1
−
t m m
)
y
1
−
)22
a
1

y
d
(
1
⋅
E a
(
1
(

d
1

−

⋅

(

 

)

Sw:  stress in installed state
Sa:  installation stress (expansion for assembly)
E:  Young’s modulus of the piston ring material
ty: 
m:  free gap in relaxed state
s1:  gap clearance in installed state
d1:  nominal diameter of cylinder liner
a1:  radial dimension of piston ring
m1:  installation opening (normally, m1 = 9 · a1)

radial distance from the neutral axis to the ring running surface

For complex piston ring cross sections, such as two-piece oil control rings, the stresses are 

typically determined by ﬁnite element analysis.

1.5.1.3  Dynamic analysis

Using a numerical simulation, it is possible to analyze the interplay of piston rings, piston, 

and cylinder. The piston ring pack can be optimized, for example, with regard to blow-by and 
reduction of lubricating oil consumption. Such analyses are composed of

■  thermal FE analysis of the cylinder;

■  thermal FE analysis of the piston;

■  computation of piston and piston ring dynamics;

■  simulation of the engine cycle.

1.5 Design details

1.5.1.4  Ring conformability

In the course of an operating cycle, the heat ﬂow changes, which results in high temperature 

and  pressure  gradients  in  the  piston  and  the  cylinder  liner.  Together  with  the  peak  cylin-

der pressure in the combustion chamber and the assembly-induced stresses in the engine 

block, this leads to various distortions in the cylinder bores. The piston ring needs to adapt 

to these deformations, in order to keep blow-by and oil consumption low.

The  ability  of  a  ring  to  compensate  for  deformation  can  be  expressed  indirectly  and  in  a 
simpliﬁed form by the coefﬁcient k. 

=

k

⋅
F d
(
1
t
4

− ⋅
2
⋅
E I

⋅

2
)

t

y

  

k:   coefﬁcient of conformability
Ft:  tangential force of the piston ring
I:   axial moment of inertia of the piston ring cross section

The greater the value of the coefﬁcient k, the better the conformability of the piston ring. The 

ability of a piston ring to make contact with the cylinder surface can be estimated as follows, 

according to Tomanik: 

U

max

=

⋅
k d
1
−
⋅
2
(
i

1
)

10

  

Umax:  maximum cylinder deformation that the piston ring can adapt to
i:  

order of deformation (i = 1,2,3…)

1.5.1.5  Specific contact pressure

One of the most important parameters is the speciﬁc contact pressure or unitary pressure. 
This is especially true for oil control rings. The speciﬁc contact pressure P0 of the piston ring 
is derived from:

17

(1–2)

(1–3)

(1–4)

P
0

⋅
2=
F
t
⋅
d h
1
1

  

P0:  speciﬁc contact pressure
h1:   width of the piston ring

piece oil control ring).

1.5.1.6  Ovality

The high peak cylinder pressure (PCP) bears on the ﬁrst and, to a lesser extent, the second 

piston ring, but dissipates during the operating cycle. For oil control rings, the ring width is 

replaced by twice the land width (two-piece oil control ring) or by twice the rail width (three-

Ring ovality is the maximum change of the nominal diameter of the piston ring, measured in 

various directions. It is determined by subtracting the diameter in the 90° and 270° direction 
from the direction of the stressed state.

18

1 Piston rings

1.5.1.7  Design specifications

Piston rings are standardized with regard to their dimensions and properties. Nevertheless, 

adaptation of the piston ring design to the particular installation and operating conditions is 

often required.

1.6  Materials, coatings, and surface treatment

1.6.1  Materials

MAHLE has a complete range of piston rings made of gray cast iron, alloyed cast iron, and 

nodular  cast  iron,  which  are  produced  using  cutting-edge  casting.  Carbon  and  stainless 

steel wire are obtained from leading global suppliers. The critical criteria for material selection 

are cost-effectiveness and engine speciﬁcations.

1.6.1.1  Cast iron

For many years, lamellar cast iron with low alloying element content—but rich in graphite—was 

the suitable piston ring material. Its wear resistance, good running properties, mechanical 

strength  appropriate  for  this  purpose,  as  well  as  advantageous  compatibility  with  cylinder 

liner and piston materials made it the optimal material for piston rings. 

For  a  long  time,  cast  iron  was  produced  in  single  and  double  casting  processes,  which 

gave  the  material  an  attractive  “A-class”  graphite  structure.  With  advancements  in  engine 

development, more complex piston ring materials with improved mechanical strength and 

wear resistance became necessary. Systematic developments in this area led to new types 

of alloyed gray cast iron and nodular cast iron. 

MAHLE produces these materials in its own foundries with modern furnaces, in which the 

melt parameters are strictly controlled, which enables the manufacture of a wide range of 

ﬁrst-class cast iron types. 

The standard material MF 013 (perlitic lamellar cast iron, MC 13 according to ISO) is used for 

oil control rings in gasoline and diesel engines. The piston ring running surface is typically 

coated with chromium or another suitable material. The perlitic basic microstructure of the 

material and the uniformly developed lamellar graphite structure are excellent characteris-

tics for a piston ring material that keep wear to a low level in uncoated oil control rings for 

gasoline engines. 

1.6 Materials, coatings, and surface treatment

19

In cases, where greater wear resistance is required, it is recommended that an alloyed mate-

rial such as MF 025 (MC 25 according to ISO) be used. The material MF 032 (MC 32 accord-

ing to ISO) can be used for applications with even higher requirements.

Alloyed types of cast iron are heat-treated in order to develop their mechanical properties. 

The resulting microstructure is primarily martensitic. 

The mechanical properties of the nodular cast iron MF 053 (MS 53 according to ISO) are 

between  those  of  gray  cast  iron  and  steel,  although  its  self-lubricating  properties  are  not 

as good as those of gray cast iron. This material is recommended for coated or uncoated 

compression and oil control rings, where the required strength is greater than that of lamel-

For applications in which greater wear resistance is needed, in combination with the higher 

mechanical strength of nodular cast iron, the material MF 056 (nodular cast iron alloyed with 

niobium, MC 56 according to ISO) is recommended.

lar cast iron. 

1.6.1.2  Steel

Steel  can  be  used  to  manufacture  many  types  of  piston  rings,  from  the  ﬁrst  to  the  third 

piston ring. These can be coated or nitrided piston rings, expanders, and rails of three-piece 

oil control rings, or I-shaped piston rings and springs of two-piece oil control rings. Steel is 

used in place of gray cast iron for its high mechanical strength and fatigue resistance, heat 

resistance, and good corrosion resistance. Steel rings are normally coated and/or nitrided.

1.6.2  Coatings and surface treatments

MAHLE  piston  ring  coatings  and  surface  treatments  provide  improved  wear  resistance 

and seizure resistance, along with low cylinder wear and favorable lubrication properties. 

Nanotechnology processes are also employed in this connection. Nitrided steel and cast 

iron, coatings based on chromium such as hard chrome and chromium-ceramic, plasma-

sprayed  molybdenum,  plasma-sprayed  cermet,  and  coatings  using  high-speed  ﬂame 

spraying (High Velocity Oxygen Fuel, HVOF) and physical vapor deposition (PVD) meet the 

most demanding service life and run-in requirements. The selection of a suitable coating 

depends on the engine technology, the application, the tribological requirements, and not 

Surface protection coatings and treatments intended to provide good oxidation resistance, 

such as tin-plating, black oxiding, ferroxidation, and phosphating, are available for speciﬁc 

least the cost.

applications.

20

1 Piston rings

1.6.2.1  Gray cast iron as a base material

MF 012
Perlitic gray cast iron

Alloying elements: Cr, Cu

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 12

Second piston ring and two-piece oil control rings

Bending strength: min. 380 MPa 

Hardness: 95 to 108 HRB

Standard material for compression and oil control rings in gasoline and diesel engines

High fracture strength with good wear resistance for second compression rings in gasoline 

MF 013
Perlitic gray cast iron

Alloying elements: Cr, Cu

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 13

Bending strength: min. 420 MPa 

Hardness: 97 to 108 HRB

MF 025
Martensitic alloyed gray cast iron

High wear resistance

Alloying elements: Mo, Nb, V, W

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 25

and diesel engines

Bending strength: min. 650 MPa

Hardness: 37 to 45 HRC

MF 032
Martensitic carbidic gray cast iron

High wear resistance

Alloying elements: Mo, Nb, V, W

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 32

and diesel engines

Bending strength: min. 650 MPa

Hardness: 35 to 45 HRC

High fracture strength with good wear resistance for second compression rings in gasoline 

First piston ring with high fracture strength and wear resistance 

1.6 Materials, coatings, and surface treatment

21

1.6.2.2  Martensitic nodular cast iron as a base material

First  piston  ring  with  high  fracture  strength  and  two-piece  oil  control  rings  with  low  land 

MF 053
Martensitic nodular cast iron

Alloying elements: Ni, Mo

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 53

width in gasoline and diesel engines

Bending strength: min. 1,300 MPa

Hardness: 28 to 42 HRC

MF 056
Martensitic carbidic nodular cast iron

Alloying elements: Ni, Mo, Nb

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 56

Bending strength: min. 1,300 MPa

Hardness: 35 to 45 HRC

1.6.2.3 Carbon and stainless steels

MS 068
Carbon steel

Martensitic heat-treated

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 68

MS 067
Austenitic stainless steel

Alloying elements: Cr, Ni

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 67

Tensile strength: no fracture in bending test

Hardness: 59 to 67 HR30N

MS 062
Steel alloyed with chromium and silicon

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 62

Tensile strength: 1,800 to 2,000 MPa

Base material for chrome-plated rails in three-piece oil control rings in gasoline engines

Tensile strength: no fracture in bending test

Hardness: 68 to 72 HR30N

Expander ES-1 (type 81) for three-piece oil control rings in gasoline engines

Heat-resistant springs in two-piece oil control rings in diesel and gasoline engines

1 Piston rings

Base material for nitrided, chrome-plated, or molybdenum-coated ﬁrst piston rings in diesel 

Base material for chrome-plated, molybdenum-coated, and high-speed ﬂame-sprayed ﬁrst 

22

MS 066
Martensitic stainless steel

Alloying elements: Cr, Mo

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 66

and gasoline engines

Tensile strength: 1,125 to 1,325 MPa

Hardness: 38 to 42 HRC

MS 064
Steel alloyed with chromium and silicon

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 64

piston rings in diesel and gasoline engines

Tensile strength: 1,590 to 1,960 MPa

Hardness: 48 to 54 HRC

1.6.2.4  Running surface and side face coatings 

MCR 024
Hard chrome plating

Galvanically applied 

Piston rings in gasoline or diesel engines

Good wear resistance and seizure resistance

Hardness: min. 800 HV 0.1

Piston rings in diesel engines

Excellent wear resistance and seizure resistance

Hardness: 900 to 1,200 HV 0.1

MSC 278/MSC 280
Mo + NiCr cermet alloys

Plasma-sprayed coatings

Piston rings in gasoline or diesel engines

Good wear resistance and high seizure resistance

Hardness: min. 450 HV

MCR 236/MCR 256
Chromium-ceramic coating with Al2O3 (MCR 236) or cBN particles (MCR 256)
Galvanically applied 

1.6 Materials, coatings, and surface treatment

23

MSC 380/MSC 385
HVOF cermet coatings applied by high-speed ﬂame spraying

For ﬁrst piston rings in diesel engines

Superior wear resistance and seizure resistance

Hardness: min. 500 HV

MIP 230/MIP 240/MIP 290/MIP 300
Chromium-nitride coating (MIP 230/MIP 240)

Chromium nitride/nanobium nitride multilayer system (MIP 290)

Chromium carbon nitride coating (MIP 300, “CERAMSLIDE”)

Coatings applied using physical vapor deposition (PVD)

For ﬁrst piston rings in gasoline and diesel engines, as well as I-shaped oil control rings

Superior wear resistance and seizure resistance 

Hardness: 1,200 to 1,600 HV (MIP 230); 800 to 1,200 HV (MIP 240);  

1,700 to 2,100 HV (MIP 290); 1,800 to 2,200 HV (MIP 300)

MIP 274
Carbon-based coating (Diamond Like Carbon, DLC)

Coating applied using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD)

For ﬁrst piston rings in gasoline and diesel engines

Superior seizure resistance and very good running-in characteristics

Hardness: min. 900 HV 0.050 at 0.01 mm, min. 700 HV 0.1 at 0.03 mm

1.6.2.5  Nitriding running surfaces

MS 065 – N
Nitrided 10 or 13% chromium stainless steel

Rails in three-piece oil control rings
High wear resistance

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 65

MS 066 – N
Nitrided 17% Cr martensitic stainless steel

High wear resistance

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 66

First piston ring in diesel engines, oil control rings in diesel and gasoline engines

Hardness: min. 900 HV 0.050 at 0.01 mm, min. 700 HV 0.1 at 0.03 mm

24

1 Piston rings

MS 067 – N
Nitrided austenitic stainless steel

Expander ES-2 (type 81) in gasoline engines

Excellent heat resistance and low tangential force loss

ISO 6621-3: Subclass 67

Nitrided area: min. 0.004 mm

1.6.2.6   Surface protection

Some surface treatments can be used for special purposes, such as for oxidation resistance 
or for protection against microwelding (Table 1.1).

Table 1.1: Properties and applications of various protective coatings

MCA standard Protective coating or 

Groove

Properties

treatment

MPR 022

Black oxiding

Oxidation resistance

MPR 023

Manganese phosphate

Oxidation resistance

MPR 027

Zinc phosphate

Oxidation resistance

Oil control rings and 
rails

First piston rings and  
oil control rings

First piston rings and  
oil control rings

2  Piston pins and piston pin circlips

25

2.1  Function of the piston pin 

The piston pin is the link between the piston and the connecting rod. Owing to the oscillating 

motion of the piston and the overlay of gas and inertial forces, it is subjected to high loads 
in alternating directions. Figure 2.1 shows the piston pin load for a gasoline engine at rated 
power. The rotational motion of the connecting rod relative to the piston must be compen-

sated for at the bearing locations of the piston pin, in the piston pin boss, and the small end 

bore. Because of the small relative motions, the lubrication conditions here are poor.

Figure 2.1: Piston pin load

For pistons in gasoline engines of passenger cars with moderate speciﬁc power output, the 

piston pins can be ﬁxed in the small end bore with shrinkage stresses (ﬁxed-pin connecting 
rod) (Figure 2.2d). This design allows savings due to the elimination of the piston pin circlips 
and the bushing in the small end bore and makes automatic assembly of the piston, piston 

pin, and connecting rod easier for large-scale production of engines.

In highly stressed gasoline engines and in diesel engines, the piston pin “ﬂoats” in the small 
end bore (Figure 2.2a–c). It needs to be secured with piston pin circlips against sideways 
motion in the piston (see Section 2.8).

In large-bore pistons, the cooling oil is often fed through the connecting rod and the piston 
pin, which features special oil feeding systems, to the piston pin boss; see Figures 2.12–2.15.


a)

2 Piston pins and piston pin circlips

b)

c)
 
Figure 2.2: a) floating configuration with parallel support, b) floating configuration with tapered sup-
port, c) floating configuration with stepped support, d) fixed-pin connecting rod

d)

2.2  Requirements 

2.2.1  General

Piston pins must meet the following requirements:

■  Sufﬁcient strength and toughness to withstand the loads without damage

■  High surface hardness, in order to achieve favorable wear behavior

■  High surface quality and shape accuracy for optimal ﬁt with its sliding partners, the piston 

and connecting rod

■  Low weight, in order to keep inertia forces minimal

■  Stiffness must be matched to the piston design, in order to avoid overloading the piston.

Despite  these  sometimes  contradictory  requirements,  piston  pin  manufacture  must  be  as 

simple, and thus economical, as possible.

2.2 Requirements

2.2.2  Strength

27

Under the effects of the gas and inertia forces, pressure and stress loads act on the piston 

pin  surface,  the  distribution  of  which  is  determined  by  the  deformations  of  the  piston  pin 

bores, piston pins, and small end bore, caused by the forces (see Section 2.4.3). As a result 

of this pressure distribution, the piston pin is subjected to bending, ovalization, and shearing 

off. Added to this is a torsional load due to the connecting rod tilting motion. It is neglected 

because of its limited proportion in the total load. The opposing requirement is that the piston 

pin must be as stiff and as light as possible.

Figure  2.3  shows  the  stress  distribution  on  the  piston  pin  during  ovalization  and  various 
microstructure states at the surface.

The ovalization of the piston pin results in the stress distribution shown in Figure 2.3a. The 
maximum  tensile  stresses  critical  for  fatigue  resistance  are  inside,  on  the  surface  of  the 

bore. Residual compressive stresses applied at the inner bore can counteract these tensile 

stresses, which has a positive effect on the fatigue resistance of the piston pin. The same 

applies analogously for the outer diameter, which is loaded mainly through bending.

The carbon and nitrogen uptake in the surface layer, associated with case hardening or nitrid-

ing of the piston pin, results in an increase in volume and thus residual compressive stresses 
in the layer. The effect on the residual stress state of the piston pin is shown in Figures 2.3b–d. 
Practical experience conﬁrms that this signiﬁcantly increases fatigue resistance.

Decarburization  of  the  skin  of  the  bore  surface  (Figure  2.4),  which  leads  to  residual  ten-
sile  stresses  (Figure  2.3d),  is  extremely  detrimental  to  the  fatigue  resistance  of  the  piston 

Figure 2.3: Stress distribution on the piston pin
a) effect of ovalization, b) without case hardening at inner bore, c) with case hardening at inner bore, 
d) during decarburization at inner bore

28

2 Piston pins and piston pin circlips

Figure 2.4: Decarburization of the surface at the bore of the piston pin

pin. Hardening cracks, slag lines, and deep machining lines in the bore also greatly reduce 

fatigue resistance.

Floating piston pins can turn. This means that highly loaded positions of the piston pin can 

move into less highly loaded positions, or form tensile to compressive loads, and vice versa. 

This  results  in  a  varying  load  on  the  piston  pin.  These  stress  amplitudes  result  in  higher 

loading of the component, in contrast to piston pins that are ﬁxed in the connecting rod, 
and therefore do not rotate. Figure 2.5 shows the differences between a ﬁxed and a rotating 
piston pin, using stress amplitudes.

The pin loads are evaluated using a fatigue strength map, e.g., according to Smith. Such a 

fatigue strength map must be determined for each material in use. Its limit lines correspond 

to the safety factor S = 1. The permissible minimum safety factor is determined according to 
the requirements and expected loads for each area of application, such as passenger cars, 

commercial vehicles, or motorsport.

Clearance  between  the  piston  pin  and  the  piston  pin  boss  or  small  end  bore  should  be 

selected such that scufﬁng cannot occur between the contact points with the piston and the 

connecting rod. The clearance should be checked carefully, especially under warm operat-

ing conditions, because of the different thermal expansion coefﬁcients of the materials used.

In order to avoid pin boss cracks, limits of the temperature-dependent material and load fac-

tors, such as contact pressure in the boss, must not be exceeded.

2.2.3  Deformation

Another requirement is that the piston pin must be light, in addition to having sufﬁcient stiff-

ness and strength. Stiffness relative to bending can be increased greatly, as the fourth power 

2.2 Requirements

29

Figure 2.5:  
Stress in a piston pin fixed in a connecting 
rod (A, B) and a rotating piston pin (A-B)

of the increase in diameter. Deﬂection also increases approximately as the third power of the 

support span of the piston pin, i.e., with the piston pin boss spacing. A reduction in this value 

thus causes a severe reduction in bending and thus increases stiffness. If a shorter piston 

pin can be used, then mass reduction is also possible.

An increase in stiffness relative to ovalization can be achieved only with a greater wall thick-

ness and thus always increases mass. The stiffness of the piston pin has a signiﬁcant effect 
on the loads on the piston pin boss, support, and bowl rim, as shown in Figure 2.6.

The susceptibility of the piston to pin boss cracks is shown in Figure 2.7 as a function of the 
piston pin geometry, as a result of engine testing. Owing to higher peak cylinder pressures, 

30

2 Piston pins and piston pin circlips

Figure 2.6: Piston stress as a function of piston pin stiffness

Figure 2.7: Boss stiffness as a function of piston pin geometry

diesel  engines  require  stiffer  piston  pins  in  comparison  to  gasoline  engines.  The  limit  of 

maximum allowable contact pressure in the piston pin boss also demands larger pin diam-

eters. Nevertheless, because of greater peak cylinder pressures in turbocharged engines, for 

example, piston pin bosses can be overloaded. 

If potential piston design measures for reducing the critical stresses in the area of the piston 

pin boss have been exhausted, such as by increasing the piston pin outer diameter, reduc-

ing the pin boss spacing, and so forth, then a solution can be found with the use of shaped 
pin bores in the piston pin boss or proﬁled pins (Figure 2.11). These signiﬁcantly reduce the 
stresses in the piston pin boss by means of a softer ﬁt between the piston pin and boss. The 

diameter of the pin bore is slightly retracted in the area of the inner or top edges, according 

to the load. A smooth transition must be ensured.

2.3 Types of piston pins

31

2.2.4  Lubrication, oil supply

The sliding partners are mechanically loaded by gas and inertia forces. The transient loads 

cause alternating pressure on the bearing surfaces, such that boundary lubrication condi-

tions can occur. The splash oil in the crankcase is not always sufﬁcient to keep wear at a 

low level. The buildup of a lubricating ﬁlm must then be supported by design measures. In 

the small end bore, this is carried out—in the case of large pistons—with splash oil feeders or 

pressurized oil supply through the connecting rod. Oil pockets can also be used as a reser-

voir. Pockets, oil grooves, and the like are incorporated in the piston pin boss. 

2.2.5  Wear

Boundary lubrication conditions cannot be avoided under all operating conditions. There-

fore, the contact between the piston pin and the small end bore and the piston pin boss bore 

must also have sufﬁcient boundary lubrication properties and be wear-resistant. Given a high 

surface quality and hardness on the piston pin, this can be achieved in a simple manner. 

Piston pins are therefore case hardened or nitrided.

In the case of particularly high requirements for the surface, such as in motorsport, or if a 

bushingless  connecting  rod  is  used,  the  sliding  properties  (friction,  wear  resistance)  can 

be signiﬁcantly improved by an additional PVD or DLC coating (physical vapor deposition, 

PVD; diamond-like carbon, DLC). Coatings of this type allow ultrahigh contact pressures and 

reduce friction.

2.2.6  Weight

The total oscillating mass can be reduced by reducing the piston pin mass. The proportion 
of oscillating mass made up by the piston pin can be between 10 and 30%.

2.3  Types of piston pins

In most applications, the tubular or cylindrical piston pin (Figure 2.8) has been accepted as 
the  standard  design.  It  optimally  fulﬁlls  requirements  with  regard  to  simple  geometry  and 

economical manufacture. 

In order to reduce the inertia forces of drive unit components moving back and forth (oscil-

lating), the mechanically less loaded ends of the pin bore can be designed with a conical 
shape to save weight (Figure 2.9).

32

2 Piston pins and piston pin circlips

Figure 2.8: Piston pin with cylindrical bore

Figure 2.9: Piston pin with inner cones

Figure  2.10:  Piston  pin  with  profiled  inner  con-
tour

Figure  2.11:  Piston  pin  with  outer  contour  (pro-
filed piston pin)

Figure 2.12: Piston pin with oil bores and blan-
king plugs (shrink-fit)

Figure 2.13: Piston pin with oil bores and sealing 
cover (rolled-in)

Figure  2.14:  Piston  pin  with  oil  bores  and  oil 
feeding tube

Figure 2.15: Piston pin with oil bores and screw 
plugs

2.4 Design

33

Another piston pin variant, used especially for highly loaded diesel engines, is the inner con-
tour piston pin (Figure 2.10). The wall thickness of the piston pin is reinforced speciﬁcally in 
the connecting rod area, while the ends of the piston pin contribute to mass reduction with 

a conical design.

For critical stresses in the piston pin boss and if the design options for the piston have been 
exhausted, the piston pin with a proﬁled outer contour can provide a solution (Figure 2.11). 
The outer surfaces of these piston pins are slightly retracted (approx. 20 to 40 μm) by proﬁle 
grinding in the area of contact of the inner bore edges of the piston pin boss. It is crucial that 

the transitions from the undercut to the cylindrical areas are smooth and gradual.

For cooled pistons, especially large-bore pistons, the cooling oil is often fed from the con-

necting rod to the piston via the piston pin. Piston pins for oil-cooled pistons allow various 
design options (Figures 2.12–2.15). Secure closure of the piston pin on the face side under all 
conditions is of decisive importance for the cooling oil supply to the piston, and thus for the 

operational safety of the engine. Both during manufacture and in later operation, the piston 
pin with a shrink-ﬁt plug has proven itself especially well (Figure 2.12).

2.4  Design

2.4.1  Dimensioning

Piston pins are designed for loading by gas and inertia forces, contact pressure, and defor-

mation. The bearing clearance between the piston pin and the piston pin boss and small 

end bore must also be determined, in order to ensure trouble-free operation, that is, quiet 
piston action and minimal wear. Consideration must be given to the fact that when the ther-

mal expansion of the piston–piston pin–connecting rod system varies, the clearance can be 

larger than the installation clearances for a warm engine and smaller at cold temperatures. 

The temperature dependence of the bearing clearance between the piston pin and small end 

bore is generally disregarded. 

When designing the smallest relative bearing clearance in aluminum pistons (Table 2.1) in 
gasoline engines, differentiation must be made between a “ﬂoating” pin bearing and a piston 

pin with a shrink ﬁt in the small end bore. A piston pin with a ﬂoating conﬁguration is the 

standard design and is the variant that can be loaded the most speciﬁcally in the piston pin 
boss. With the shrunk connecting rod design, the piston pin is seated in the small end bore 

with some overlap. 

Advantages and disadvantages of ﬁxed-pin connecting rods and ﬂoating conﬁguration of the 
piston pin in the connecting rod are shown in Table 4.2.

34

2 Piston pins and piston pin circlips

Table 2.1: Smallest relative installation clearance between the piston pin and piston or connecting rod 
for gasoline and diesel engines, motorsport engines not included

Application

Piston material Piston pin  

Relative bearing clearance1)

Gasoline 
engines

Pass. car 

Pass. car

Pass. car

Com. veh.

Diesel engines

Com. veh.

Large-bore 
engines

 

 

Al 

Al

Al

Al

St

St/Al

St/St

1) relative to the outer diameter of the piston pin 

bearing

With shrink fit 
connecting rod

Floating

Floating

Floating

Floating

Floating

Floating

> 0.4 ‰ 

Piston pin boss Conrod bore
< –1.0 ‰ 
(overlap) 
> 0.4 ‰
> 0.6 ‰
> 1.0 ‰
> 1.0 ‰
> 1.0 ‰
> 1.0 ‰

> 0.2 ‰
> 0.2 ‰
> 0.2 ‰
> 1.0 ‰
> 0.15 ‰
> 0.5 ‰

The piston and connecting rod geometry and the maximum pressure in the expansion stroke 

cycle must be considered when dimensioning the piston pin. Depending on the application, 
dimensions according to Table 2.2 are the result.

Table 2.2: Typical major dimensions of piston pins
D: piston diameter, d1: piston pin outside diameter, d2: piston pin inside diameter, l: piston pin length

Application

Piston pin

Piston

D [mm]

35–70

65–100

65–95

d1/D

d2/d1

l/D

0.20–0.30

0.40–0.73

0.65–0.80

0.20–0.30

0.47–0.60

0.60–0.75

0.30–0.40

0.43–0.53

0.65–0.80

0.40–0.47

0.78–0.82

100–160

0.40–0.45

0.31–0.47

0.60–0.85

Gasoline engines

Diesel engines

2-stroke

Pass. car

Pass. car

Com. veh. 
Al

Com. veh. 
St

Large-bore 
engines

 

 

     < 250

     > 250

0.30–0.45

0.34–0.56

0.70–0.86

0.35–0.45

0.38–0.45

0.65–0.86

2.4 Design

2.4.2  Analysis

35

An  analysis  of  the  transient  deformations  and  stresses  on  the  piston  pin  cannot  be  per-

formed very accurately, even with great effort, because the following factors, amongst others, 

need to be considered simultaneously:

■  Signiﬁcantly  different  piston  cross  sections,  and  thus  stiffnesses,  required  for  functional 

purposes

modulus)

■  Effect of the piston temperature on piston deformations and on piston stiffness (Young’s 

■  Effects of piston pin deformation

■  Different Young’s modulus of the piston material and piston pin material

■  Different elastic section moduli of piston pin cross sections (e.g., conical piston pins) 

■  Lubricating ﬁlm distribution 

Using simpliﬁed load assumptions, analyses can be performed that, together with empirical 

values, enable an assessment of the operating conditions. Assuming a surface load in the 

conrod bore and individual point loads in the pin bores in the piston, Schlaefke presented a 
useful calculation method back in 1940 (Figure 2.16).

In addition to the deformation due to bending and ovalization, the “total stress” is determined 
from the bending stress (cid:86)B and the stress due to ovalization (cid:86)A.

It is assessed on the basis of empirical values for total stress and deformation. The average 

pin bore pressure must not exceed the threshold prescribed by the piston strength.

Stress due to ovalization

σ

A

=

+

d

)

i

3

,max (
F
g
−
4
(
d
l
a

d
a
d

2
)

i

Stress due to bending

σ
B

=

8
F
g
,max
π
−
4
(
d
a

a d
a
4
)
d
i

Total stress

σ

ges

=

σ

+2
A

σ
2
B

Figure 2.16:  
Load schematic of a piston pin  
(Schlaefke design)

36

2 Piston pins and piston pin circlips

2.4.3  Finite element analysis

As  for  other  components,  the  use  of  ﬁnite  element  analysis  methods  (FE)  in  component 

design has also been accepted for piston pins. The EHD contact (elasto-hydrodynamic con-

tact) must be calculated under consideration of the deformations and lubricant gap geom-

etry. This analysis is very computation-intensive, since the deformations due to temperature, 

gas, and inertia force loads on the piston and connecting rod need to be considered.

Boundary conditions of the EHD contact at the piston pin, deﬁned by the load case, have 

been standardized for variant analyses and a simpliﬁed 3D FE calculation method has been 

derived.

The  MAHLE  program  MPOT  uses  a  pressure  distribution  in  the  connecting  rod  and  the 

piston  pin  boss  for  load  introduction.  This  pressure  distribution  has  been  determined  for 

pistons using a 3D FE analysis and is the basis of the program as a standardized elasto-

hydrodynamic lubrication pressure distribution. Pressure proﬁles have been calculated and 

Figure 2.17:  
Pressure distribution for par-
allel support of a piston pin

Figure 2.18:  
Deformation of a piston pin 
(large-bore engine) analyzed 
with MPOT

2.4 Design

37

integrated for all applicable support cases. Figure 2.17 shows an example of a pressure distri-
bution for parallel support. With the aid of the peak cylinder pressure and the geometric data 

(piston diameter, boss, piston pin, and connecting rod geometries), the corresponding proﬁle 

is applied to the new data and a mesh for a quarter of a piston pin is generated automatically. 
The results are available after just a few minutes of computation (see Figures 2.18–2.20).

Figure 2.19: Analysis of main stresses on the piston pin (large-bore engine)

Figure 2.20: Safety factors at various locations of the piston pin (large-bore engines)

38

2 Piston pins and piston pin circlips

The MAHLE program MPOT enables the simpliﬁed design of piston pins for passenger car 

and  commercial  vehicle  aluminum  pistons  with  cylindrical  piston  pin  shapes  and  tapered 

bores. Parallel, keystone, and stepped support geometries are available.

Assessment of the calculated stresses (Figure 2.19) is carried out automatically, using the 
integrated accessory program, for typical piston pin materials, and safety factors are output 
(Figure 2.20).

2.4.4  Dimensional and form tolerances, standard

The markings on the piston pin corresponding to piston pin standard ISO 18669 are shown 
in Figure 2.21.

The piston pin standard DIN 73216 has been internationally revised and published as ISO 

18669-1 and 18669-2. Part 1, “General Speciﬁcations,” lists the markings, piston pin types, 

dimensions  and  tolerances,  materials,  heat  treatment,  and  quality  characteristics.  Part  2 

deals with measurement and test methods. 

MAHLE piston pins are designed, manufactured, and applied on the basis of the ISO 18669 

standard.

d1: outer diameter
d2: inner diameter
l1:   length
a:   wall thickness

1:   end surface

2:   bore surface (inner surface)

3:   outer surface

d3: tapered outlet diameter
l3:   taper length
(cid:68):   taper angle

4:   tapered bore surface

Figure 2.21: Markings on a piston pin

2.4 Design

39

The  important  design  criteria  listed  in  the  standard—core  hardness,  hardness  penetration 
depth,  surface  hardness,  volume  stability,  and  surface  roughness—are  provided  in  Tables 
2.3–2.6. 

Table 2.3: Core hardness (core strength)

Wall thickness 
a  [mm]

Core hardness  HV 30 (core strength Rm [MPa]) 1)

Class L

Class M

Class N

1.5–2

>2–5

>5–10

>10–15

>15–25

>25

310–515 
(1,000–1,650)

280–485 
(900–1,575)

270–470 
(850–1,500)

250–470 
(800–1,500)

235–470 
(750–1,500)

310–470 
(1,000–1,500)

280–470 
(900–1,500)

250–435 
(800–1,400)

310–470 
(1,000–1,500)

1) The core strength values (Rm) are provided for reference only and are calculated from the core hard-
ness HV with a factor of 3.2.

Table 2.4: Hardness penetration depths, dimension in mm

Wall  
thickness  
a [mm]

Case depth

Nitride depth

Outside

Inside 
min.

Outside and inside  
together

Outside 
min.

Inside 
min.

Min.

Code X 

1.5– < 2

2–3

> 3–5

> 5–15

> 15

–

0.3

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.4

0.5

0.6

–

–

Max.

0.65 · a

0.65 · a

0.50 · a

0.35 · a

0.35 · a

Code X

0.80 · a

0.80 · a

0.65 · a

–

–

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.3

0.2

Comment 1: the limit hardness used in determining the case depth is Hs 550 HV.

Comment 2: for piston pins with limited change in volume, identification mark V, the limit hardness is 
Hs 500 HV. 

Comment 3: code X: applies to piston pins used with needle bearing in the conrod bore.  

40

2 Piston pins and piston pin circlips

Table 2.5: Surface hardness for Class 1 piston pins

Hardness measuring 
method

Surface hardness

Case-hardened steel

Nitrided steel

Unlimited change in 
volume

Limited change in volume, 
abbreviation: V

Vickers HV 10
Rockwell HRC 1)
Rockwell HRA 2)

675 min.

59 min.

80.7 min.

635 min.

57 min.

79.6 min.

690 min.

–

–

1) Case depth min. 0.7 mm
2) Case depth 0.4–0.9 mm

Table 2.6: Volume change after heat resistance test, dimensions in mm 

Test conditions

Outer  
diameter d1

Max. increase in dimension Δd1

Case-hardened steel

Nitrided steel

Unlimited change 
in volume

Limited change in 
volume,  
abbreviation: V

After 4 h  
at 180°C

After 4 h  
at 220°C

≤ 50

> 50– ≤ 60

> 60–100

≤ 50

> 50– ≤ 60

> 60–100

+ 0.006

+ 0.008

+ 0.012

–

–

–

0

0

0

+ 0.006

+ 0.008

+ 0.012

0

2.5  Materials

MAHLE piston pins are manufactured from high-quality case-hardened or nitrided steels. 

Case or nitride hardening yields good toughness in the core and high surface hardness with 

good wear behavior. Piston pins made of nitrided steel are especially noteworthy for their 
outstanding  wear  resistance.  The  enrichment  of  the  edge  zones  with  carbon  or  nitrogen 
causes an increase in volume, which leads to compressive stresses in the piston pin edge 

layers. As previously indicated, these residual compressive stresses at the surface have a 

positive effect on the fatigue resistance of the piston pin. Material or microstructure defects, 

such as decarburization of the skin, cementite network, missing case hardening of the inner 

bore, hardening and grinding cracks, or open slag lines are especially critical in these edge 

41

2.5 Materials

zones. 

Piston pins made of case-hardened steel bear the problem of lack of volume stability, i.e., 

with increasing surface hardness (increased residual austenite content), the piston pin diam-
eter will continually “grow” under heat load (Table 2.6).

Table 2.7 shows the composition, physical properties, and areas of application of MAHLE 
piston pin materials.

Table 2.7: MAHLE piston pin materials

Chemical composi-
tion by weight %

Case-hardened steels

Nitrided steel

17Cr3

16MnCr5

17CrNi6

31CrMoV9

SAE 5115  
(Class L)1)

0.13–0.20

0.15–0.40

0.60–0.90

(cid:100) 0.035

(cid:100) 0.040

(Class M)1)

0.14–0.19

0.15–0.40

1.00–1.30

(cid:100) 0.035

(cid:100) 0.035

0.70–1.00

0.80–1.10

210,000

210,000

210,000

0.50–0.90

0.40–0.70

0.14–0.20

040 max.

(cid:100) 0.035

(cid:100) 0.035

1.40–1.70

1.40–1.70

12.8

37

7.84

0.27

(Class N)1)

0.27–0.34

0.40 max.

(cid:100) 0.025

(cid:100) 0.035

2.30–2.70

0.15–0.25

0.10–0.20

214,000

13.0

39

7.83

0.27

C

Si

Mn

P

S

Cr

Ni

Mo

V

Young’s modulus 
[MPa]

Thermal expanson2)  
[10–6 1/K] 20–200°C
Thermal conductivity2)  
(cid:79) [W/m*K]
Density [g/cm3]

Poisson ratio (cid:80)

Application

13.1

36

7.82

0.27

Gasoline and 
passenger car 
diesel engines

Large-bore 
engines

Highly loaded 
gasoline and 
diesel engines

13.1

36

7.84

0.27

High-perfor-
mance passenger 
car engines and 
commercial vehi-
cle and medium-
speed diesel 
engines

1) conforms to ISO 18669-1
2) determined using separately produced samples of the same hardness (approx. 300 HV)

2 Piston pins and piston pin circlips

For highly stressed racing and motorsport engines and for all large-bore piston pins, ESR 

(electro slag remelting) quality steels are used. The ESR steels are exceptional for their very 
high degree of purity, low sulfur content, and high uniformity in microstructure. Figure 2.22 
shows  typical  hardness  curves  over  the  piston  pin  cross  section  with  associated  micro-

structure at the outside, in the core, and at the bore, for case-hardened and nitrided piston 

42

pins.

Figure 2.22: Typical hardness curve and microstructure of piston pins, case-hardened and nitrided

2.6 Coating

2.6  Coating 

43

Various  amorphous  DLC  coatings  that  contain  hydrogen  (a-C:H)  are  used  for  low-friction 
and secure operation of piston pin bearing (Table 2.8). The coatings are built up in layers, 
and the layer hardness is adapted to the contact loads and materials making contact with 

the piston pin. Three types of layers are distinguished after layer buildup: single, dual, and 
triple layer (Figure 2.23). Total thicknesses are between 2 and 3.5 μm. The layers with high 
hardness values are used for sliding contact surfaces made of abrasive materials, such as 

the aluminum piston alloy, or for high contact pressures.

Figure 2.23: 
DLC layer buildup, example of 
a triple layer

Table 2.8:  MAHLE piston pin coatings

MAHLE

piston pin 
coating

MPC-101

MPC-102

MPC-201

MPC-202

MPC-203

MPC-204

MPC-301

MPC-302

Type of layer

Layer buildup

Layer property

Indentation 
hardness HIT 
[GPa]

Single layer

a-C:H

High wear resistance

Dual layer

High layer strength

CrN, a-C:H

a-C:H:W, a-C:H

Triple layer

CrN, CrC, a-C:H

High wear resistance 
and very high layer 
strength

20

24

20

24

20

24

20

24

44

2 Piston pins and piston pin circlips

2.7  Component testing

Piston pin test bench

Piston pins are often tested on servo-hydraulic test machines and resonance pulsators. A 

simulation of the rotational motion of the piston pin is generally not included. As previously 

indicated, the loads on the piston pin in a ﬂoating conﬁguration cannot be tested with suf-
ﬁcient  accuracy  using  this  method.  Piston  pins  with  a  ﬂoating  conﬁguration  are  therefore 
tested on a special ﬁxture, the piston pin test bench (Figure 2.24). With this test installation, 
the alternating loads on the rotating piston pin can be reproduced, with bending and oval-

The test load is applied statically and can be adjusted continuously up to the maximum load.

The piston pin is turned under load at a constant rpm. The rotational motion is transferred 

to the piston pin indirectly, without introducing a moment, by driving the boss bearing. The 

piston pin mount is a geometric reproduction of the real piston pin boss and the small end 

ization.

bore.

The piston pin load and deﬂection, bearing temperatures, and displacement of the connect-

ing rod are all monitored. The system shuts down if the connecting rod changes position as 

a result of a crack in the piston pin.

Figure 2.24: Passenger car piston pin test bench, correlation between analysis and testing

2.8 Piston pin circlips

45

2.8  Piston pin circlips

If the piston pin is not held in the small end bore by a shrink-ﬁt connection, then it must be 

secured to prevent it from moving sideways out of the piston pin boss and contacting the 

cylinder  wall.  For  small  and  passenger  car  engines,  this  is  solved  almost  exclusively  with 

circlips mounted on the outside, made of round or square wire, which are inserted in cor-

responding grooves in the outside of the piston pin boss. Circlips made of round or square 

wire (also called snap rings) are made of patented drawn spring steel wire (DIN EN 10270-1) 
or oil-tempered spring steel wire (DIN EN 10270-2). Figure 2.25 shows a typical round wire 
snap ring, such as is used in passenger car engines.

For easier assembly, the ends of the snap rings can be drawn in to form hooks (Figure 2.26).

The hooks, however, increase the mass at the ends of the rings and thus lead to lower engine 

speed  to  the  point  where  the  snap  rings  are  lifted  out  of  the  circlip  groove  in  the  piston. 

Owing  to  this  lower  speed  limit  for  snap  rings  with  hooks,  these  circlips  are  used  almost 

exclusively in diesel engines.

For high-speed engines, the seat of the circlip ends can be ﬁxed in the groove by a hook that 

is bent outward, so that the joint opening is oriented in the direction of the stroke and the 
ring cannot rotate in the groove. The example in Figure 2.27 shows the type and location of 
the ring gap, suitable for very high speed limits.

Figure 2.25:  
Pistons for passenger cars with round wire snap 
ring, shape C, per DIN 73130

Figure 2.26:  
Diesel engine piston with pin bore bushing and 
square wire snap ring

46

2 Piston pins and piston pin circlips

Figure 2.27:  
Snap ring with external hook 
for very high speed limits

For  large  piston  pin  diameters,  eccentrically  stamped  circlips  according  to  DIN  472  and, 
increasingly, rings made of square wire with hooks are employed. See Figures 2.28a–c. So-
called oval snap rings are used in connection with large-bore pistons with long piston pins.

a)

b)

c)

Figure 2.28: Circlips for large piston pins 
a) DIN 472 seeger circlip ring, b) square wire snap ring, c) oval snap ring

Internal tension circlips per DIN 471 can also be used. These locking devices are installed 

in grooves at the end of the piston pin. The piston pin must then be longer and therefore 

heavier in comparison with a design that uses external tension circlips. No circlip groove is 

needed in the pin bore on the piston side. Producing the groove in the piston pin is difﬁcult 

and is associated with higher costs, which is why this form of retaining the piston pin is used 

only very rarely.

47

3  Bearings

3.1  Product range

applications.

3.1.1  Applications

Bearings are used to ensure the function of the movable connection between two compo-

nents.  In  general,  different  types  of  bearings  include  roller,  plain,  air,  liquid,  and  magnetic 

bearings. The MAHLE product range focuses on bearing shapes for engines and peripheral 

Bearings are needed to locally separate surfaces that move relative to each other. This is 

achieved by a viscous lubricating ﬁlm generating a pressure ﬁeld that withstands even very 

high external loads, if the surfaces and their relative motion are properly designed. 

Most bearings in the MAHLE product range are used in the engines of motor vehicles: 
■  Connecting rod bearing for the big end bore (radial)

■  Main bearing (radial)

■  Flange bearing (radial and axial)

■  Thrust washers (axial)

■  Conrod bushings for the small end bore (radial)

Other applications for MAHLE bearings are

■  bushings for camshafts;

■  bushings and washers for other automotive systems, such as transmissions.

Figure 3.1 shows the variety of bearings that are installed in an engine.

3.1.2  Types and terminology

A  distinction  is  generally  made  between  bimetal  and  trimetal  bearings.  Bimetal  bearings 

include radial plain bearings, bushings, and thrust washers. They generally consist of a steel 
support shell with an aluminum or bronze alloy coating. Trimetal bearings consist of a steel 

support shell coated with an aluminum or bronze alloy, with a thin bearing layer (galvanic, 

polymer, or sputter layer) referred to as an overlay. Typical bearing designs and terms are 
shown in Figures 3.2–3.7.


3 Bearings

Figure 3.1: Plain bearing applications in a combustion engine

Figure 3.2: Conrod bearing

Figure 3.3: Main bearing shell (crankshaft)

3.1 Product range

49

Figure 3.4: Flange bearing—solid bearing (rigid) and trimetal bearing (flexible)

Figure 3.5: 
Thrust washer for axial bearing

Figure 3.6: Connecting rod bushing

Figure 3.7: Camshaft bushing

50

3 Bearings

3.2  Design specifications

3.2.1  Properties

A prerequisite for correct material selection, relative to the application proﬁle of the engine, is 

knowledge of the material properties. The bearing loads occurring in the engine describe the 

mechanical and tribological requirements proﬁle for the bearing. Material selection is always 
the result of a compromise among all the properties, which are often contradictory in nature. 
Important deﬁnitions and properties are explained in Table 3.1.

Table 3.1: Important bearing properties

Property

Description

Load carrying capacity

Ability to bear mechanical loads on a sustained basis

Wear resistance

Resistance of the material to sliding wear

Seizure resistance

Embeddability

Conformability

Ability of the material to run at the lubrication limit without welding 
to the journal; it depends on whether soft phases are present in the 
material composition

Ability of the material to tolerate and absorb hard particles on the 
sliding surface

The ability to compensate for geometric deviations that cause local 
contacts

Corrosion resistance

Ability to resist corrosion by organic and mineral acids from combus-
tion and oxidation of lubricants

The most important properties are evaluated for each material (Section 3.5) and are used as 

an aid in material selection. 

3.2.2  Load carrying capacity

Load  carrying  capacity  is  determined  using  what  is  known  as  a  “Sapphire”  test  bench 
(Figure 3.8). The test bench consists of a motor-driven eccentric test shaft that exerts a load 
impulse  on  the  test  bearing  shell  with  every  revolution,  while  the  counterforce  is  applied 

by a hydraulic cylinder. The test is run under lubricated conditions and the temperature is 
controlled. Test conditions are listed in Table 3.2. 

3.2 Design specifications

Potential tests include

51

■  screening test—brief repeated test under ﬁxed load;

■  L/N test—assessment of load cycles until damage under constant load;
■  “staircase” test—a statistical assessment of load carrying capacity with stepwise increases.

The loads applied depend on the bearing shell length that is standardized for this test:

■  19.5 mm length — 70 to 180 MPa

■  29.5 mm length — 50 to 130 MPa

Table 3.2:  Test conditions for the “Sapphire” load carrying capacity test

Test conditions

Skirt material

Skirt speed

Load

Lubricant

Temperature

Test duration

Hardened steel

3,000 rpm

~ 50 to 180 MPa

Synthetic 46

110 °C

~ 3.6 million cycles

Figure 3.8: “Sapphire” load carrying capacity test bench

52

3 Bearings

3.2.3  Wear resistance

Wear  resistance  is  evaluated  using  a  test  bench  known  as  “Viper”  (Figure  3.9).  The  test 
bench  consists  of  an  eccentric  shaft  against  which  the  test  bearing  is  pressed.  The  lever 

force  is  produced  by  the  weight  of  a  ballast  and  is  transferred  via  a  lever.  Lubrication  is 

applied continuously via a nozzle. The loss of mass is determined and then computationally 
converted into a loss of volume. The test conditions are summarized in Table 3.3.

Tabelle 3.3:  Test conditions for the Viper wear resistance test

Test conditions

Shaft material

Shaft speed

Load

Lubricant

Temperature

Test duration

Hardened steel

500 rpm

0.04 MPa

Synthetic 46

120 °C

60 minutes

Figure 3.9: 
“Viper” wear resistance test 
bench

3.2.4  Stop-start applications

In order to evaluate load carrying capacity and wear resistance under dynamic lubrication 

conditions,  particularly  as  they  arise  in  conjunction  with  stop-start  applications,  a  “Sap-

phire”  test  bench  has  been  expanded  to  allow  the  load  and  speed  to  be  controlled  by 
a  computer  (Figure  3.10).  The  test  bench  motor  has  been  programmed  so  that  it  per-

3.3 Bearing geometry

53

 
Figure 3.10: Control of the automated “Sapphire” test bench

forms cycles consisting of an increase in speed, followed by a stabilization phase, and then 

reduces the speed back to 0. This cycle is followed for a deﬁned number of repetitions. The 

change in speed causes a change in the lubrication regime, thus causing accelerated wear. 

The test bench is fully instrumented and includes a capacitive wear sensor for measuring 
wear data (Figure 3.11).

Figure 3.11: 
“Sapphire” test—measuring 
wear over a number of stop-
start cycles performed

54

3 Bearings

3.2.5  Seizure resistance

One potential way to evaluate the seizure resistance of various bearing materials is a test 

in which the formation of a lubricating ﬁ lm is intentionally interrupted. This test is also per-

formed using an automated “Sapphire” test bench by applying a linearly increasing load. The 

test shaft also has a slot in the axial direction, preventing the formation of the hydrodynamic 

lubricating  ﬁ lm.  The  test  bench  is  equipped  with  appropriate  instrumentation  in  order  to 

detect the time of failure of the bearing. The applied load, the ﬁ rst seizure event, and the start 
of seizure are recorded (Figure 3.12).

Figure 3.12: “Sapphire” seizure resistance test

3.2.6  Embeddability

The embeddability of a bearing material is tested by feeding particles of a deﬁ ned size and 

hardness  to  the  bearing.  A  lubricant  is  contaminated  with  a  deﬁ ned  quantity  of  particles, 
which are embedded into the bearing surface by the weight of a ballast (Figure 3.13). An 
imprint (Figure 3.14) is then prepared in which the ferrous particles are made visible chemi-
cally. The imprint is scanned and digitized. An image processing algorithm is used to evalu-

ate the size, number, and total surface area of the embedded particles. The results are then 

used to compare various bearing materials using an embeddability index.

3.3 Bearing geometry

55

Figure 3.13: Embeddability test bench

Figure 3.14: 
Examples of iron imprints 
of the bearing surface after 
particle embedding

3.3  Bearing geometry

3.3.1  Bearing diameter and length

The variables of peak oil ﬁlm pressure (POFP) and minimum oil ﬁlm thickness (MOFT) are 

strongly associated with the bearing diameter and bearing length. The length/diameter ratio 

L/D inﬂuences the operating characteristics of the bearing. A larger bearing length reduces 

the  peak  pressure  in  the  oil  ﬁlm  and  increases  the  minimum  oil  ﬁlm  thickness.  A  larger 

56

3 Bearings

diameter has the same effect. For a given projected bearing surface, the bearing with the 

higher L/D ratio experiences lower oil ﬁlm pressures, greater minimum oil ﬁlm thicknesses, 

and thus more advantageous load conditions.

3.3.2  Grooves and bores

The lubricating oil enters the bearing through grooves and boreholes. Independently of this, 
they also have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the function of the bearings. They are undesirable 

in loaded areas, because they reduce the usable contact surface of the bearing and thus 

increase the peak oil ﬁlm pressure and reduce the minimum oil ﬁlm thickness. If the grooves 

and bores are poorly located, there is an increased risk of surface contact between the slid-

ing partners or cavitation damage to the bearing material. 

3.3.3  Bearing clearance

Bearing clearance has a twofold effect on the properties of the oil ﬁlm. With less clearance, 

the loads are better distributed, because the elastic journal deformation that occurs during 

operation is nearly identical to the bearing curvature and generates a lower peak oil ﬁlm 

Figure 3.15: 
Peak oil film pressure POFP as a 
function of bearing clearance at 
various rated power levels

Figure 3.16: 
Minimum oil film thickness MOFT 
as a function of bearing clearance

3.3 Bearing geometry

57

pressure. Lower clearances also generate more heat, which reduces the oil viscosity. The 

peak oil ﬁlm pressure POFP increases more or less proportionately with greater clearance 
(Figure 3.15), and the minimum oil ﬁlm thickness MOFT decreases (Figure 3.16).

3.3.4  Fit of bearings and bushings

A properly designed ﬁt of the bearing in its housing ensures a reliable seat and good heat 
transfer due to radial tension. This is achieved through correct design of the bearing overlap. 

For  bearings,  this  overlap  results  from  the  protrusion  of  the  joint  face  height  beyond  the 

housing radius. For bushings, it is the difference in diameter between the bushing and the 
bore (Figure 3.17).

In the past, limit samples with maximum and minimum overlap were prepared, assembled, 

and measured experimentally in order to validate the design. Today this adaptation is done 

much more quickly using appropriate computation methods (see Section 3.4.4).

Eccentricity

Bearing  eccentricity  is  the  difference  between  the  vertical  and  the  horizontal  diameter. 

The  eccentricity  helps  to  generate  sufﬁcient  oil  ﬁlm  thicknesses,  but  also  helps  prevent 

greater contact load between the journal and the bearing surface when the connecting rod 

approaches the partition line during the idle phase of the combustion cycle. A simulation 

of the elasto-hydrodynamic lubrication (EHL), using a special analysis program, allows the 

selection of the optimal eccentricity for each application. 

 
Figure 3.17: Definition of fit of half bearing shells and bushings

58

3 Bearings

3.4  Numerical simulation

In the development of an engine component, time and costs play an important role. For this 

reason, a great deal of effort is invested in analysis methods during development, in order 

to evaluate components and adapt them, on the basis of the results, prior to starting tests. 

A  software  package  named  SABRE  (Software  for  Analysis  of  Bearings  in  Reciprocating 
Engines)  has  been  developed  in-house  for  simulating  the  behavior  of  bearings,  bushings, 

and thrust washers in conjunction with assembly and operating parameters. Two main areas 

■  “Routine”  simulations  for  rapid  analysis  of  bearing  applications  (calculation  times  from 

■  “Specialized” simulations for detailed analysis of bearing applications (calculation times of 

of application are differentiated:

seconds to minutes)

hours, days, or weeks)

In order to beneﬁt from the simulation experience (e.g., to establish guidelines), the simula-

tion results are saved in a database (SABRE-DB) and then used to validate new designs by 

comparison with known solutions.

3.4.1  Hydrodynamic lubrication (mobility method)

In addition to the load calculation, the motion of the journal in the bearing is simulated. For 

this purpose, the two-dimensional Reynolds equation is solved numerically using the ﬁnite 

difference method. The results are then summarized in numerical ﬁt curves using the mobility 

method. The most important simpliﬁcation in this case is the assumption of a rigid, cylin-

drical housing. The main results of this simulation are the maximum speciﬁc bearing load 
(MSL), the minimum oil ﬁlm thickness (MOFT), and a factor indicating the contact intensity 

under various operating conditions (PeakDCR Severity). The data required for performing the 

analysis are the operating parameters of the engine, the crankshaft and bearing geometries, 

and the properties of the lubricant, which depend heavily on the effective operating tempera-
tures of the bearing. A heat balance (Figure 3.18) is therefore required for any bearings for 
which solutions are sought using the iterative application of the Reynolds equation mobility 

method. 

The computation results can be presented in the form of polar diagrams for the loads and 

journal orbit diagrams. In addition, diagrams for analysis of the oil ﬁlm pressure and thickness 

over the entire engine cycle can be produced, allowing evaluation of the potential risks of 
contact and wear (Figure 3.19).

3.4 Numerical simulation

59

Figure 3.18: Safe operating range and “heat balance” 
for assessing the bearing temperature

Figure 3.19: Example analysis of a crankshaft bearing 
using SABRE-M

60

3 Bearings

3.4.2  Specialized simulations (TEHL)

To obtain more precise results, the same model is used for simulating hydrodynamic lubri-

cation,  but  with  the  deformation  of  the  housing  due  to  the  bearing  load  and  the  heating 

due to shear work in the  oil ﬁlm (thermo-elasto-hydrodynamic  lubrication  or  TEHL)  taken 

into consideration. The stiffness of the crankshaft, the housing, and the housing shape are 

determined using a ﬁnite element model and also entered into the program. This allows even 

more detailed results to be obtained for the oil ﬁlm thickness and the peak oil ﬁlm pressure 
(Figure 3.20). 

Figure 3.20: Summary of a SABRE-TEHL computation and example of animation of the oil film pres-
sure, shape, and temperature

3.4 Numerical simulation

61

The use of the elasto-hydrodynamic theory assumes lubrication, which takes into consid-

eration not only the hydrodynamic pressure but also the metal-to-metal contact pressure.

Evaluation criteria for these computation results include wear, peak oil ﬁlm pressure, power 

loss, oil ﬂow, and maximum temperature.

3.4.3  Additional CFD simulations

In  addition  to  the  previously  described  TEHL  method,  more  advanced  computations  are 

sometimes  needed  in  order  to  better  understand  the  environment  outside  of  the  bearing 

clearance and the inﬂuences of materials. One important tool in this context is computational 

ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) for computing the oil ﬂow out of the gallery, through the oil grooves of 

the main bearing, and through the crankshaft bores to the connecting rod bearing in the big 

end bore. At high engine speeds or low supply pressure in the gallery, for example, bubbles 

can form in the crankshaft bores and cause the big end bore of the conrod to be undersup-

plied with lubricant. CFD technology is also helpful for evaluating various groove geometries 
and assessing the risk of seizure due to undersupply of lubricant (Figure 3.21).

Figure 3.21: CFD computation for testing oil transport between bearing locations—bubble formation 
in the crankshaft bore 

62

3 Bearings

3.4.4  Interference and assembly simulations

The behavior of the bearings and bushings depends on how securely these components 

are installed in their housings. A proper ﬁt ensures that the component is held securely and 

provides  appropriate  heat  transfer  and  optimal  bearing  clearance.  The  routine  simulation 

is based on the theory of solid cylinders and uses automated ﬁnite element analysis (FEA) 

within  a  customized  analysis  program  named  SABRE-FIT-FEA.  The  data  entered  consist 

of  the  geometric  features  of  the  assembly  and  the  housing,  the  properties  of  the  bearing 

material, and the operating temperatures. The results are stresses and diametric overlaps or 

clearances at different temperatures.

A special FEA simulation can also be used for main bearings in order to investigate the inﬂu-
ence of housing oil grooves and the engine block (Figure 3.22).

Figure 3.22: Illustration of a routine and specialized simulation of the assembly of main bearings

3.5 Materials

3.5  Materials

63

Selection  criteria  for  bearing  materials  include  the  load  and  the  permissible  stress  of  the 

material. The load carrying capacity limits are determined for each material on the basis of 

simulations, bench tests, and engine testing. They are lower for main bearings, because of 

potential alignment errors. 

the geometric and material factors. 

For axial bearings, the selection of the material is based on empirical analysis, considering 

Composition and properties of bearing materials

Table 3.4: Aluminum alloys 

Descrip-
tion

Chemical composition of 
the core alloy  
[%]

Application/
properties

Process

Al

89

Sn

6

Si

2

Cu

1

MAS 
19

Other

Ni 1 
Mn < 1 
V < 1

Design

Minimum 
hardness 
(alloy/steel 
support shell)

Specific 
bearing 
load 
carrying 
capacity 
[MPa]

65

Cast alumi-
num alloy 
roll-bonded 
on steel

MAS 20: 
45–62 HV1–5  

Steel: 
155–235 HV10 

89

6

2

1

MAS 
20

Ni 1 
Mn < 1 
V < 1

Cast alumi-
num alloy 
roll-bonded 
on steel

MAS 20: 
58–72 HV1–5  

75

Steel: 
155–235 HV10 

Bimetal material 
with fine formation 
of the tin phase 
in an aluminum 
matrix, combined 
with an aluminum 
interlayer and 
roll-bonded onto a 
low-carbon steel 
support shell

Bimetal material 
with fine formation 
of the tin phase 
in an aluminum 
matrix, combined 
with an AlCu 
interlayer and 
roll-bonded onto a 
low-carbon steel 
back

Plain bear-
ings, bush-
ings, and 
thrust wash-
ers; medium 
load carrying 
capacity with 
high wear 
resistance 
and embed-
dability

Plain 
bearings, 
bushings, 
and thrust 
washers; high 
load carrying 
capacity with 
high wear 
resistance 
and embed-
dability

64

Table 3.5: Alloys of cast bronze (overlays, see Table 3.8)

Descrip-
tion

Chemical composi-
tion of the core alloy  
[%]

Application/
properties

Process

Minimum hard-
ness (alloy/steel 
support shell)

Sn

Other

Cu

78

Pb

20

2

MCB  
1

Bearing mate-
rial for trimetal 
bearings

Lead-bronze 
alloy cast on 
steel

75

23

2

MCB  
2

Bearing mate-
rial for trimetal 
bearings

Lead-bronze 
alloy cast on 
steel

80

10

10

MCB  
5

Bearing material 
for rod bushings

91

MCB  
17

4

Bi 4 
Ni 1

95

4

Bi 1

MCB 
18

Lead-free bear-
ing material for 
trimetal bearings 
with galvanically 
applied overlay or 
polymer overlay

Lead-free bear-
ing material for 
trimetal bearings 
with sputter 
overlay

Lead-bronze 
alloy cast on 
steel

Lead-free 
bronze cast 
on steel

Lead-free 
bronze cast 
on steel

91

MCB  
20

8

Ni 1

Lead-free bearing 
material for rod 
bushings

Lead-free 
bronze cast 
on steel

87

8

MCB 
25

Bi 4 
Ni 1

Lead-free 
bronze cast 
on steel

Lead-free bear-
ing material for 
rod bushings with 
improved corro-
sion and seizure 
resistance

MCB 1: 
70 – 110 HV5  
  
Stahl: 
121 – 195 HV10 
MCB 2: 
40 – 95 HV5  
 
Stahl: 
115 – 230 HV10
MCB 5: 
95 – 160 HV2,5–5  
 
Stahl: 
90 – 215 HV10
MCB 17: 
76 – 125 HV5  
 
Stahl: 
145 – 240 HV10

MCB 18: 
80 – 140 HV5  
 
Stahl: 
120 – 220 HV10

MCB 20: 
120 – 195 HV2,5–5  
 
Stahl: 
100 – 180 HV10
MCB 25: 
120 – 195 HV2,5–5  
 
Stahl: 
100 – 180 HV10

3 Bearings

Design

Specific 
bearing 
load  
carrying 
capacity  
[MPa]

See upper 
limit of 
overlay

Bimetal mate-
rial, copper-tin 
base material, 
cast on steel

See upper 
limit of 
overlay

Bimetal mate-
rial, copper-tin 
base material, 
cast on steel

130

See upper 
limit of 
overlay

See upper 
limit of 
overlay

See upper 
limit of 
overlay

Bimetal mate-
rial, copper-tin 
base material, 
cast on steel

Bimetal 
material with 
bismuth, 
copper-tin base 
material, cast 
on steel

Bimetal 
material with 
bismuth, 
copper-tin base 
material, cast 
on steel

Bimetal mate-
rial, copper-tin 
base material, 
cast on steel

See upper 
limit of 
overlay

Bimetal mate-
rial, copper-tin 
base material, 
cast on steel

3.5 Materials

Table 3.6: Sintered bronze alloys 

Descrip-
tion

Chemical composition of 
the core alloy  
[%]

Application/ 
properties

Process

Cu

80

Pb

10

Sn

10

Other

MSB  
10

Standard bronze for 
bushings

Minimum 
hardness 
(alloy/steel 
support shell)

Specific 
bearing 
load 
carrying 
capacity 
[MPa]

130

Lead-
bronze alloy 
sintered on 
steel

MSB 10: 
70–165 HV5 
Steel: 
105–165 HV10 

 

 

91

MSB  
20

8

Ni 1

Sintered lead-free 
material for bush-
ings with increased 
corrosion resistance

Lead-free 
bronze alloy 
sintered on 
hard steel

MSB 20: 
73–87 HV5  

150

91

MSB  
21

8

Ni 1

Sintered lead-free 
trimetal bearing 
material for polymer 
bearing layers

Lead-free 
bronze alloy 
sintered on 
hard steel

87

MSB  
30

8

Bi 3

Ni 1

Sintered lead-free 
material for bush-
ings with increased 
corrosion and wear 
resistance

Lead-free 
bronze alloy 
sintered on 
hard steel

Al2O3 < 1

See 
upper 
limit of 
overlay

150

Steel: 
105–165 HV10
MSB 21 
95–200 HV5  

Steel: 
170–220 HV10
MSB 30: 
95–200 HV5  

Steel: 
105–165 HV10

65

Design

Bimetal mate-
rial with consis-
tently formed 
lead phase, 
copper-tin 
base material, 
sintered on 
steel

Lead-free 
copper-tin 
Bimetal mate-
rial, sintered on 
steel

Lead-free 
copper-tin 
Bimetal mate-
rial, sintered on 
hard steel

Lead-free 
copper-tin 
Bimetal mate-
rial, sintered on 
steel

Design

Table 3.7: Galvanic bearing layers (overlays)

Descrip-
tion

Chemical composition of the core 
alloy  
[%]

Application/ 
properties

Process

Pb

87

Sn

10

Cu

3

In

1

P 3

Al

Other

P 5

85

10

5

Lead-based 
overlay for less 
demanding appli-
cations

Galvanic 
application

Lead-based over-
lay with improved 
wear resistance

Galvanic 
application

Specific 
bearing 
load 
carrying 
capacity 
[MPa]

70

75

Galvanically applied 
lead layer with homo-
geneously distributed 
copper-tin; with nickel 
interlayer

Galvanically applied 
lead layer with homo-
geneously distributed 
copper-tin; with nickel 
interlayer

66

Descrip-
tion

Chemical composition of the core 
alloy  
[%]

Application/ 
properties

Process

Pb

81

Sn

10

9

P 9

Cu

In

Al

Other

Q 1

92

8

C 1

88

11

C 2

75

10

14

Al2O3
1%

Al2O3
1%

T 5

99

1

Higher load  
carrying capacity 
for lead-based 
overlays

Galvanic 
application

High-performance 
gasoline and 
diesel engines

Galvanic 
application

Overlay with 
increased wear 
resistance for pas-
senger car diesel 
engines

Higher load carry-
ing capacity and 
wear resistance 
for passenger car 
diesel engines

Lead-free galvani-
cally applied layer 
for high-load 
applications

Galvanic 
application

Galvanic 
application

Galvanic 
application

3 Bearings

Design

Galvanically applied 
lead layer with homo-
geneously distributed 
copper-tin; with nickel 
interlayer

Galvanically applied 
lead layer with homo-
geneously distributed 
indium

Galvanically applied 
lead layer with homo-
geneously distributed 
aluminum oxide and 
local tin enrichment; with 
nickel interlayer

Galvanically applied 
lead-indium layer with 
homogeneously distrib-
uted aluminum oxide and 
local tin enrichment; with 
nickel interlayer

Galvanically applied tin 
layer with fine-grained 
structure; with nickel 
interlayer

Specific 
bearing 
load 
carrying 
capacity 
[MPa]

80

85

80

90

85

Specific 
bearing 
load 
carrying 
capacity 
[MPa]

85–105

Table 3.8: Polymer bearing layers (overlays)

Descrip-
tion

Chemical composition 
of the core alloy  
[%]

Application/properties

Process

Design

F1, 

F2, 

F3

PAI polymer matrix

Metal flakes

Solid lubricant

Lead-free polymer bearing 
layer for stop-start applica-
tions with high wear resis-
tance and seizure resistance

Polymer

Polymer layer with a 
homogeneous distribu-
tion of metal flakes and 
solid lubricant

3.6 Market requirements and technology trends

67

Table 3.9: Sputter bearing layers (overlays)

Description

Chemical composition of the 
core alloy  
[%]

Application/
properties

Process

Design

Specific 
bearing 
load 
carrying 
capacity 
[MPa]

Pb

Sn

Cu

In

Other

40

1

Al

59

Sputter

110

S1

S2

S3

30

1

69

Sputter

130

40

1

59

Sputter

130

Sputter overlay 
for passenger 
car diesel 
engines

Sputter overlay 
for high-
performance 
passenger car 
applications

High-
performance 
passenger car 
diesel engines

S10 (1st 
intermediate 
layer—2nd 
intermediate 
layer-bearing 
layer)

6

30

30

1

1

1

90

67

69

Ni 1 
Si 2

Fe 2

Top-perfor-
mance diesel 
engines for 
passenger 
cars

Sputter

130

Sputter aluminum-copper 
layer with fine homo-
geneously distributed 
tin phase; with nickel-
chromium interlayer

Sputter aluminum-copper 
layer with fine homo-
geneously distributed 
tin phase, with nickel-
chromium interlayer

Sputter aluminum-copper 
layer with fine homoge-
neously distributed tin 
phase, with aluminum-tin 
interlayer

Graded sputter aluminum-
copper layer with fine 
homogeneously distrib-
uted tin phase

3.6  Market requirements and technology trends

The goals of ongoing development of engines are higher speciﬁc power output, lower fuel 

consumption,  lower  emissions,  smaller  designs,  and  lower  costs.  These  result  in  greater 

demands on MAHLE engine components in terms of wear resistance, load carrying capac-
ity, and seizure resistance. Table 3.10 shows a summary of the effects of these goals on the 
bearing portfolio.

68

3 Bearings

Table 3.10: Market demands and regulatory goals for engine components

Engine trends

Effects on bearings

Effects on the opera-
ting characteristics of 
the engine

1. Regulatory goals

Emissions and  
particle reduction

Reduction of engine 
friction

Lower oil viscosity 
Stop-start

Increased wear,  
redesign

Reduction of engine 
weight

Lighter components, 
aluminum crankcase

Excessive housing 
deformation

Higher piston weight

Greater inertial load

Oil contamination

Increased wear

Gasoline direct  
injection

Exhaust gas  
recirculation

Increase in peak  
cylinder pressure

Greater mechanical 
loads

Greater loads

Noise

Less vibrations

Reinforced crankcase

Housing adaptation

Prohibited materials

Lead-free components

Lead-free materials

2. Customer demands

Higher performance

Greater air consump-
tion and greater blow-
by

Higher temperatures 
and engine speed

Overheating, higher 
inertial loads

Increase in peak  
cylinder pressure

Greater mechanical 
loads

Greater loads

Lower fuel  
consumption

Reduced engine  
friction, downsizing

Lower oil viscosity

Increased wear,  
redesign

Reduction of engine 
weight

Lighter components, 
aluminum crankcase

Excessive housing 
deformation

Gasoline direct  
injection

Higher piston weight

Increased inertial loads

Longer oil change 
intervals

Service life, reliability

Higher vehicle miles 
traveled

Oil contamination and 
aging

Increased wear,  
corrosion

Redesign

To meet these demands, the bearings were adapted in terms of dimensions and materials. 

High-strength aluminum alloys for bimetal bearings are newly developed for this purpose. 

New bearing layers for trimetal bearings and lead-free materials as a substitute for the tradi-

tional leaded bronze have also been introduced on the market. In the future, great additional 

potential can be expected from the new polymer bearing layers in particular.

4  Connecting rod 

4.1 

Introduction

69

The connecting rod connects the piston to the crankshaft and consists of the small end and 

big end bores as well as the shank. 

The rotation of the crankshaft induces a rotational motion of the big end bore, which has a 

bearing eccentric to the axis of the crankshaft. The small end bore follows the axial stroke 
motion of the piston in the cylinder (Figure 4.1). The connecting rod is thus a machine ele-
ment that transforms the axial motion of the piston into the rotation of the crankshaft.

The  space  covered  by  the  connecting  rod  during  one  revolution  of  the  crankshaft,  also 
known  as  the  conrod  sweep  (Figure  4.2),  must  be  considered  in  collision  studies  for  the 
crankcase and engine block.

Figure 4.1: Main motions of the 
piston-connecting rod system  
(vertical arrow: oscillating;  
circular motion: rotational)

Figure 4.2: Conrod sweep

4 Connecting rod 

While the small end bore is always closed, the big end bore is normally designed to come 
apart for assembly. Table 4.1 provides information about the different design details of con-
necting rods, but not about the interrelationship of individual details. The task of the designer 

is to determine the correct conﬁguration associated with the requirements proﬁle.

Figure 4.3 shows the important terminology and dimensions of a connecting rod.

Figure 4.3: Terminology and major dimensions of a connecting rod

71

4.2 Stresses

Area

Shank

Big end bore

Parting plane of  
big end bore

Blank production

Table 4.1: Types of connecting rods and design parameters

Small end bore

Parallel

Piston pin (small end bore)

Type

Stepped

Keystone

Fixed

H-section (motorsport)

Angle-split

Floating

I-section

Straight-split

Cracked

Machined flat, with dowel sleeve/fitting 
screw/dowels

Tooth profile

Forging

Casting

Powdered metal/sintering

4.2  Stresses

As the element that transfers forces and motions between the piston and the crankshaft, the 

connecting rod is subjected to large, alternating loads. The connecting rod is loaded by the 

piston in compression (under prevailing gas force) and in tension (primarily because of inertia 

force). The connecting rod is also stressed in bending as a result of its pivoting motion. As 

a moving engine component, it should be as light as possible and sufﬁciently stiff in shape 

in terms of interacting with the piston pin and the crankshaft pin. Sufﬁcient component and 

structural strength must also be ensured.

The  transmission  of  power  from  the  piston  and  piston  pin  via  the  connecting  rod  to  the 

crankshaft  is  achieved  by  the  lubrication  in  the  bearings.  The  force  applied  to  the  con-

necting  rod  is  therefore  dependent  on  the  pressure  distribution  in  the  lubricant.  This,  in 

turn, is affected by the stiffness of the conrod bores. The inertia force is held in equilibrium 

by the lubrication pressure between the crank-

shaft  pin  and  the  cap  side  bearing.  The  force 

ﬂow between the connecting rod and the bear-

ing cap is provided by the connecting rod bolts. 

The  conrod  bore  deforms  under  inertia  force 

with ovality in the vertical direction and the bolts 

are bent outward. If the bolt force is insufﬁcient, 

the connecting rod joint will gape on the inside; 
see Figure 4.4.

Figure 4.4:  

Deformation of the big end bore

72

4 Connecting rod 

Under maximum gas pressure, however, the connecting rod shank presses on the crank-

shaft  pin  via  the  lubrication.  The  connecting  rod  bore  becomes  transversely  oval  and  the 

bolts bend inward. As a result of these deformations, considerable bending stress occurs in 

the conrod bores. The most highly stressed areas in straight-split connecting rods, in addi-

tion to the bolt threads, are the ﬁllets on the transition from the shank to the big end bore 

and to the small end bore. With angle-split connecting rods, the upper part of the blind hole 
thread is located directly in the force ﬂow, which leads to a stress peak (Figure 4.7).

4.3  Requirements

Mass of the connecting rod

As a general principle, moving masses should be kept as small as possible, in order to help 

keep fuel consumption low and to reduce vibration excitation. Weight can be saved in the 

engine because of the lower overall height resulting from reduced connecting rod length. 

The changes to the lateral forces on the piston skirt, however, must be taken into consid-

eration. 

In order to maintain high running smoothness and low vibration levels, the rotating and oscil-

lating masses should match as closely as possible among the individual cylinders. The oscil-

lating mass portion is located on the piston side and the rotating portion is on the crankshaft 

side. There exist several potential ways to attain this goal.

The sintering method allows tolerances in raw sintered weight with a spread of less than 1%. 

MAHLE has comprehensively developed industrial engineering for forging connecting rods 
and signiﬁcantly reduced weight variation. The controlled, fully automated forging process 

thus allows a spread of less than 1% in the raw forging weight.

Another option is classiﬁcation. The oscillating and rotating masses of the ﬁnished connect-

ing rods are determined and the connecting rods are divided into different weight classes. 

For  this  purpose,  the  connecting  rod  is  weighed  horizontally  with  two  scales,  each  at  the 

center  point  of  the  small  end  and  big  end  bores.  The  value  at  the  small  end  bore  corre-
sponds to the oscillating mass, and that of the big end bore to the rotating mass (Figure 4.5).

When machining to weight, a weight slug is added on the big end bore (sometimes on the 

small end as well), which is milled off to adjust to the desired weight.

Only one connecting rod weight class is installed in a given engine. Because different diam-

eter classes are often required for the piston, depending on the ﬁnished cylinder diameter, 

the assembly unit consisting of the piston, piston rings, piston pin, circlips, and connecting 

rod is assembled directly in the engine for installation.

4.4 Big end bore

73

Figure 4.5:  
Distribution of moving masses 
of a connecting rod

4.4  Big end bore

The  diameter  of  the  big  end  bore  is  determined  from  the  crankshaft  pin  diameter  of  the 

crankshaft  and  the  bearing  wall  thickness.  The  critical  stress  for  the  big  end  bore  results 

from inertia force. The oscillating mass force loads the big end bore in tension, and the bore 

is ovally deformed along the longitudinal axis of the connecting rod. This results in bend-

ing stresses and transverse forces in the parting surface. It is important that the parting line 

remains closed under all operating points.

4.4.1  Cracking (fracture splitting)

Cracking, or fracture splitting, of connecting rods has become common practice in recent 

years. Nearly all new designs in series production today employ this method to create the 

parting in the big end bore. The big end bore is notched inside the bore with a laser beam 

or reamer. For sintered parts, the notch is pressed in during the manufacture of the blank. 

Using a cracking mandrel, the halves are then broken apart (cracked) hydraulically at room 
temperature  (Figure  4.6).  The  resulting  joint  face  (fracture  surface)  is  not  machined,  and 
dowel sleeves or ﬁtting screws are not needed. The ﬁt is provided solely by the engagement 

of the uneven surfaces. The fracture surfaces experience only minimal settling. In cracking, 

the fracture splitting ability of the connecting rod material is critical. Special steel materials 

with a yield point/tensile strength ratio of up to 0.75 are used.

74

4 Connecting rod 

Figure 4.6:  
Fracture surfaces of the big end bore, 
manufactured by cracking

4.4.2  Angle split of the big end bore

If the crankshaft has a large crankshaft pin diameter, the big end bore must be split at an 

angle in order to allow the connecting rod to be installed and removed through the cylinder 

liner. This leads to complex loading conditions in the parting joint.

In an angle-split connecting rod (Figure 4.7), the upper blind hole thread is particularly at risk, 
because it is located directly in the force ﬂow of the entire connecting rod. This is the area 

of alternating tensile and compressive loads, which are increased further by the notch effect 

of the thread, resulting in an increased risk of fracture. The cross section around this thread 

must therefore be dimensioned carefully.

Figure 4.7:  
Angle- or straight-split 
connecting rod and required 
clearance of the cylinder liner 
for identical crankshaft pin 
diameter

4.6 Small end bore

75

4.5  Connecting rod shank

Looking  at  the  shank  cross  section  in  pivoting  direction  (perpendicular  to  the  crankshaft 

axis), a differentiation is made between the I- and H-section. The latter is often used in racing 

engines because of the bending loads at high speeds. The I-section is preferred for mass-

production  engines  because  of  simpler  blank  production  and  thus  lower  costs  at  higher 

quantities.

The connecting rod shank is subjected to an alternating tension/compression load in four-

stroke engines (tension due to inertia force at TDC nonﬁred; compression due to gas force 

at TDC ﬁred). In addition to fatigue resistance, the connecting rod shank must also feature 

sufﬁcient buckling resistance. 

To  supply  oil  to  the  small  end  bore,  oil  can  be  fed  under  pressure  from  the  crankshaft 

through a bore along the length of the connecting rod shank.

4.6  Small end bore

4.6.1  Pin bearing in the small end bore

The small end bore accepts the piston pin and, together with the piston pin boss, forms the 

joint about which the connecting rod pivots.

In  a  ﬁxed-pin  connecting  rod,  the  piston  pin  is  shrink-ﬁt  in  the  small  end  bore  and  has 

clearance only in the piston pin boss. To assemble the piston pin, the small end bore is 

heated to approximately 400°C. This assembled unit can no longer be disassembled non-

destructively.

For a ﬂoating piston pin design, press-ﬁt bushings are used in the small end bore. The piston 

pin has clearance both in the connecting rod and in the piston pin boss. It must be held in 

the piston axially by piston pin circlips (Chapter 2.8) and can “ﬂoat” circumferentially on the 

oil ﬁlm. The piston boss can withstand higher loads because of the intensive lubrication, or a 

shorter piston pin can be used with the same load. In highly stressed engines, therefore, the 

piston pins have ﬂoating bearings.

The advantages and disadvantages of ﬁxed-pin connecting rods and ﬂoating piston pins are 
summarized in Table 4.2.

76

4 Connecting rod 

Table 4.2: Advantages and disadvantages of fixed-pin connecting rods and floating configurations for 
piston pins

Fixed pin connecting rod

Advantages

No circlip needed

Floating design

Advantages

Assembled unit can be disassembled

No sliding bearing needed in the connecting rod, 
such as a bushing

Lower weight due to greater load carrying 
capacity

Disadvantages

Disadvantages

Piston pin cannot be removed easily

Circlip grooves and circlips must be provided

Difficult to assemble piston pin

Locking devices must be assembled

Higher weight with longer piston pin, due to lower 
load carrying capacity

Connecting rod bushings generally required

4.6.2  Geometry of the connecting rod small end

Contact pressure, as a dimension for the bearing load in the small end bore, is derived from 

the gas force, pin diameter, and bearing length. It is generally greater than 100 MPa.

Gas  force,  as  the  highest  magnitude  load,  acts  only  in  the  direction  of  the  big  end  bore, 

which has led to the development of various types of support in the small end bore to meet 

requirements relating to load carrying capacity, weight, and cost.

The parallel connecting rod is the basic version and the easiest to use. It is the most eco-

nomical for manufacturing if the big end bore has the same width as the small end bore. 

Because  of  increasing  gas  pressures,  this  type  is  often  replaced  with  one  of  the  variants 

described below, whereby the lower part of the small end bore, which is subjected to the 
gas force, is wider than the upper part, which is subjected only to inertia forces (Figure 4.8).

Figure 4.8: 
Cross-sectional shapes of the 
small end bore
Left: parallel connecting rod 
Middle: tapered connecting rod
Right: stepped connecting rod

4.6 Small end bore

77

The tapered connecting rod is slanted at the small end bore and thus gets wider in the direc-

tion of the connecting rod shank. The piston pin boss is adapted accordingly, in order to 

reduce contact pressure here as well. During design, particular care must be taken to ensure 

that the distance between the connecting rod and the piston pin boss in the direction of the 
piston pin axis is reduced when the connecting rod pivots (Figure 4.8). 

The stepped connecting rod presents the greatest challenge to the manufacturing process. 

However, it best combines load carrying capacity and shape. During design, here again, it 
must  be  ensured  that  the  connecting  rod  does  not  collide  with  the  piston  when  it  pivots 
(Figure 4.8).

4.6.3  Lubrication of the small end bore

Oil is sprayed onto the bottom side of the piston through spray nozzles in the crankcase in 

order to dissipate heat absorbed by the piston. This oil drips onto the small end bore and 

moves laterally or through oil bores into the lubricant gap between the piston pin and the 

bore.

If  the  amount  of  lubricating  oil  coming  from 

the  piston  is  not  sufﬁcient,  then  oil  is  fed  into 

the lubricant gap, starting from the crankshaft, 
through a bore in the shank (Figure 4.9).

This design is used primarily in connecting rods 

for  commercial  vehicle  diesel  engines,  which 

are run at low speeds and have sufﬁcient space 

for the oil bore because of the cross-sectional 
area of the shank. This measure is independent 

of  the  use  of  a  bearing  bush  in  the  small  end 

bore.

Figure 4.9: 
Oil bore in the shank

78

4 Connecting rod 

4.6.4  Bushingless pin bearing in the small end bore

By eliminating the bearing bush, the wall thickness in the small end bore can be reduced. 

This solution reduces oscillating masses, which is of increasing importance in terms of run-

ning smoothness and fuel consumption. The trend for passenger car engines is therefore 

toward bushingless pin bearings. Good lubrication of the small end bore is critical for this 

concept. Various measures are available for improving tribological behavior. They are deﬁned 

as a function of the contact pressure in the conrod bore:

■  The bore is designed as a shaped pin bore, where the bore tapers off to the sides (Figure 
4.10).This prevents the piston pin, which bends under the maximum gas pressure, from 
making contact with the edge of the connecting rod and consequently seizing.

Figure 4.10: Shape optimization of the small end bore, without bushing

■  Specialized mechanical processing, such as roller-burnishing, can harden the surface and 

produce a deﬁned surface roughness. The goal is to prevent peaks in the surface structure 

that would contribute to seizing, and to obtain valleys in which oil collects.

■  Another possibility is the use of oil pockets in the area of transition to the bore (Figure 4.11). 
These recesses are already produced within the forging. Oil collects in the pockets and is 

drawn into the lubricant gap by the capillary effect.

4.7 Guiding the connecting rod

79

Figure 4.11: 
Oil pockets for improving lubrication

■  A manganese-phosphate layer acts as a protective coating for the run-in phase. The peaks 

resulting from surface roughness are covered, thus preventing seizure from occurring. As 

the service life increases, the bore smoothes out and the durability of the running surfaces 

is ensured.

4.7  Guiding the connecting rod

The connecting rod is typically guided axially (in the direction of the crankshaft) by the big 
end bore on the crank web. This is referred to as “bottom-guided” (Figure 4.12). 

Figure 4.12:
“Bottom-guided” connecting rod

80

4 Connecting rod 

Figure 4.13: 
“Top-guided” connecting rod

In some cases, the guidance is provided by the piston and the small end bore (“top-guided”); 
Figure 4.13. To this end, the piston is provided with a surface against which the small end 
bore runs and the clearance is reduced to about 25 μm.

As a result, the need for thrust washers on the crankshaft is eliminated and the length of the 

piston pin can be reduced. This leads to a reduction in weight relative to the “bottom-guided” 

variant. Because of the smaller thrust surfaces, lower friction losses occur.

The disadvantage is that motions and vibrations from the crankshaft are transmitted directly 

into the piston. The lubrication conditions in the small bore are also worsened, because less 

oil travels through the narrow gap between the connecting rod and the piston.

4.8  FE analysis of the connecting rod

4.8.1  Modeling

The starting point of every FE analysis is modeling, i.e., the partitioning of the affected struc-

ture  into  many  volume  elements.  The  FE  model  includes,  in  addition  to  the  big  end  bore 

with  the  bearing  cap,  the  bearing  shells,  bolts,  and  the  piston  pin,  as  well  as  a  suitable 
replacement model for the piston and the crankshaft (Figure 4.14). Modeling of all individual 
components is realized as a three-dimensional structure including all signiﬁcant details, with 

only minor simpliﬁcations (e.g., screw threads). Symmetrical models can be used to limit the 

modeling effort for connecting rods for in-line engines. For V-type engine connecting rods, it 

depends on the number of asymmetries present and is determined for individual cases. The 

assembled structure is ﬁxed for the analysis solely by means of contact boundary conditions. 

4.8 FE analysis of the connecting rod

81

Figure 4.14: 
Three-dimensional FE model of the connecting 
rod of a passenger car gasoline engine with 
bolts, bearing shells, and piston pin, as well as a 
substitute piston model for load application

Direct securing in position of the connecting rod structure is avoided because it would lead 

to overconstraint of the conditions at the restraint points. The assignment of material char-

acteristic values concludes the modeling process.

4.8.2  Stresses from assembly

The  ﬁrst  load  case  is  bolt  pretensioning,  which  results  from  the  assembly  of  the  bearing 

cap to the connecting rod shank. A prerequisite for realistic determination of the resulting 

stresses is the consideration of the geometry of the bolt shank, the joint face shape (cracked 

or machined joint face) and the centering of the joint face, the bolt contact face, thread depth 

(number of load-bearing thread turns), and bearing crush.

82

4.8.2.1  Bolt force

4 Connecting rod 

Analogous to the speciﬁcation for tightening the connecting rod bolts, the load on the bolt 

joint is prescribed for the assembly simulation. In an iterative process, the extension and thus 

the stress in the bolt shaft is varied until the prescribed pretensioning force of the connection 

has been reached. The yield point of the bolt material generally limits the amount of preten-

sioning force. In some cases, however, the contact pressure on the bearing cap in the area 

of the bolt contact face can be the limiting factor.

As a reaction to the bolt force, the big end bore deforms into an out-of-round blind bore 
(Figure 4.15).

In  the  connecting  rod  manufacturing  process,  a  round  blind  bore  is  generated  by  ﬁnish 

machining in the bolted state. It ensures ideal geometry for this highly stressed bearing point. 

This manufacturing process is also recreated in the simulation by a suitable procedure. This 

is necessary in order to prevent any prohibited stress increases in the contact zones in the 

subsequent steps of representing the operating loads.

Figure 4.15:  
Representation of deformation of the blind bore 
of the big end after connecting rod bolts have 
been tightened

4.8.2.2  Bushings, bearings, and shrink fit

For the typical plain bearing of the big end bore on the crankshaft, split bearing shells with 

deﬁned crush height are used for positioning and securing during operation. The bushing 

in the small end bore, or shrink-ﬁt piston pin in the small end bore, generates stresses due 

to overlap. This overlap in the bearing shells, piston pins, or bushings is represented in the 

simulation by appropriate contact boundary conditions. The resulting static stresses are later 

combined with the dynamic stresses from operating load.

4.8 FE analysis of the connecting rod

83

4.8.3  Stresses from engine operation

It follows from the kinematics of the crank mechanism that the piston, together with the small 

end bore and the piston pin, performs an oscillating motion, and the big end bore with the 

crankshaft pin on the crankshaft primarily performs a rotational motion. The displacement 

of the big end bore leads to a pivoting motion of the connecting rod. The measure of the 

pivot angle of the connecting rod is determined by the geometric dimensions of the crank 

mechanism (crank radius and length of connecting rod).

The pivot motion of the connecting rod leads to alternating transverse acceleration of both the 
big and small end bores, with an approximately sinusoidal curve (Figure 4.16). The lift motion 
of the connecting rod leads to a longitudinal acceleration, which also features a modiﬁed sinu-

soidal curve. The stroke-connecting rod ratio of the crank mechanism (crank radius to length 

of connecting rod) determines the degree of deviation from the sinusoidal curve and leads 

to the acceleration at the top dead center being greater than that at the bottom dead center. 

The two accelerations would be equal only in the case of an inﬁnitely long connecting rod.

In order to translate the dynamic operating loads on the connecting rod into suitable bound-

ary conditions for a static structural analysis, different load cases that can occur during one 

or two crankshaft revolutions (depending on the working principle, two- or four-stroke) are 

captured and applied to the structure in the form of quasi-static boundary conditions.

Figure 4.16:  
Curve of acceleration due 
to gas and inertia forces for 
a passenger car gasoline 
engine in a four-stroke com-
bustion cycle

84

4 Connecting rod 

■  For  the  simulation  of  the  load  at  TDC  ﬁred  (top  dead  center  in  the  expansion  stroke, 

the maximum of the combustion chamber pressure is generally applied, so that a slight 

displacement of the gas force maximum can occur, compared with the representation in 

Figure 4.16. The relief of the structure due to the inertia force directed opposite the gas 

■  Only the inertia force, without any combustion chamber pressure load, is therefore used 

force is taken into consideration.

accordingly at the TDC nonﬁred.

■  In order to calculate the load due to transverse acceleration, the respective maxima from 

the transverse acceleration curve for both the small end bore and the big end bore are 

applied  in  combination  with  the  effective  combustion  chamber  pressure  at  the  corre-

sponding point in time.

The individual loads mentioned are combined appropriately to obtain a complete represen-

tation of the operating load. Ten relevant load cases are the result. Depending on the engine 

type, there are different weightings of the individual load cases: 

■  For passenger car diesel engines, the gas force load on the connecting rod dominates, 

whereas the load due to transverse acceleration is very small relative to the gas force load 

and can be neglected.

■  For passenger car gasoline engines, likewise, the gas force load on the connecting rod 

dominates,  while  the  load  due  to  transverse  acceleration  is  small  for  the  typical  speed 

range (up to about 8,000 rpm) and therefore negligible in general.

■  For high-speed sport and racing engines, the inertia forces are critical and the loads due 

to longitudinal and transverse acceleration are correspondingly high. Particularly at very 

high speeds, the inertia forces can exceed the load due to gas force, and the greatest load 

magnitude can result, for example, from the transverse acceleration.

4.8.3.1 Gas force

An example of the resulting comparative stresses on the connecting rod structure of a pas-

senger car gasoline engine, under combined assembly, gas, and inertia force loads at the 
design speed at TDC ﬁred, is shown in Figure 4.17.

High stress can be detected on the connecting rod. The location with the minimum cross sec-

tion establishes the limits of pure compressive capacity. Analyses of the buckling resistance 

of the connecting rod shank must also be carried out, as the maximum load carrying capacity 

can be further reduced if the buckling resistance is not sufﬁcient. Modern combustion pro-

cesses in gasoline engines increase the risk of premature ignition and knocking, which leads 

to a brief, substantial increase in the pressure load on the connecting rod. These pressure 

peaks must be considered when computing resistance to buckling. Other locations with high 

static loading are the areas of bolt force application. The local material creeping that typically 

results in the bolt thread and in the area of the bolt contact face leads to redistribution and 

smoothing of the load. Owing to the pulsating gas force load, the transitions from the con-

necting rod shank to the big and small end bores are dynamically highly loaded locations. 

The limits of the operational strength of the connecting rod, in terms of service life, ultimately 

result from this consideration.

4.8 FE analysis of the connecting rod

85

Figure 4.17:  
Comparative stresses on the connecting rod 
structure under combined assembly, gas, and 
inertia force loads at the design speed at TDC 
fired

4.8.3.2 Inertial force

The  comparative  stresses  on  the  connecting  rod  structure  of  a  passenger  car  gasoline 

engine, under combined assembly and inertia force loads at the design speed at TDC non-
ﬁred, is shown in Figure 4.18. 

Dynamically highly loaded locations from alternating inertial force loads, once again, are the 

transitions from the connecting rod shank to the big and small end bores. The effect of the 

inertia force at the TDC nonﬁred leads to an oval deformation of the conrod bores. The result-

ing bending load must be borne by the structure at the small end bore and by the screw 

joint at the big end bore. In addition to the requirements in terms of operational strength, the 

effects on bearing clearance play a primary role. To limit deformations, larger cross sections 

may be required than would otherwise be necessary for strength reasons to ensure fatigue 

resistance. Greater bearing eccentricity may also be called for (cf. Section 3.3.4). 

86

4 Connecting rod 

Figure 4.18:  
Comparative stresses on the connecting rod 
structure under combined assembly and inertia 
force loads at design speed at the TDC nonfired

As a further aspect, dynamic gaping of the joint face at the big end bore must be investigated 

for minimum screw force and maximum inertia force in the TDC nonﬁred. Gaping must not 

occur, or has to be minimal, in edge areas, i.e., contact pressure must not reach zero. See 
Figure 4.19. Otherwise, suitable measures to increase contact pressure are needed, such as 
greater bolt pretensioning forces or a reduced joint face surface area.

Figure 4.20 shows the comparative stresses in the connecting rod structure of a series pas-
senger  car  gasoline  engine  under  combined  assembly,  gas,  and  inertia  force  loads  at  the 

design  speed,  at  the  point  of  maximum  transverse  acceleration  of  the  big  end  bore.  This 

results in only minor bending loads on the connecting rod shank. Bending loads on the con-

necting rod shank resulting from the maximum transverse acceleration at the small end bore 

are also low. 

4.8 FE analysis of the connecting rod

87

Figure 4.19:  
Contact pressure distribution for investigation 
of gaping in the joint face of the big end bore 
at maximum inertia force loading at the TDC 
nonfired

Figure 4.20:  
Comparative stresses in the connecting rod 
structure under combined assembly, gas, and 
inertia force loads at design speed at the point 
of maximum transverse acceleration of the big 
end bore

88

4 Connecting rod 

Since the maximum transverse acceleration at the small end bore occurs in an early crank 

angle range, near the TDC ﬁred and TDC nonﬁred, the longitudinal load on the structure 

due to gas force dominates once again. It should be noted, however, that these statements 

apply  exclusively  to  normal  operating  speeds  for  mass-production  engines  (up  to  about 

8,000 rpm for gasoline and 5,000 rpm for diesel), but not for the very high speeds of racing 

engines (up to about 20,000 rpm). The greater the rpm level, the more dominant the loads 

due to inertia forces come to be, until ﬁnally they become the largest operating load on the 

connecting rod.

4.9  Component testing of the connecting rod

Connecting rods, like all other components of a combustion engine, must reliably bear the 

highest loads that can occur during operation. These occur over the entire rpm range when 

operating under full load.

Testing of component and operational strength is intended to demonstrate that, even consid-

ering variability in material strength and the manufacturing process (raw forging, machining, 

surface treatment, assembly, etc.), the component meets all strength requirements.

The primary stress in tension and compression due to the oscillating inertia force and gas 
pressure occurs in the axial direction of the connecting rod shank (rod force FSt). For high-
rpm engines, the bending stresses occurring in the plane of motion of the connecting rod, 

arising from the rotating masses, must not be neglected.

Additional, not insigniﬁcant bending moments can act on the connecting rod as a result of 

production tolerances, installation conditions, and deformations of the crankshaft and the 

housing.

Typically, component testing of the connecting rod under alternating tension/compression 

loads is performed on resonance pulsators or servohydraulic testing machines. When deter-

mining the load horizon, it must be taken into consideration that owing to mass distribution 

over the length of the connecting rod, different load conditions R (R = underload/overload) 
and thus different average stresses can arise during engine operation (Figure 4.21).

When determining boundary conditions, execution, evaluation, and statistical evaluation of 

component tests of this type, various engine manufacturers have speciﬁc procedures, based 

on longstanding experience.

The maximum value occurring during the expansion stroke is always used for the gas force. 

The inertia force has different values, depending on the engine speed. At MAHLE, the pulsa-

tor tests are always carried out using the highest resulting values. This means that the load 

amplitudes  applied  in  the  pulsator  test  are  made  up  of  values  that  would  not  necessarily 

occur at the same speed.

4.9 Component testing of the connecting rod

89

Figure 4.21: Pulsator testing of a connecting rod (R: load ratio; FSt: rod force)

The required data are determined in that, analogous to Figure 4.22, the curve of gas force 
(blue) and inertia force (red) is calculated for different engine speeds, in this case for a four-
stroke engine. The resulting sum curve (green), which represents the rod force (FSt) curve, 
yields maxima and minima, which are marked here as points 1 and 2. 

These are shown in the diagram in Figure 4.23 as a function of the engine speed. It shows 
the curve for maximum inertia force (upper curve) and maximum gas force (lower curve), 
where points 3 and 4 indicate the largest value FSt max and the smallest value FSt min of the 
rod force FSt.

The following applies for the pulsator tests:

=

0 5.

⋅

(

F
Stmax

−

F
Stmin

)  

F
a
 

F
m

=

0 5.

⋅

(

F
Stmax

+

F
Stmin

)  

 
R

F
= Stmin
F
Stmax

Load amplitude                                            (4-1)

Mean load                                                   (4-2) 

Load ratio                                                    (4-3)

90

4 Connecting rod 

Figure 4.22:  
Calculated rod forces in a 
connecting rod over an oper-
ating cycle of 720 degrees of 
angle at constant speed, such 
as n1

Figure 4.23:  
Rod forces in a connecting 
rod as a function of engine 
speed

The staircase method has been tried and tested for rapid and cost-effective determination 
of the Wöhler line (Figure 4.24). Using a load amplitude near the expected median of the 
transition range, the ﬁrst sample is tested. If the sample does not fracture, then the load for 

the next samples is increased with a constant step width, until fracture occurs. The load is 

then reduced stepwise until no further fracture occurs. The method very quickly centers on 

the average value.

A clear combination of the load map in the engine, with lab results of component fatigue 
resistance, is shown in the Haigh diagram (Figure 4.25).

4.9 Component testing of the connecting rod

91

Figure  4.24:  Component  Wöhler  lines  for  a  connecting  rod,  determined  according  to  the  staircase 
method (PÜ: probability of survival at 10, 50, 90%, FD50%: average service life, PÜ: 50%)

Figure 4.25: Operating loads on a connecting rod in a Haigh diagram

92

4 Connecting rod 

The safety factor j is determined from the quotient of

j = Fatigue resistance
 
Operating load

(4-4)

The  required  minimum  value  is  dependent,  among  other  things,  on  the  required  survival 

probability, the spread, the targeted probability of failure, and the ﬁeld of application. 

In  addition  to  the  pulsator  tests  already  described,  special  ﬁxtures  are  used  to  apply,  for 

example, bending loads. Motored tests are also carried out at excessive speeds on a stripped 

engine, using an external drive.

4.10   Materials

4.10.1  Steels for forged connecting rods

In the past, heat-treated steels were primarily used for connecting rods. In the 1980s, these 

were increasingly replaced with precipitation-hardened ferritic-perlitic steels. 

With the development of the fracture splitting method (Section 4.4.1), the steel C70S6BY was 

introduced in the mid-90s as a series material for connecting rods. This material is air-cooled 

immediately after hot forging, like a precipitation-hardened ferritic-perlitic steel, and has the 

typical advantages of these steels, such as the elimination of additional heat treatment, low 

distortion,  cost-effective  machinability,  and  good  fracture  splitting  ability.  The  structure  is 

nearly perlitic, with a small ferrite fraction at grain boundaries. The high perlite fraction sup-

ports the formation of brittle fracture  surfaces  during  cracking,  which  provide  an  exact  ﬁt 

between the upper and lower parts thanks to their crystalline fracture microstructure. 

Increasing combustion pressures and the demand for weight reduction call for the use of 

higher-strength steel grades, while the requirements for fracture splitting must still be met. 

The material 46MnVS6mod provides a higher yield point, without degrading fracture splitting 

ability, which enables an increase of approximately 25% in the design strength of compo-

nents compared with C70S6BY. These improved mechanical properties have been achieved 

by increasing the nitrogen and vanadium content and thus the associated precipitation hard-

ening  that  is  typical  of  precipitation-hardened  ferritic-perlitic  steels.  It  is  characterized  by 

the formation of ﬁnely distributed vanadium-carbonitride precipitation during cooling of the 

forging  from  the  heat  of  deformation.  The  microstructure  is  ferritic-perlitic  and  the  ferrite 

fraction is greater than that of C70S6BY, owing to the lower carbon content. Machinability is 

improved in comparison with C70S6BY.

4.11 Connecting rod bolting

93

For the material C70S6BY, increasing the vanadium content can increase precipitation hard-

ening. This material is referred to as 70MnVS4. The increase in strength affects the yield point 

and the tensile strength equally. Because the tensile strength should not exceed 1,200 MPa 

for reasons of machinability, the increase in strength is limited to this value.

4.10.2  Sinter-forged connecting rods

As  an  alternative  to  forged  steel  connecting  rods,  connecting  rods  can  be  produced  in 

a  powder-metallurgical  process.  In  this  case,  a  downstream  forging  process  is  used  to 

reduce porosity (sinter forging process). The material used, 3Cu6C, has a carbon content 

of 0.50–0.60%. The increase in strength is achieved by alloying copper at up to 3.25%. With 

respect to fatigue resistance, this material is at the level of 70MnVS4. For process-related 

reasons,  the  use  of  sinter-forged  connecting  rods  is  limited  to  passenger  car  engines. 

Forged steel connecting rods are used for highly loaded gasoline engines and diesel con-

necting rods.

4.11   Connecting rod bolting

4.11.1  Requirements for connecting rod bolting

The  connection  of  the  conrod  cap  to  the  connecting  rod  shank  is  a  typical  example  of  a 

dynamically  and  eccentrically  loaded  bolt  joint.  It  transfers  inertia  forces  from  the  piston, 

piston rings, piston pin, and connecting rod to the crankshaft pin on the crankshaft. In the 

process, the forces must be guided around the crankshaft pin. Therefore, in addition to axial 

loads, transverse forces and bending moments act on the bolt joint. Additionally, as a result 

of gas forces in the combustion chamber, deformations occur in the big end bore, which 

causes additional transverse forces in the joint face, particularly for connecting rods with an 

angle-split big end bore. These boundary conditions lead to dynamic stress in the connect-

ing rod bolts in the longitudinal and transverse directions. To reliably support these stresses, 

high clamping forces are required. 

In addition, the bolt joint has to support the forces for ﬁxing the bearing shells. The force 

required  to  generate  the  overlap  from  the  bearing  crush  must  also  be  considered  in  the 

analysis of the pretensioning force of the connecting rod bolts. 

Variations in the pretensioning force should be small, because otherwise undesired shape 

deviations can occur in the connecting rod bearing. The stress state during machining of 

the bearing housing, and later during connecting rod assembly in the engine, must therefore 

94

4 Connecting rod 

be nearly identical, because otherwise the different bolt forces can cause deviations in the 

roundness of the bearing that negatively affect the function of the bearing. 

This makes it necessary to use bolts with high material strength and assembly methods that 

take as much advantage of the material as possible, up to the yield point, such as the torque/

angle method or yield point method. For bolts that are tightened beyond the yield point, the 

permissible number of times they can be tightened is limited. In some cases, new bolts must 

be used for repeated assembly.

4.11.2  Design and analysis of connecting rod bolting

The design of connecting rod bolts is made on the basis of guideline VDI 2230. It provides 

general instructions for the analysis of a bolt joint. The derivation of the operating forces on 

the bolt joint, which result substantially from the inertia force loading due to the masses of 

the connecting rod and the piston, is not included in this guideline. 

Using an analysis method for a closed circular ring model (big end bore), the relevant oper-

ating loads (lateral force, transverse force, and bending moment) can be determined in the 
parting plane of the big end bore (Figure 4.26). The calculation of the stresses in the bolt 
joint uses the maximum tensile load, which is deﬁned in the connecting rod direction by the 

inertia force at the top dead center. 

Starting from the operating load (lateral force, transverse force, bending moment), the sys-

tematic calculation steps can be carried out on the basis of guideline VDI 2230. The elastic 

compliances of the bolts and tensioned parts (stepped bending bodies) are determined and 

the operationally reliable function of the bolt joint is demonstrated.

Figure 4.26:  
Calculated forces in the 
parting plane of the big 
end bore

■  bolt pretensioning force due to assembly (min., max.) for yield point tightening or rotation 

4.11 Connecting rod bolting

The results are

angle tightening (superelastic); 

■  tightening torque (min., max.);

■  contact pressure on the bolt contact face;

95

■  required clamping force/bolt pretensioning force to prevent partial gaping of the joint face, 

considering the clamping force of the bearing shells;

■  operating force/engine speed at the start of gaping in the joint face;

■  demonstration of durability, stress amplitude (including bending) at the threads, even for 

the case of partial gaping at the joint face;

■  required minimum engagement depth of the thread (nut height).

4.11.3  Shape of the connecting rod bolts

The connecting rod bolt joint can be designed as a through hole or tapped blind hole (blind 

hole with reduced notch effect). The through-bolt with threaded bolts and nuts on both sides, 

or with a headed bolt and a nut, is mainly used for connecting rods in large-bore engines. 

In passenger car and commercial vehicle engines, a tapped blind hole using headed bolts 

is typical.

Connecting rod bolts for passenger car and commercial vehicle engines are designed as 

bolts with or without a waisted shank, partially or fully threaded, and with or without grooves. 

Typical head shapes include hex, double-hex, and multitooth, used with external force appli-
cation (Figure 4.27). Bolt strength, Rm ranges from about 800 MPa to over 1,400 MPa in 

Figure 4.27: Connecting rod bolt design types

96

4 Connecting rod 

exceptional cases. The yield point ratio Rp0.2/Rm is greater than 0.9. In order to achieve as 
great a thread service life as possible, the threads are rolled after heat treatment.

Displacements at the joint face can lead to autonomous loosening of a connecting rod bolt 

after just a short period of operation, due to settling and wear. They must be avoided without 

fail. The connecting rod cap and connecting rod have a form-ﬁt connection for reliable ﬁxa-

tion. Bolts with a dowel ﬁt or knurl, centering sleeves, pins in ﬂat parting surfaces, toothed 

parting surfaces, or, as is now typical for passenger car and commercial vehicle connecting 
rods, fracture parting surfaces (cracking) are used. 

In the design of the bolt joint, care must be taken that the bolts are as close as possible to the 

crankshaft pin. This reduces the risk of gaping in the joint face and reduces bending stress. 

In angle-split connecting rods, the thread at the higher location in the big end bore is directly 

in the force ﬂow. Measures must therefore be taken in many cases to increase component 

strength at the thread exit. The tip of the core hole should have radii and the thread should 

be rolled in order to further reduce the notch effect.

5  Crankcase and cylinder liners 

97

5.1 

Introduction

The crankcase is the central component of the combustion engine, containing and connect-

ing the functional groups of the crank mechanism, and forms a system boundary that seals 

off the combustion engine externally. It prevents exit of the working medium, coolant, and 

lubricant, and the entry of moisture and dirt. The crankcase must make use of the available 

installation space with the prerequisite of sufﬁcient structural stiffness and with respect to the 

shape accuracy of the bearing and cylinder bores as well as the cylinder ﬁt (for replaceable 

cylinder liners), with component mass as low as possible.

Crankcases bear the internal forces and moments and transfer them to the engine mounts. 

They need to withstand external forces, such as

■  forces from add-on parts; 

■  radial and axial forces from the machine being driven (supporting forces and axial load);

■  forces through the engine mounts (e.g. for offroad travel or boat travel with severe waves);

■  assembly forces; and

■  forces due to thermal expansion.

The type of crankcase is based on the size and application of the engine, the working pro-

cess (four-stroke or two-stroke), the type of cooling (water/air), the number of cylinders, their 

design and arrangement, the material, and production process. 

A crankcase consists of bearing panels, the side and end walls, cylinder surfaces or liners, 
and, depending on the design, an upper cover plate. The bearing panels support the crank-

shaft and, in some commercial vehicle engines, the camshaft(s). It also contains channels for 

coolant and lubricant (“galleries”) and the coolant spaces. The case is closed at the bottom 

by an oil pan and at the top by the cylinder head. The lower opening entails a loss of struc-

tural stiffness for the crankcase. The consequences of this, such as vibrations and deforma-

tion, can be compensated for with numerous design measures.

5.1.1  Forces and stresses

The gas pressure in the combustion chamber acts both on the cylinder head, which transfers 

the force via the cylinder head bolts to the crankcase bearing panel, and on the bearing caps 

via the crankshaft, which are also attached to the bearing panel by bearing cap screws. The 

force ﬂow is thus closed. The crank case wall is dynamically loaded in tension. The cylinder 

head bolts are arranged around the cylinders and the cylinder block, and the forces of the 

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

bolts in the area of the bearing panel can be guided directly into it. The forces of the bolts 

in the area of the crank circle plane must be guided to the bearing panel by special design 

measures, such as tension bands, ﬁns, and belts.

The redirection of the forces into the crankcase bearing panel causes additional stresses. 

Deformations of the cylinder bore as a result of assembly, thermal, and operational forces 

can degrade the nominal piston clearance. Deformation of the bores for the crankshaft bear-

ings by the forces in the housing can reach the order of magnitude of the bearing clearance. 
Detailed CAE analyses (thermomechanical analyses) can support the design process and 

minimize these problems accordingly.

5.1.2  Development goals

In line with fuel consumption and emission goals planned for the future, the power-to-weight 

ratio of the combustion engine must be minimized (lightweight design concept). Weight is 

not only a cost factor, but it also affects fuel consumption values proportionally, with cor-

responding effects on emissions.

Comparing the density of cast iron, at about 7.3 g/cm3, with that of aluminum alloys, at about 
2.7 g/cm3, a mass reduction of about 45–55% results for aluminum crankcases, depending 
on the construction and integration of accessory equipment. The lower stiffness of alumi-

num, however, requires an adapted design, which signiﬁcantly reduces the mass advantage.

5.2  Types of crankcases

The following types of crankcases are distinguished, depending on the type of connection of 

the cylinder liners or cylinder surfaces:
■  Open-deck design (Figure 5.1). The case can be produced in high-pressure die casting.
■  Closed-deck design (Figure 5.2). This design requires complex sand cores for the water 
jacket and can be produced in gravity die casting or low-pressure die casting for light alloy 

designs. The closed-deck design is a more compact and stiffer construction. 

In addition to these designs, the types are divided into the so-called skirted block (Figure 
5.3), where the side walls (skirts) are drawn downward over the main bearing bridge, and 
the two-piece design, with an upper crankcase and a lower crankcase (also called bearing 
traverse or bed plate). See Figure 5.4).

To  prevent  deformation  of  the  cylinder  surfaces,  special  design  measures  are  necessary, 

which also applies to cylinder tubes cast together in the direction of the crankshaft, known 

as the Siamese variant.

5.2 Types of crankcases

99

Figure 5.1: Crankcase with open-deck design

Figure 5.2: Crankcase with closed-deck design

Figure 5.3: Crankcase as skirted block

Figure  5.4:  Crankcase  with  two-piece  design 
block and bed plate

5.2.1  Methods for attenuating noise emissions

The crankcase is both a source and a transmitter of noise and vibration. The sources include

■  broadband combustion noises; 

■  piston noises; 

■  natural vibrations of add-on parts;

■  natural vibrations of the unit.

■  vibration excitement of the crank mechanism and valve train;

These noises and vibrations are transferred through the structure of the crankcase. Excita-

tion of the exterior surfaces causes noise to be emitted. The excitation is also transmitted to 

the vehicle structure via the engine mounts.

100

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

To reduce this vibration and noise emission, larger ﬂat surfaces must be avoided or stiffened 

by  appropriate  ribbing,  and  the  bending  and  torsional  stiffness  of  the  crankcase  must  be 

optimized.  This  applies  particularly  to  aluminum  crankcases,  which  must  either  be  ribbed 
(Figure 5.5, left) or come in a two-piece design (Figure 5.4). Oil pans and stiffening plates 
contribute to the bending and torsional stiffness of the overall structure. Transmission mount-

ing ﬂanges and engine mounting locations are also stiffened using ribs.

Cast  iron  crankcases  have  a  signiﬁcant  advantage  over  those  made  of  aluminum  (better 
acoustic  behavior,  lower  distortion),  due  to  their  higher  density,  higher  Young’s  modulus, 

and  better  damping  properties.  Cast  iron  crankcases  exhibit  less  ribbing  for  this  reason 
(Figure 5.5, right).

Figure 5.5: Segments of crankcases, made of aluminum material on the left, of ferrous material on the 
right

5.2.2  Main bearing seats

The main bearing seats are subject to particularly high loads within the crankcase. When 

creating the design layout, care must be taken to ensure that no local stress peaks occur 
(Figure 5.6). The bearing seats typically contain threaded holes for mounting the main bear-
ing cap, holes for bay to bay breather, and oil grooves and galleries.

In  high-performance  engines,  the  use  of  several  main  bearing  bolts  is  a  common  way  to 

accommodate the high forces from the crank mechanism that are transferred into the bear-

ing cap. For deep skirt crankcases (with crankcase walls that extend very far down), trans-

verse bolts can also be used to further improve the bearing cap structure.

The  bearing  panel  stiffness  can  be  increased  with  an  additional  stiffening  plate  installed 

between the oil sump connection area of the cylinder block and the bearing cap itself.

5.2 Types of crankcases

101

Figure 5.6: 
Stress curves at a main bea-
ring seat

5.2.3  Cooling

The temperatures in the engines must be kept within certain limits for various reasons:

■  High temperature gradients cause thermal stresses, which reduce service life.

■  High temperatures reduce fatigue resistance in aluminum alloys.

■  High temperatures cause large deformations in the crankcase, especially in the area of the 

cylinder surfaces.

■  The cylinder surfaces must be cooled in order to minimize cylinder distortion and over-

heating of the lubricating oil, especially in the TDC area of the ﬁrst compression ring.

■  Higher temperatures of the cylinder surfaces can make it necessary to shift the ignition 

point and thus reduce the thermal efﬁciency. 

The operating temperature of the engine is controlled by means of the coolant. It is especially 

important that the cylinder surfaces have as even a ﬂow as possible on the outside, to pre-

vent thermal deformation or overheating.

The ﬂow of the coolant depends on the design of the cooling system. Normally, the coolant 

is fed from the exhaust side into the crankcase and from here to the cylinder head.

Today,  the  cooling  jacket  is  designed  using  CFD  analysis  software  (computational  ﬂuid 

dynamics, ﬂow simulation) in several optimization cycles. One of the goals is to reduce the 

amount of coolant needed, so that the engine can reach its operating temperature quickly. 

Improvements in emission behavior and fuel consumption can be obtained through the use 

of this process.

102

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

Special attention has to be given to the risk of cavitation with cylinder liners, which are in 

direct contact with the coolant. MAHLE has investigated this problem in extensive develop-

ment work.

5.3  Crankcase materials

Crankcases are cast in iron, aluminum, or magnesium materials. Depending on the applica-

tion goal, various alloys are available.

5.3.1  Cast iron

Crankcases made of GJL are

■  low cost;

■  easily machinable.

The most important cast iron materials are GJL (gray cast iron), GJV (cast iron with vermicu-

lar graphite), and GJS (cast iron with nodular graphite).

■  stable with regard to deformations in both the cylinder surfaces and the main bearings;

The  material  GJL  can  also  be  used  as  a  cylinder  surface  and  supports  noise  dampen-

ing. Disadvantages are greater density, lower thermal conductivity relative to aluminum, and 

lower load carrying capacity compared with GJV and GJS.

GJV has a higher load carrying capacity than GJL, but owing to its severely reduced sulfur 

content  (manganese  sulfate  acts  as  a  lubricant  during  machining),  it  is  signiﬁcantly  less 

machinable than GJL. Because of its higher cost, GJV is currently used only in turbocharged 

diesel engines with special requirements proﬁles. If the structure is carefully optimized, GJV 

also allows thinner walls than GJL. This means that substantially lighter components can be 

produced.

GJS has a greater load carrying capacity than GJV (tensile strengths of up to 900 MPa). Its 

disadvantages, however, are higher cost, reduced castability, and poor thermal conductivity.

5.3.2  Aluminum alloys and material properties

Aluminum alloys stand out thanks to a combination of good thermal conductivity, low weight 
(Table 5.1), easy machinability, and acceptable mechanical properties. An advantage of alu-
minum crankcases with aluminum cylinder surfaces is that the installation clearance between 

5.3 Crankcase materials

103

Table 5.1: Weight savings with aluminum, compared with GJV, using the example of a V6 crankcase 

Crankcase

GJV

Aluminum low-pres-
sure die casting

Aluminum sand 
casting

Aluminum sand casting 
with iron cylinder liners

 
[%]

100

100

100

100

Cast

Machined

Completed

Completed, with 
oil pan

[%]

54

52

58

60

[%]

42

42

50

50

[%]

50

45

55

55

the piston and cylinder surface can be smaller than if cast iron liners are used, because of 

the similar thermal expansion coefﬁcients. Piston noise is reduced at the same time.

The weight advantage and better thermal  conductivity  improve  the  thermal  efﬁciency  and 

thus the fuel consumption and exhaust gas emissions. 

These advantages are countered by lower stiffness, higher material and process costs, and 

reduced strength values of aluminum, especially at temperatures of greater than 200°C, as 
is shown in Figure 5.7.

The  most  important  alloying  elements  for  the  use  of  aluminum  in  crankcases  are  mag-

nesium, manganese, copper, and silicon. Manganese, magnesium, and copper are typical 

constituents for improving the mechanical strength of aluminum. Particularly above 150°C, 

copper improves the strength properties of aluminum-silicon alloys.

Silicon improves casting properties and wear behavior of the microstructure of the cylinder 
surfaces. In crankcases made of hypereutectic alloys (Si (cid:116) 12.5%), a minimum land width of 
4 mm may be achieved between cylinders.

Figure 5.7: Sample strength values of an aluminum alloy as a function of temperature

104

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

Table 5.2: Chemical composition of aluminum alloys used at MAHLE for cylinder liners

Alloy symbol

MAHLE 147 
AlSi17Cu4Mg

MAHLE 233 
AlSi10MgCu

MAHLE 124V 
MAHLE 124P 
AlSi12MgCuNi

226 (EN-AC 46000)  
GD-AlSi9Cu3 (Fe) as 
per EN 1706

Alloying  
elements,  
% by  
weight

Si

Cu

Mg

Ni

Fe

Mn

Ti

Zn

Cr

Al

16.0–18.0

9.0–11.0

11.0–13.0

4.0–5.0

0.4–0.7

–

max. 0.7

max. 0.2

max. 0.2

max. 0.2

0.6–1.0

0.2–0.5

max. 0.15

max. 0.6

0.1–0.4

max. 0.15

max. 0.3

0.8–1.5

0.8–1.3

0.8–1.3

max. 0.7

max. 0.3

max. 0.2

max. 0.3

max. 0.05

–

max. 0.05

remainder

remainder

remainder

8.0–11.0

2.0–4.0

0.05–0.55

max. 0.55

max. 1.3

max. 0.55

max. 0.25

max. 1.2

max. 0.15

remainder

Table 5.3: Mechanical and physical properties of MAHLE aluminum alloys

Alloy symbol

MAHLE 147

MAHLE 233

MAHLE 124V

MAHLE 124P

Manufacturing process

LP permanent 
mold casting

LP permanent 
mold casting

LP permanent 
mold casting

Hardness HB10

Tensile strength  
Rm [MPa]

Yield point Rp0.2 
[MPa]

Elongation at 
fracture A5 [%]

Fatigue strength 
under reversed 
bending stress 
(cid:86)bw [MPa]
Young’s  
modulus [MPa]

Thermal  
conductivity 
(cid:79) [W/mK]

Thermal  
expansion  
[10-6 m/mK]

Density 
(cid:85) [g/cm3]

90–120

20°C

180–220

150°C

160–210

20°C

160–210

150°C

150–190

20°C

150°C

20°C

150°C

20°C

150°C

20°C

150°C

20–100°C

20–200°C

20°C

0.5

0.5

70

60

84,000

79,000

152

153

19.4

20.4

2.7

85–110

190–250

180–220

160–210

150–200

< 1

1

80

70

78,000

76,000

155

156

22

22.4

2.7

forged

90–125

300

250

280

230

< 1

4

130

115

90–125

210–230

180–200

190–210

170–180

< 1

1

90–100

75–80

80,000

77,000

155

156

19.6

20.6

2.68

5.3 Crankcase materials

105

a) MAHLE 147

b) MAHLE 233

c) MAHLE 124V

d) MAHLE 124P

Figure 5.8: Microstructure images of MAHLE aluminum alloys 

Tables 5.2 and 5.3 give an overview of the compositions and properties of the aluminum 
alloys used at MAHLE for crankcases, cylinder heads, and cylinder liners. Typical material 
microstructures are presented in Figure 5.8. 

Among Al cylinder alloys, the hypereutectic AlSi alloy MAHLE 147 (comparable to the stan-

dardized US alloy Reynolds 390) takes a special position. Owing to its high content of pri-
marily precipitated hard silicon crystals (Figure 5.8a), it features outstanding wear resistance. 
Combined with special machining of the cylinder surface, which exposes the silicon crystals, 

good running properties can be obtained even without coatings. The alloy MAHLE 147 is 

particularly well suited for low-pressure permanent mold casting and is widely employed for 

monolithic crankcases. It can also be used to make cylinder liners.

The hard silicon crystals, however, present a challenge for machining. For this reason, crank-

cases  with  running  surface  coatings  or  cylinder  liners  are  preferably  made  of  more  easily 

machinable, hypoeutectic AlSi alloys. As a high-strength material that is also well suited for 

processing in sand casting or low-pressure permanent mold casting, the alloy MAHLE 233 
is used (Figure 5.8b). It was developed on the basis of the standardized alloy 233 (EN-AC 
43200 per EN 1706) and contains Cu as an additional alloying element to improve strength at 

elevated temperatures. Bearing traverses (bed plates) for split crankcases can also be made 

106

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

of this alloy. Today, however, it is common to produce the bearing traverses from standard 

alloys with cast-in iron inserts in order to support the main crank mechanism loads.

For NIKASIL®- and CROMAL®-coated running surfaces on ﬁnned cylinders in air-cooled 
engines, which are subjected to relatively high temperatures, the eutectic alloy MAHLE 124V 
is used (Figure 5.8c). It is a variant of the piston alloy MAHLE 124 with a modiﬁed structure. 
Thanks  to  the  reﬁnement,  the  mold  ﬁlling  behavior  of  the  alloy  is  improved,  among  other 

things, which is important for casting very thin-walled ﬁns. For less highly stressed ﬁnned 
cylinders made by high-pressure die casting, the standardized alloy 226 (EN-AC 46000 per 

EN 1706) is employed.

For  forged  cylinder  liners  in  motorsport  engines,  the  piston  alloy  MAHLE  124P  is  used  in 
combination with a NIKASIL® running surface coating (Figure 5.8d).

5.3.2.1  Effects of the casting process on the material properties of aluminum alloys

The  local  material  properties  of  a  crankcase  cast  in  aluminum  depend  on  the  local  mold 
ﬁlling velocity, cross sections, and thus the local cooling speed during casting (Figure 5.9). 

Figure 5.9: Analysis of the solidification profile of a crankcase in the mold

5.3 Crankcase materials

107

Before creating a casting setup, MAHLE performs a casting simulation using a CFD program 

to determine the following data in particular: 

■  Deﬁning a ﬁlling and solidiﬁcation proﬁle
■  Liquid fraction of the melt

■  Failure analysis

■  Solidiﬁcation time

■  Dendrite spacing
■  Not exceeding a maximum permissible porosity

■  Optimization of cooling in the tool

A projection of the residual stresses and local material properties is performed in a further 

analysis, using a special analysis program.

5.3.2.2  Effects of heat treatment on the properties of cast aluminum alloys 

Heat treatment of cast aluminum alloys serves to adjust the material properties. It must be 

customized for each material and subsequent application. 

One of the possibilities is heat age hardening after casting. The soak time and temperature 

determine the ﬁnal mechanical properties of the product.

The fatigue strength can be improved by hot isostatic pressing (HIP). In this process, the 

casting is held in an inert atmosphere at high pressure and temperature prior to heat treat-

ment. The material is thus compacted and porosity is reduced.

For sand castings, heat treatment can consist of a multistage cycle (Figure 5.10). During solu-
tion heat treatment, the castings are soaked for several hours at a temperature just below the 

melting point, at which the constituents enter solution. The part is then quenched. This can, 

however,  result  in  residual  stresses  in  the  component.  Hot  age  hardening  (artiﬁcial  aging) 

follows.

Figure 5.10: Sample heat treatment curve of a sand casting made of an aluminum alloy

108

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

5.3.3  Magnesium

Owing to its density, 35% lower than that of aluminum, and its low Young’s modulus, mag-

nesium is typically used for non-structural engine components. As a material for crankcases, 

it has some disadvantages: 

■  Increased tendency to creep at high temperatures

■  Loss of preload at higher temperatures when using steel bolts

■  Tendency toward galvanic corrosion when in contact with steel

■  Tendency to corrode when exposed to coolants

One possible solution for reducing component weight is to produce highly stressed locations 

in  a  hypereutectic  aluminum  alloy,  which  are  then  encapsulated  with  magnesium.  With  a 

hybridized combination of magnesium and aluminum, weight savings in such a component 

can be up to 25%.

5.3.4  Material trends

The  trend  toward  ever-higher  power-to-weight  ratios  requires  new  materials.  This  applies 

ﬁrst to passenger car diesel engines with working pressures of up to 200 bar, which consti-

tutes the performance limit for the use of aluminum crankcases. For less stressed engines, 

such as gasoline engines, aluminum will remain dominant, except for cases where cost is 

a signiﬁcant factor or where high-performance derivatives are sought. Magnesium will ﬁnd 

only limited application owing to its lower high-temperature stability and tendency to creep, 

its corrosive behavior, and its higher cost.

5.3.5  Effects of the casting process on the design of the 

crankcase

The technical requirements and tools required, and therefore the costs, have a signiﬁcant 

effect on the selection of the casting process. This decision is generally made prior to the 

ﬁrst draft of the component. It is therefore important to be aware of the advantages and dis-

advantages of the individual casting processes. Some of the typical casting processes and 

their associated designs are shown below.

5.3.5.1  Sand casting

Sand casting parts are cast in a sand mold with sand cores inserted. These can be indi-
vidual cores or core packages (Figure 5.11). The molten metal is either poured from above 
or pumped into the mold from below. Figure 5.12 shows a mold with mold ﬁlling from below. 
The  cores  are  generally  manufactured  in  sand  or  in  a  CPS  process  (core  package  sand 

process).

5.3 Crankcase materials

109

Figure 5.11: Inserting a core package in a mold

Figure 5.12: Principle of a mold with filling from 
below

5.3.5.2  COSCASTTM process 
One  variant  of  the  sand  casting  process  is  the  patented  COSCASTTM  process,  in  which 

cores  are  made  from  zirconium  sand.  This  material  provides  precision  casting  with  high 

surface quality, thanks to its shape accuracy. The density of the sand is very similar to that 

of aluminum. This means that the casting cores move only very slightly, further improving 

the  dimensional  accuracy  of  the  manufactured  parts.  The  aluminum  melt  is  ﬁlled  into  the 

mold from below using a ceramic pump; it is then rotated 180° for solidiﬁcation. The process 

is  particularly  suited  for  small  and  medium  batch  sizes.  The  zirconium  sand  can  also  be 

recycled in a thermal process and reused.

5.3.5.3  Molding sand—“green sand”

Sand cores made of molding sand are bonded with clay or mud and have a relatively high 

moisture content. The moisture is absorbed by the aluminum during casting and can cause 

an unacceptable level of porosity in the part, which is associated with an undesired reduction 

in mechanical strength. This process is not always suitable for series production, despite its 

cost advantages.

5.3.5.4  CPS method 

In this method, the sand core is chemically bonded with resin, for example. The binder is then 

hardened in a furnace, or by inﬁltration with gas, or even just at room temperature, depend-

ing on the type. Silicon or zirconium sands are used. Zirconium has a very small thermal 

expansion coefﬁcient and density similar to that of aluminum. Cores made of zirconium sand 

are used preferably for die-cast parts with high dimensional accuracy, for complex cores, 

and for high mechanical strength requirements. 

110

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

The principal advantages of sand casting for crankcases are the possibilities of

■  incorporating oil and other galleries as well as cooling jackets in the casting;

■  casting bores and recesses (weight savings);
■  improving material properties with heat treatment.

Fundamental  disadvantages  of  this  method  include  the  high  investment  cost  required  for 

mass  production  (long  production  times)  and  the  difﬁculty  of  cooling  critical  regions  (the 

potential  for  targeted  cooling  is  limited  to  the  use  of  cooling  inserts).  The  lack  of  cooling 
capability makes it more difﬁcult to cast hypereutectic alloys.

5.3.5.5  Full-mold casting method (lost foam method)

Cores are made of polystyrene foam, given a heat-resistant coat, and placed in the mold. 

When the liquid metal is poured in, the cellular material is gasiﬁed.

Complex crankcases with a high number of integrated parts can be manufactured at a rea-

sonable cost using cores of this type. The ability to integrate water-cooled galleries in the 

mold pack is limited, however, so it can be difﬁcult to reliably achieve the required cooling 

speed at critical points.

5.3.5.6  Permanent mold casting

the mold under pressure. 

In permanent mold casting, reusable molds and cores are used and the metal is cast into 

The characteristics of this process are high dimensional accuracy, very good surfaces, and 

high tooling costs. Crankcases are generally manufactured in permanent molds at medium 

to high production quantities.

5.3.5.7  Gravity die casting

The molten aluminum is ﬁlled into the mold under the inﬂuence of gravity. Because of the 

low ﬁlling pressure, lost sand cores can even be used, and there is only very low turbulence. 

Dimensional accuracy is good. The local material structure can be improved, if needed, with 

targeted cooling. The material properties can also be stabilized with targeted heat treatment, 

such as solution heat treatment, quenching, and artiﬁcial aging (Section 5.3.2.2).

5.3.5.8  Low-pressure die casting

Filling  the  mold  under  controlled  pressure  opens  up  a  few  advantages  compared  with 

normal gravity die casting. By controlling the ﬁlling speed, better mechanical properties can 

be obtained, and by maintaining pressure during the solidiﬁcation process, the porosity of 

the part is controlled in a targeted manner.

5.4 Cylinder liners and cylinder surfaces

111

5.3.5.9  High-pressure die casting

The  aluminum  is  ﬁlled  into  the  mold  under  high  pressure.  High  pressure  and  rapid  ﬁlling 

allow  the  casting  of  thin-walled  parts,  improvement  of  material  properties  with  intensive 

cooling, and short cycle times. The disadvantage is that the use of insert parts is limited and 

expensive because the risk of absorption of gases, and thus porosity, is increased, and sub-

sequent heat treatment is not possible without degassing the mold. It is typical to use cast 

iron inserts for cylinder liners or bearing inserts in aluminum die-cast components.

5.3.5.10  Squeeze casting

Compared with “simple” high-pressure die casting, as described in Section 5.3.5.9, the melt 

is ﬁlled into the mold through a rise at low speed. High pressure is maintained during the 

solidiﬁcation process with this method as well. Crankcases are preferably cast vertically in 

this process, which allows effective degassing during the ﬁlling process and thus reduces 

gas inclusions. Subsequent heat treatment is used to obtain improved material properties. 

The required wall thicknesses for this process are generally somewhat greater than for high-

pressure  die  casting.  The  use  of  an  open  silicon  matrix  structure  as  an  insert  can  also 

improve the local material properties (e.g., in the cylinder region of the crankcase).

5.3.5.11  Semisolid process

A newly developed casting process for manufacturing crankcases processes aluminum in 

a  semisolid  (thixotropic/rheotropic)  state.  In  this  process,  the  aluminum  is  heated  to  the 

appropriate  temperature  and  then  injected  into  the  mold  under  high  pressure.  For  thixo-

tropic casting, the aluminum billets with non-dendritic structures are inductively heated to 

the  appropriate  temperature  and  then  injected  into  the  mold.  For  rheotropic  casting,  the 

liquid metal is cooled to the semiliquid phase, in which no dendrites have yet formed, and 
then injected into the mold. Both processes prevent entrapped air, feature low shrinkage and 

short solidiﬁcation times, form ﬁne-grained structures, and provide the capability of improv-

ing material properties through further heat treatment.

5.4  Cylinder liners and cylinder surfaces

5.4.1  Requirements for the cylinder surface

Because of the lift motion of the piston and piston rings, their partner, the cylinder surface, 

is also subjected to wear. Wear occurs particularly at the top dead center of the piston ring 

because the change in direction of the moving parts limits the lubrication. The wear behavior 

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

of the running surface and the piston rings is substantially determined by the material pair-

ing selected for the two components. In order to reduce wear, the running surface should 

be smooth and the lubrication between the sliding partners must be ensured. The type and 

quality of the running surface affect oil consumption as well as the wear of the two compo-

112

nents.

5.4.2  Cylinder surfaces in aluminum crankcases

The monolithic aluminum crankcase is based on a hypereutectic AlSi alloy (such as AlSi 17), 

where the cylinder surfaces are produced by chemical etching or mechanical exposure (spe-

cial honing) of the primary silicon crystals. The disintegration rate of the silicon crystals must 

not exceed an upper threshold for both processes.

For the quasi-monolithic crankcase, the running surface is coated, for example with a gal-
vanic layer of MAHLE NIKASIL® (Figure 5.27), by means of a plasma-thermal spray process 
(Plasma  Transfer  Wire  Arc  (PTWA)),  High  Velocity  Oxygen  Fuel  (HVOF),  or  using  twin  arc 

spraying.  Alternatively,  running  surfaces  can  be  produced  with  local  material  engineering, 

by laser alloying (e.g., with silicon) or by using Al matrix composite materials (preforms) with 

subsequent ﬁnishing.

The  dominant  construction  for  automotive  applications,  however,  is  the  heterogeneous 

crankcase, in which cast-in or inserted cylinder liners made of GJL form the running surfaces.

In addition to the general requirements for cylinder surfaces, additional conditions must be 

met by cylinder liners. The wall thickness and material strength must be sufﬁcient, so that 

the  cylinder  liners  do  not  crack.  The  ﬁnite  element  analysis  allows  the  construction  and 

material selection to be adapted to the loads due to assembly, temperature, peak cylinder 

pressure, and piston lateral forces. Stresses originating in assembly are essentially deter-
mined  by  the  number,  tightening  torque,  and  arrangement  of  cylinder  head  bolts  as  well 
as the selected cylinder head gasket. Figure 5.13 shows a typical gas pressure and lateral 
force curve as a function of the crank angle. The maximum lateral force is later in time than 

the maximum gas pressure, while the lateral force acts transverse to the pin axis only in the 

piston contact area. 

The  loads  on  the  cylinder  liners,  however,  like  the  stresses  and  deformations  at  the  cir-

cumference, are different because of the temperature distribution, lateral forces, and bolt 
arrangement. In Figure 5.14, using the example of the bottom side of the ﬂange of a cylinder 
liner, the resultant stresses for the load case of assembly and temperature and the superpo-

sition of all load cases at maximum lateral force are depicted. The maximum stress occurs 

in the area of the radius of the cylinder liner contact with the crankcase. Using fatigue resis-

tance charts, the effects of changes in construction and material on the local safety factor 

are evaluated.

5.4 Cylinder liners and cylinder surfaces

113

Figure 5.13: Gas force and lateral force as a function of the crank angle

Figure 5.14: 
Maximum stresses at the 
bottom side of the flange of a 
cylinder liner, for the following 
load cases:
a) Assembly + temperature 
+ max. lateral force + gas 
force

b) Assembly + temperature

5.4.3  Types of cylinder liners

The  design  of  the  cylinder  liner  is  based  on  the  ﬁeld  of  application  of  the  engine,  among 

other things. 

of these engines.

For passenger car engines, cylinder liners are cast in the aluminum crankcase. Replaceability 

of the cylinder liner does not seem to be necessary because of the relatively low service life 

114

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

a)

b)

Figure 5.15: 
Cast-in liners for light-alloy 
housing:
a) Threaded cylinder liner  
b) Rough cast liner

To  obtain  a  form-ﬁt  connection  during  casting,  the  outer  surface  of  the  cylinder  liner  is 
threaded, such as by machining (Figure 5.15a). So-called rough cast liners are cast in with 
a rough surface (Figure 5.15b). Rough cast liners provide excellent heat dissipation from the 
combustion chamber due to their strong bond with the crankcase. A light alloy coating on 

the external surface of these cylinder liners is also possible in order to improve bonding to 

the case material.

The geometric design of the cylinder liners has to be adapted to the installation space design 

of the engine and to the casting process. The cylinder liners are ﬁne bored and honed in the 

crankcase (Section 5.4.5). The remaining load-bearing residual wall thickness for rough cast 

liners made of gray cast iron should be no less than 1–1.5 mm. The wall thickness depends 

on the permissible land width between the cylinder liners, the roughness depth on the outer 

diameter, and offsets during casting. 

When used in high-pressure die-cast cases, roughness depths of about 1.5 mm can be used 

for rough cast liners. When casting in a gravity die casting process, the roughness depth 

should not exceed 1 mm. For the land spacing between two cylinder liners, different limit 

dimensions apply depending on the casting method (gravity die casting, high-pressure die 

casting with single or double gating). 

In addition to the typical rough cast liners made of cast iron, MAHLE has also developed 

a  rough  cast  liner  made  of  a  hypereutectic  aluminum-silicon  alloy  and  an  aluminum  liner 

composite. 

5.4 Cylinder liners and cylinder surfaces

115

a)

b)

Figure 5.16: 
Dry cylinder liners:
a) Pressed-in cylinder liner, 

press fit

b) Inserted cylinder liner, 

transition fit

In the case of large-bore engines for power generation or engines for commercial vehicles, the 

running surface wears relatively severely as a result of the long cylinder service life. Because 

the service life of these engines is generally much greater than for passenger car engines, 

replaceable cylinder liners made of suitable materials are generally used (Section 5.4.4).

For the cylinder liners used in the crankcase, a differentiation is made between “dry” and 

“wet” liners. 

Dry  cylinder  liners  made  of  cast  iron  have  relatively  thin  walls  at  1.5–4  mm.  This  means 

that they take up only little installation space, but are not in direct contact with the coolant 
(Figure  5.16).  Precise  matching  of  installation  clearances  between  the  crankcase  and  the 
cylinder liner is necessary. This prevents stress peaks that can cause cracks, and reduces 

the loss of contact between the insert and the crankcase structure.

The axial location of replaceable cylinder liners is determined by a ﬂange, generally on the 
top side. Dry cylinder liners are mounted with a press or interference ﬁt (Figure 5.16a) or a 
transition ﬁt (e.g., H7/n6) (Figure 5.16b) in the crankcase. Cylinder liners with interference ﬁts 
are ﬁnish machined only after being installed in the crankcase.

Cylinder liners with interference ﬁts feature better heat transfer to the crankcase. This solution 

is selected, for example, when cast iron liners are installed in aluminum crankcases. Good 

heat transfer is ensured, however, only if the interference exists at all operating temperatures 

present in the aluminum case. Fits similar to ISO ﬁts N7/r6 (interference ~ 0.05–0.10 mm) 

can be used for installation here or, for engines with increased operating temperatures, R7/r6 

116

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

a)

b)

Figure 5.17: 
Wet cylinder liners:
a) Standard
b) Midstop liner

(interference ~ 0.075–0.125 mm). These interference ﬁts make it necessary, as a rule, to cool 

the cylinder liners with liquid nitrogen during assembly or to heat the crankcase. 

For a cast iron crankcase, the problem of loosening does not exist, because the cylinder 

liners and crank case have a similar thermal expansion coefﬁcient. An ISO ﬁt K7/r6 (over-

lap  ~ 0.03–0.08  mm)  is  recommended.  In  any  case,  the  overlap  to  be  selected  must  be 

matched to the operating temperatures of the engine and the respective assembly process.

Cylinder liners with a transition ﬁt, which are already ﬁnish machined, are used in commercial 

vehicle engines with medium performance. Dry cylinder liners, however, are no longer used 

as a ﬁrst choice in modern high-performance engines. Wet cylinder liners are used for this 

application.

ingly used. 

Wet cylinder liners are in direct contact with coolant (Figure 5.17), thus ensuring excellent 
heat dissipation. For commercial vehicle and large-bore engines, cylinder liners made of cast 

iron are preferred. The required wall thickness depends mainly on the maximum pressure 

in the expansion stroke. With increasing peak cylinder pressures and larger displacements, 

high-strength materials such as GJS (cast iron with nodular graphite) or steel are increas-

Wet cylinder liners are divided into standard (Figure 5.17a) or midstop liners (Figure 5.17b). 
The standard liners feature cooling over the entire running surface area. The midstop liners 

have a ﬂange within the running surface area. In this design, water is fed only to the upper 

part of the running surface area, which is thus cooled more efﬁciently. In both cases, location 

5.4 Cylinder liners and cylinder surfaces

117

Figure 5.18: Comparison of wall thickness ratios of gray cast iron (GJL), aluminum (Al), and steel (St) 
for passenger car applications (data in mm)

ﬁxing and sealing is done at the top with the cylinder head gasket and the cylinder head. The 

water chamber is sealed radially at the bottom with O-rings.

In  the  passenger  car  sector,  sporty  high-performance  engines  still  use  wet  cylinder  liners 

made of steel or coated aluminum.

Steel cylinder liners are thinner, while aluminum ones are somewhat thicker than cast iron 
liners (Figure 5.18). 

A special group consists of head-cooled cylinder liners, which are used in large-bore engines. 

This type of cylinder liner has bores for coolant ﬂow in the head of the cylinder wall that pro-

trudes from the crankcase. 

In order to prevent buildup of oil carbon on the top land of the piston in large-bore engines, 

or at least to make it more difﬁcult, a ring made of cast iron can be inserted in the cylinder 

liners, loosely located in a turned recess inside the top of the cylinder liner. The ring protrudes 

slightly into the combustion chamber, thereby scraping the oil carbon off the top land of the 

piston. For commercial vehicle diesel engines, the use of such a ring is difﬁcult because there 

exists less available installation space for the ring. In this case, a knurl can be used in the 

cylinder liner, for example, or scraper rings made of sheet metal are an option.

5.4.4  Materials

Cast iron, coated or uncoated aluminum alloys, or steels are used as materials for cylinder 
liners. Aluminum liners are coated with NIKASIL®, and steel liners can be hardened, rein-
forced, or coated with CROMAL®.

118

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

The  requirements  for  installation  space,  the  operating  conditions  of  the  engine,  and  the 

cost all determine the selection of material for cylinder liners and their properties. Important 

properties are speciﬁc weight, microstructure, hardness, tensile strength and fatigue strength 

under vibration, thermal conductivity, thermal expansion coefﬁcient, stiffness, and Young’s 

modulus. Cast iron is preferred for diesel engines. Cylinder liners made of aluminum provide 

signiﬁcant advantages in thermal conductivity and speciﬁc weight. Steel stands out for its 

high strength and stiffness. 

Cast iron, in many alloy variants, has been a proven and cost-effective cylinder liner solution 
for  decades.  See  Table  5.4.  Lamellar  gray  cast  iron  (GJL)  with  perlitic  basic  microstruc-
ture can be manufactured with tensile strengths of up to about 350 MPa. To ensure wear 

resistance,  phosphorus  or  carbide-forming  elements  are  added,  or  the  running  surfaces 

are inductively hardened. Phosphorus forms hard steadite, which forms as a network if the 

phosphorus proportion is sufﬁciently high. For strengths above 400 MPa, lamellar gray cast 

iron (GJL) with a bainite basic microstructure or cast iron with nodular graphite (GJS) can be 
used; see Figures 5.19 to 5.21. 

The alloys listed in Table 5.2 are used as aluminum-based liner materials. For steel liners that 
are coated, simple structural steels can be used.

Table 5.4: Properties of cast iron for cylinder liners (reference values)

Properties

Gray cast iron (GJL)

Cast iron with nodular 
graphite (GJS)

Basic microstructure

perlite

bainite and very fine 
perlite

Hardness [HB]

Tensile strength [MPa]

Young‘s modulus [GPa]

Chemical  
composition 
(weight %)

180–300

200–350

100–120

2.8–3.3

1.8–2.1

0.6–1.0

max. 1.0

max. 0.12

0.1–0.3

max. 0.6

max. 0.8

max. 0.07

–

max. 1.2

C

Si

P

S

Mn

Cr

Mo

Cu

B

Ti

Ni

270–330

400–600

120–140

2.6–2.8

1.4–2.0

max. 0.8

max. 0.08

max. 0.08

1.0–1.5

–

–

–

–

1.0–1.5

max. 1.0

perlite

260–330

(cid:116) 600

(cid:116) 150

3.1–3.7

2.1–2.8

0.35–0.65

max. 0.1

max. 0.02

max. 0.1

–

–

–

–

5.4 Cylinder liners and cylinder surfaces

119

Figure 5.19: Gray cast iron (GJL)—perlite 
Left: unetched, graphite: type A and B, size 4–6; right: etched, basic microstructure: perlite, max. 5 % 
ferrite, steadite network

Figure 5.20: Cast iron—bainite
Left: unetched, graphite: type A and B, size: 4–6; right: etched, basic microstructure: bainite and very 
fine perlite

Figure 5.21: Cast iron with nodular graphite (GJS)—perlite  
Left: unetched, graphite: nodular graphite; right: etched, basic microstructure: perlite with max. 5% 
ferrite

120

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

5.4.5  Surface treatment

The running surface structure generated by honing has a very signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the 

operating conditions of the engine, the running-in characteristics of the piston rings, and the 

wear of the sliding component. During honing, a cylindrical tool equipped with honing stones 

performs a rotational and a vertical motion simultaneously. This generates a cross scored 

structure in the cylinder. Various processes are employed at MAHLE, such as normal honing, 

brush honing, plateau honing, and sliding honing. The honed surface can be characterized 

by roughness measurements, fax-ﬁlm, white light interferometry, and metallographic investi-

gations. To evaluate the roughness measurement of a cylinder surface, the values standard-
ized in DIN EN ISO 13565-2 according to Table 5.5 are typical. 

For hypereutectic aluminum-silicon cylinder liners, as with crankcases, the running surfaces 

are chemically etched or mechanically exposed. Eutectic AlSi cylinder liners receive a NIKA-
SIL® coating (Figure 5.27).

Table 5.5: Roughness parameters for honed surfaces

Parameter

Description

Influence on function

Rpk

Rk

Rvk

Mr1

Mr2

Reduced peak height

Core roughness depth

Reduced scoring depth

Many and high peaks above the core roughness 
depth (Rk) extend the run-in phase and can lead 
to increased wear.

The core roughness depth largely determines oil 
consumption. The smaller the core roughness 
depth, the lower the oil consumption. The achiev-
able core roughness depth depends on the honing 
method.

The deep scoring forms the oil reservoir. An Rvk 
value that is too low can lead to increased long-
term oil consumption.

Material ratio of protruding 
peaks

In order to keep the run-in phase short, the small-
est possible value should be targeted.

Material ratio of core roughness 
depth

Values depend on the honing method. Together 
with Rvk, they represent a dimension for oil volume 
capacity (V0).

5.5  Light-alloy cylinders

The design characteristics of light-alloy cylinder barrels, like those of crankcases, are deter-

mined by the individual application.

5.5 Light-alloy cylinders

121

5.5.1  Types of light-alloy cylinders for small engines

For each application case, the following characteristics are distinguished:

■  Cooling
  Air ﬂow cooling, fan cooling, water cooling

■  Engine design
 

case and cylinder head.

Installed cylinders, cylinder block; cylinders or cylinder blocks form a unit with the crank-

■  Operating principle 
  Cylinders for four-stroke engines as installed cylinders with continuous bore

■  In two-stroke engines, the cylinders are signiﬁcantly more complicated, because they con-
tain the intake, scavenging, and exhaust ports, and possibly clean air channels required for 

gas exchange; the vast majority are manufactured with a cast-on cylinder head, and some 

with crankshaft bearings.

5.5.2  Air-cooled cylinders

Air-cooled  cylinders  are  ﬁtted  with  cooling  ﬁns  on  the  external  circumference  for  cooling, 

to increase the effective heat transfer area. Theoretically, cooling ﬁns with a cross section 

that gets smaller toward the outside are the most effective. For cast cylinders, however, for 

manufacturing reasons, these are slightly trapezoidal with rounded edges at nearly the same 
cooling capacity (Figure 5.22).

The heat transfer at the cooling ﬁns increases in case of

■  increased ﬁn area (closer spacing, greater ﬁn height);

■  increased cooling air velocity;

■  transition from free-ﬂowing to guided cooling airﬂow;
■  transition to a cylinder material with higher thermal conductivity (e.g., from gray cast iron to 

aluminum). 

Casting process

Sand casting 

Low-pressure die 
casting

High-pressure die 
casting

a

6.5

6.5

b

1.4

1.4

d

≥ c+1

≥ c+1

α

1°

1°10´

6

1

1

1°

c

5

6

5

Figure 5.22: Minimum dimensions for cast cooling fins (minimum values in mm)

122

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

The inﬂuence of the individual factors is captured rather accurately with appropriate analy-

sis methods. Owing to the very complex relationships of the entire heat exchange process 

between the cylinder ﬁlling and the cooling air, however, theoretical determination of cylinder 

temperature is very complex. Measurements on the engine are more cost-effective. For air-

cooled  engines  with  high  speciﬁc  power  output,  light-alloy  cylinders  have  been  tried  and 

tested, but cooling capacity can be increased only to a limited extent by extending the cool-

ing ﬁns. Fin heights greater than 60–80 mm yield only a slight improvement in heat dissipa-

tion, even for light-alloy cylinders. Extending the cooling ﬁns is more effective for light-alloy 

cylinders than for those made of cast iron. Irrespective of a few exceptions, ﬁn spacing closer 
than 6 mm in cast cylinders is not practical for casting reasons. Figure 5.22 contains the 
minimum dimensions in the ﬁn area that are important for manufacturing. For low ﬁn heights, 

ﬁn spacing of at least 4 mm can be implemented by machining.

5.5.3  Port shapes and gas exchange in two-stroke engines

High speciﬁc engine output is required of most small two-stroke engines. High speeds and 

efﬁcient gas exchange are necessary. Because the time for gas exchange gets shorter and 

shorter as the speed increases, the control cross sections, and thus the port cross sections, 

must be as large as possible.

The emissions limits required by law also increase the complexity of the design. Weight plays 

a  large  role,  particularly  for  hand-held  power  equipment.  Integral  solutions  are  therefore 

needed in order to meet these emissions values.

In  the  conventional  two-stroke  engine,  purging  losses  occur  because  of  the  principles 

involved. This means that unburned air-oil-fuel mixture is “purged” into the exhaust, which 

increases fuel consumption and emissions. Air purging in particular represents a now typical 
solution for minimizing purging losses. An air cushion is built up ahead of the fuel-air mixture 

through additional clean air channels, so that the purging process sends almost exclusively 

fresh air into the exhaust gas tract.

The  angle  and  port  time  area  derived  from  the  control  diagram  in  Figure  5.23  deﬁnes 
the control cross sections effectively available during gas exchange for intake, mixing, and 

exhaust.

Figure 5.24 describes the relationship of speciﬁc engine output to port time areas, on the 
basis  of  100  cm3  displacement,  for  various  high-performance  two-stroke  engines.  This 
design of the speciﬁc port time areas in the control diagram enables a signiﬁcant reduction 

in practical experimentation.

The complexity of the gas exchange and the valve timing has increased with the introduction 

of the air-purged two-stroke engines mentioned above. Depending on the design of the air 

purging, additional clean air channels are required.

5.5 Light-alloy cylinders

123

Figure 5.23: Time sequence of charge cross sections in two-stroke engines

Figure 5.24: 
Examples of specific 
port time areas in 
high-performance 
two-stroke engines

Serial no. Application

Displacement

Serial no. Application

Displacement

1

2

3

4

5

6

Chain saw

Chain saw

Motorcycle

Motorcycle

Motorcycle

Motorized bicycle

31.7 cm2

44.4 cm2

47.6 cm2

49.9 cm2

49.9 cm2

49.9 cm2

7

8

9

10

11

12

Chain saw

Chain saw

Chain saw

Motorcycle

Chain saw

Chain saw

55.5 cm2

60.8 cm2

68.7 cm2

73.1 cm2

80.5 cm2

105.5 cm2

124

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

Figure 5.25: Design type of scavenging ports in two-stroke engines

If the channel ports in the cylinder surface are too wide, the running behavior of the piston 

rings is degraded and the shape stability of the cylinder is negatively affected. The width of 

the exhaust and intake ports should not exceed 56% of the cylinder diameter. Arch-shaped 

top and bottom edges of the channel ports help to keep the load on the piston rings due to 

the port edges, which increases as the speed increases, within bearable limits.

To reduce losses during gas exchange, the ports must be designed for effective ﬂow. The 
design of the scavenging ports, in particular (Figure 5.25), has a great bearing on the engine 
output. They lead the unburnt gas charge from the crank chamber into the cylinder, deﬂect-

ing it nearly 180°. 

A port that is curved as evenly as possible, the so-called loop-shaped scavenging passage, 

shows the lowest ﬂow losses. It has become common in compact engine designs, such as 

for chain saws. By using externally ﬂooded pistons, it has been possible to move the lower 

oriﬁce of the loop-shaped scavenging passage far enough upward that the cylinders can be 
short, stiff, and closed on the lower end. The externally ﬂooded piston is made by retracting 
the piston wall in the area of the pin bores (Figure 5.26).

The process to be used in casting the cylinder is determined by the design of the scaveng-

ing ports.

Figure 5.26: 
NIKASIL® blind bore cylinder for a two-
stroke chain saw: short loop-shaped sca-
venging passage with externally flooded 
piston

5.5 Light-alloy cylinders

125

The  most  advantageous  cylinders  in  terms  of  performance,  with  loop-shaped  scavenging 

passages, require lost sand cores. This entails that they cannot be manufactured by high-

pressure die casting. Composite cylinders with external scavenging ports that can be closed 

with a cover present an alternative solution. 

Cylinders with straight, open scavenging ports—the reciprocating piston forms one wall of the 

port—can  be  manufactured  by  high-pressure  die  casting.  The  mixing  conditions,  however, 

are  even  less  favorable  than  for  closed,  straight  ports.  Since  this  construction  is  not  very 
stable in shape, it is suitable only for low-stress engines.

5.5.4  Cylinders for four-stroke engines

More stringent exhaust regulations are prompting engine manufacturers to pursue the four-

stroke  principle,  even  in  small  hand-held  engines.  Previous  development  efforts  with  the 

objective of making the designs as small as possible, lightweight, independent of orientation, 

and high-speed have not yet caught hold.

5.5.5  Surface treatment

Depending  on  the  required  service  life  and  operational  reliability,  various  running  surface 

coatings  are  available  to  the  user  of  light-alloy  cylinders.  In  any  case,  light-alloy  cylinders 

without running surface coatings or with thin reinforcements made of other metals are nearly 

equal in terms of heat dissipation and weight as well as less expensive compared with cast 

iron cylinder liners.

Table 5.6 shows the ratings of light-alloy cylinders with various cylinder surface coatings in 
comparison with gray cast iron cylinders. According to the relationship

°

T

(cid:87) =

 gray cast iron
°
 light alloy
T

 

the temperatures at the base of the ﬁn, near the combustion chamber ﬂoor, are compared 

for gray cast iron and light-alloy cylinders.

Table 5.6: Ratings of various running surface coatings, relative to gray cast iron cylinders 

Cylinder

Gray cast iron cylinder

Light-alloy cylinder with running 
surface coating

Light-alloy cylinders without  
reinforcement

Running surface coating

Rating of heat dissipation τ 

NIKASIL®

CROMAL®

–

–

1

1.16 – 1.19

1.16 – 1.19

1.17 – 1.20

126

NIKASIL®

The following coatings have been proven in practice:

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

The running surface of light-alloy cylinders coated with NIKASIL® consists of a nickel dis-
persion layer (Figure 5.27), about 0.05 mm thick in its ﬁnish-honed state, which has been 
developed by MAHLE. 

This galvanically applied nickel layer, with an even inclusion of hard silicon carbide particles 
( < 2.5 μm edge length), results in a relatively “smooth” cylinder surface after honing.

Figure 5.28 shows the proﬁle diagram of a typical NIKASIL® layer. The bearing roughness 
value TR has the magnitudes 0.4/96/1.2 (0.4 μm average roughness of the bearing surface 
with 96% bearing surface; average depth of deep scoring 1.2 μm).

NIKASIL®, as a cylinder surface, leads to fast run-in and associated rapid and good sealing 
of the piston rings. Together with the low friction power loss provided by NIKASIL®, optimal 
properties are obtained with regard to engine output, quantity of blow-by, oil consumption, 

and cylinder wear.

Figure 5.27: 
Running surfaces with 
NIKASIL®-coated cylinder, 
unhoned and honed

Figure 5.28: Roughness profile of a NIKASIL® layer

5.5 Light-alloy cylinders

127

NIKASIL® cylinders are used in great quantities today, as standard, for air-cooled two-stroke 
and four-stroke engines. NIKASIL® is employed worldwide in racing engines, even for water-
cooled four-stroke engines, with very great success. 

CROMAL®

possible.

This coating is a galvanically applied hard chrome layer of about 0.06 to 0.08 mm in thick-
ness (Figure 5.29).

Wear of the chrome running surface and the piston rings that run against it are signiﬁcantly 

affected  in  engine  operation  by  the  formation  of  the  layer  surface,  which  is  intended  to 

provide as even a distribution and adhesion of the lubricating oil to the cylinder surface as 

Honing with diamond strips, which is mainly used today, generates a roughness Ra of about 
2.5 μm, which is then smoothed to create a plateau structure.

The roughness proﬁle in Figure 5.30 shows a typical diamond-honed CROMAL® cylinder 
surface with a bearing roughness TR of 1.2/77/4.5. Honing with diamond strips has largely 

Figure 5.29: Running surfaces of CROMAL®-coated light-alloy cylinders, unhoned and honed

Figure 5.30: Roughness profile of a diamond-honed CROMAL® cylinder surface

128

5 Crankcase and cylinder liners

replaced the previously used process of porous chrome plating or linked chrome plating as 

well as knurling. The correctly formed chrome running surface provides a good counterpart 

for the piston and the piston rings. The hardness and chemical resistance of the chrome 

coating lead to low wear values for the cylinder and piston rings and to a long service life.