Introduction to Advanced Combustion
Techniques and Engine Technologies
for Automotive Sector
To resolve the transportation sector issues such as rapidly increasing
petroleum consumption and stringent emission norms for vehicles, researchers have
proposed three solution strategies namely advanced combustion techniques, after-
treatment systems and alternative fuels. This book covers all three aspects for auto-
motive sector. A dedicated section of this book is based on methanol, which discusses
about the methanol utilization strategies in vehicles, especially in two wheelers. Sec-
ond section of this book is based on advanced combustion techniques, which includes
gasoline compression ignition (GCI), gasoline direct injection (GDI), and spark
assisted compression ignition (SACI). Fourth section is based on emissions and after
treatments systems. Last section of this book includes two different aspects. First is
the vehicle lightweighting and second is the development of UAVs for defence appli-
cations. Overall this book emphasizes on different techniques, which can improve
engine efﬁciency and reduce harmful emissions for a sustainable transport system.
Keywords Advanced engine techniques · Alternative fuels · Methanol · Emission
control

Currently, energy and environment are the two major issues for transportation sec-
tor. Rapidly dwindling petroleum reserves are already alarming, which shows the
immediate requirement of alternative fuels. Emissions from vehicles also pushing
researchers to develop energy efﬁcient and clean combustion techniques (World
Health Organization 2018). This book is based on all these aspects related to internal
combustion (IC) engines. First section of this book includes one chapter based on
introduction of different sections and presents the important aspects of each section.
Second section of this book is based on methanol utilization techniques. In India,
methanol can be produced from different stray carbon resources such as high ash
coal, municipal solid waste (MSW) and low-value agricultural biomass. Indian trans-
port sector, two-wheelers play a dominant role compared to four wheelers (Society
of Indian Automobile Manufacturers 2018). Therefore, it is important to develop
the technologies for alternative fuel utilization in two wheelers. First chapter of
this section discusses about the engine control unit (ECU) calibration process for
adaptation of methanol in modern two-wheelers. This chapter covers all the chal-
lenges in developing the retroﬁtment kit for existing electronic fuel injection (EFI)
two-wheelers with minimal structural changes for successful M85 adaptation. This
chapter primarily deals with the methodology for theoretical and experimental inves-
tigations for ECU calibration, which can ensure ﬂawless performance and on-road
drivability of M85 fuelled motorcycle. Second chapter of this section discusses
the material compatibility of methanol with different engine components because
methanol has compatibility issues with soft components of fuel injection systems.
In this chapter, various research data were studied and cited to understand material
compatibility aspects and engineering challenges for engine parts made of metals,
elastomers, and plastics. The corrosion, wear of engine components are studied and
suggested the suitable material for the engine parts which are coming in contact with
methanol. Last chapter of this section is based on development of M15-fuelled two
wheelers. In this chapter, conventional carburetor assisted two-wheelers is described.
Carburetor is an essential component of these engines, which delivers the fuel to the
combustion chamber however, conventional carburetors are designed to operate with
gasoline. Therefore, it become necessary to modify design parameters of carburetor
to operate with M15. This chapter deals with these challenges and presents possible
solutions for using M15 in carburetor assisted two-wheelers.

Third section of the book is based on advanced combustion techniques. First
chapter of this section is based on gasoline compression ignition (GCI) technique,
which is a futuristic engine technology that takes advantage of good volatility, high
auto-ignition temperature of the gasoline and high compression ratio (CR) of the
diesel engine for higher thermal efﬁciency and lower particulate matter (PM) and
NOx emissions (Hao et al. 2016). This chapter discusses about the development
aspects and challenges involved in practical implementation of GCI technology in
commercial engines. There are several issues such as cold start, high CO and HC
emissions, combustion stability at part load, and high combustion noise at medium
and full load, which need to be resolved. Detailed discussion about the effect of
various control strategies on the GCI engine combustion, performance and emis-
sions, optimum fuel requirement of the GCI engine, and adaption of GCI technique
in the modern CI engines are few key aspects of this chapter. Next two chapters of
this section describe about the gasoline direct injection (GDI) technique. In last few
years, this technology became very popular due to its high power output, thermal
efﬁciency and fuel economy. This chapter introduced different strategies of GDI and
reviews the developments in the area of GDI technology. This chapter presents the
concluding ways for enhancing the performance, way forward for making it more
efﬁcient and reliable by overcoming the limitations of GDI engine technologies.

1 Introduction to Advanced Combustion Techniques …

5

Third chapter discusses about the utilization of alternative fuels in GDI engine and
the effect of these alternative fuels on particulate emissions. It is well known fact
the addition of oxygenated additives to gasoline reduces the particulate formation
tendency compared to gasoline. This chapter discusses the optimization strategies
of combustion by varying the parameters such as spark timing, fuel injection quan-
tity, etc. Discussion on several disadvantages of oxygenated additives has been also
included in the chapter. Last chapter of this section discusses about the mixed-mode
combustion in which engine is operated in both combustion modes namely spark-
assisted compression ignition (SACI), pure advanced compression ignition (ACI)
and spark-ignited (SI) combustion. This chapter presents challenges involved with
such combined mode operation. This chapter presents the addition of ozone (O3) to
avoid excessive knocking at the boundaries of load-speed map. O3 addition stabilized
combustion by enhancing the reactivity of gasoline, which thereby enabled stable
auto-ignition with less initial charge heating.

Fourth section of this book is based on emissions and aftertreatment techniques.
First chapter is based on the PM2.5 bound trace metals and associated health effects.
In this chapter, passenger cars of different age group as Bharat Stage (BS) II, III,
and IV and different fuel type such as diesel, gasoline and compressed natural gas
(CNG) have been used for PM sampling. These samples were analysed using Induced
Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) and total 17 trace metals (Al, Ag, As,
Ba, Co, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Se, Sr, Ti, V, and Zn) were found in PM. Out of
these metals, the non-carcinogenic and carcinogenic risks for adults and children were
calculated for 5 metals namely Cr, Mn, Ni, Zn, and Pb. This chapter concluded that
the human health risks associated with the exposure to PM2.5 emitted from gasoline
and CNG vehicles were higher as compared to diesel vehicle. Last chapter of this
section is based on application of diesel particulate ﬁlter (DPF) for reducing PM
emissions to achieve Bharat Stage-VI. Bharat Stage-VI requires ~90% reduction of
PM compared to Bharat Stage IV, which can be achieved by using DPF. This chapter
deals with the challenges involved with application of DPF in which appropriate
size, accurate position in the tailpipe and minimum pressure drop are important. This
chapter discusses the comprehensive details of material and regeneration processes
used in DPF, including action plan for developing it BS-VI compatible.

Last section of this book includes two chapters. First chapter is based on design
and development aspects of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), which can be used
in numerous applications such as surveillance, communication, terrain mapping,
reconnaissance, and attack, etc. This chapter discusses the application of recipro-
cating engine as a propulsion system for UAVs. Main objective of this chapter is
to discuss the challenges involved in development of IC engine based UAV, which
can provide more durability, reliability, and enhance the ﬂight duration. Discussion
about different aspects such as structural and thermal analysis of engine components
is an important feature of this chapter. Second chapter of this section if based on
vehicle lightweighting strategy for improving the engine efﬁciency and for emission
reduction. This technique is based on replacing parts made with heavier materials
with lighter materials in order to reduce the overall weight of the vehicle.

6

A. P. Singh et al.

This monograph presents the different technologies, which can be used for increas-
ing energy efﬁciency and lowering the exhaust emissions. Speciﬁc topics covered in
the monograph include:
(cid:129) Introduction to Advanced Combustion Techniques and Engine Technologies for

Automotive Sector

(cid:129) Development of Methanol Fuelled Two-Wheeler for Sustainable Mobility
(cid:129) Material Compatibility Aspects and Development of Methanol-Fuelled Engines
(cid:129) Prospects of Methanol Fuelled Carburetted Two Wheelers in Developing Countries
(cid:129) Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) Engine-Fuel System
(cid:129) Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline Direct Injection Engine

(cid:129) Study on Alternate Fuels and their effect on Particulate Emissions from GDI

Technology

Engines

(cid:129) Ozone Added Spark Assisted Compression Ignition
(cid:129) Emissions of PM2.5-bound Trace Metals from On-road Vehicles: An Assessment

of Potential Health Risk

(cid:129) Role of Diesel Particulate Filter to Meet Bharat Stage-VI Emission Norms in India
(cid:129) Design and Development of Small Engines for UAV
(cid:129) Automotive Lightweighting: A Brief Outline

The topics are organized in ﬁve different sections: (i) General, (ii) Methanol
utilization, (iii) Advanced engine technologies, (iv) Emissions and aftertreatment
systems, (v) Miscellaneous.
Methanol Utilization

Chapter 2
Development of Methanol Fuelled
Two-Wheeler for Sustainable Mobility

Tushar Agarwal, Akhilendra Pratap Singh and Avinash Kumar Agarwal

Abstract With environmental pollution norms becoming increasingly stringent,
there is a need for alternate combustion techniques and alternate fuels to keep up
with the changing trends. One of the viable solutions for India is the adaptation of
methanol as a fuel for automotive sector. Methanol could be produced from stray
carbon resources such as high ash coal, municipal solid waste (MSW) and low-
value agricultural biomass, and it can be potentially a good substitute for imported
petroleum-based fuels. Methanol has a higher Octane number and emits lower hydro-
carbon and NOx. Engine noise and vibrations of methanol-fuelled engines are also
relatively lesser than equivalent petrol engines. Further, better fuel properties of
methanol lead to higher engine efﬁciency, which in turn lead to higher well-to-
wheel efﬁciency vis-à-vis gasoline. This chapter covers challenges in developing
the retroﬁtment kit for existing electronic fuel injection (EFI) two-wheelers with
minimal structural changes for successful M85 adaptation. In a fuel injection sys-
tem equipped engine, combustion is primarily governed by Electronic Control Unit
(ECU) map, which controls the amount of fuel injected in the cylinder and also the
spark timings based on various parameters like engine speed, manifold air pressure,
throttle position, engine temperature, intake air temperature, acceleration, altitude
etc. This chapter primarily deals with the methodology for theoretical and experi-
mental investigations for ECU calibration, which can ensure ﬂawless performance
and on-road drivability of M85 fueled motorcycle.
Keywords Methanol · Electronic control unit (ECU) · ECU calibration · Engine
performance · Emissions

2.1 Introduction

Majority of fuels currently used worldwide are of fossil origin, mainly derived from
petroleum and coal. Electricity production in the world is dominated by coal while the
automotive industry extensively consumes petroleum-based fuels, mainly gasoline
and diesel. According to the BP review, global energy consumption increased by
2.2% in 2017, with petroleum being the most dominant fuel resource (Statistical
Review of World Energy 2019). Gaseous fuels and renewables are beginning to be
adopted on a commercial scale. Global energy demands are also on at an all-time
high. Currently, ~80% of the global population lives in countries having per capita
annual energy consumption of fewer than 100 GJ (Carley and Spapens 2017; BP
Energy Outlook 2019).

According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), India has
emerged the 3rd largest primary energy consumer in the world after China and USA
since 2016 (BP Statistical Review 2018; World Energy Consumption Clock 2019).
Total energy consumption of India is ~572.29 million tons of oil equivalent (MTOE).
India is the second top consumer of coal and third top consumer of petroleum in the
world. The primary energy source for the transport sector in India is petroleum,
which provides ~46% (263.25 MTOE) of the entire primary energy demand of the
nation. Out of 263.25 MTOE petroleum-based energy, 213.93 MTOE is imported,
which means that ~81.26% of transport energy requirements of the country are met
by imported petroleum (Total Energy Consumption in India 2013; ET Bureau 2017).
However, if we consider the coal reserves of India, the situation is quite different.
According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), India has the world’s fourth-
largest coal reserves (International Energy Agency 2018). The major problem with
Indian coal reserves is that although it has low sulphur content (0.2–0.7%), it suffers
from high moisture content (4–20%), high ash content (40–50%) and low caloriﬁc
value (2500–5000 kcal/kg), making it virtually impossible to use in its raw form
for electricity generation. Thus, leaving a large untapped primary energy resource,
which is not fully exploited.

With increasingly stringent emission norms and ever-increasing energy demand
for transport energy, it is extremely important to ﬁnd alternatives, which can cater
to both of these challenges. For any new fuel to be globally acceptable, it has to
be readily available and should have sufﬁcient supply at an economical price. Thus,
new alternative fuel should also comply with current and upcoming emission norms.
Then, the most important factor is its adaptability in existing vehicles and minimal
hardware changes required in the existing energy utilization technology to adapt to
this new alternative fuel.

2.1.1 Indian Automotive Sector

According to the Transport Research Wing, Ministry of Surface Transport. Gov-
ernment of India, the total number of registered motorized vehicles in India as on
31st March 2016 was 230 million.1 The report categories these vehicles as Buses,

1Transport Research Wing, Ministry of Surface Transport. http://www.mospi.gov.in/statistical-year-
book-india/2015/189.

2 Development of Methanol Fuelled Two-Wheeler …

11

Taxies, Light Motor Vehicles (Passengers), Goods Vehicles (multi-axle/Articulated
Vehicles/Trucks and Lorries and light), Two–Wheelers, Cars, Jeeps and Miscella-
neous consisting of Three wheelers and agricultural vehicles. The population density
in each category is shown in Fig. 2.1 (see Footnote 1). As seen from this data, the
two-wheelers dominate the automotive sector with more than 73% market share.

Vehicle production statistics (category–wise) for the year 2016, published by
Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), New Delhi is given in Fig. 2.2,

Fig. 2.1 Registered vehicles in India (2016) (Statistical Review of World Energy 2019)

Fig. 2.2 Number of vehicles manufactured in 2015–16 (Society of Indian Automobile Manufac-
turers 2018)

12

T. Agarwal et al.

which shows that at present, the maximum vehicles manufactured and sold in India
are two-wheelers (Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers 2019).

From the above data, it is clear that automotive sector in India is primarily domi-
nated by gasoline-fuelled two-wheelers. Therefore, any reduction in vehicular pollu-
tion due to change in existing motorcycle engine technology, or fuel will signiﬁcantly
affect the air ambient air quality in India. Along with this, one has to also keep in
mind that the new technology or new fuel should be economical enough to get to the
masses and should require minimal changes for retroﬁtment in the existing engines
so that the lead time of changes is relatively small.

2.1.2 Potential Alternative Fuels for Two–Wheelers

Alternative fuels are the fuels, which are not used commercially in the transport
sector currently but have potential to be used in the near future. Alternative fuels are
non-conventional and advanced fuels, which has constituent substances that can act
as an energy carrier for energy conversion in the vehicles. Alternatives to petroleum-
based fuels include hydrogen, chemically stored electricity, alcohols etc. A brief
description of potential alternative fuels for two-wheelers is given in the following
sub-section.

Hydrogen Hydrogen is the cleanest of all fuels. It is a zero-emission fuel, which
produces water as a combustion product when burnt in the presence of oxygen. It can
be used in internal combustion (IC) engines as a gaseous/liquid fuel and can also be
used in electrochemical devices such as fuel cells to produce electricity (Brinner and
Philipps 2001). Although hydrogen has many advantages such as clean production
from water using renewable primary energy and emissions-free combustion but has
several disadvantages and limitations that cannot be ignored. Hydrogen has a very
low volumetric energy density of 600 kWh/m3 at 200 bar storage pressure, which is
~5.5% of gasoline (Brinner and Philipps 2001). Current hydrogen storage methods
are very expensive, complicated and unsafe. Hydrogen is an ideal fuel, but it is not
freely available. Using current production techniques, hydrogen remains as just an
energy carrier and not a primary source of energy. Hence it requires some out of box
break through to establish hydrogen as fuel.

Electrical Energy Chemically stored electrical energy in batteries seems to be a
potential solution for current transport needs. Renewable energy from solar, wind,
hydro etc. can be converted into electricity, which then can be stored in batteries to
operate vehicles. However, a major problem with chemically stored electrical energy
is the medium of energy storage itself (Brueckner 2018). In India, a company named
Ather Energy has successfully launched a battery power scooter with up to 75 km
of running a single charge and 0–40 km/h timing just 3.9 s. The company claims a
battery life of more than 50,000 km (Hsieh et al. 2002). Worldwide too big giants like
Harley Davidson also have come up with their own version of electric motorcycles.
In case of the scooter, the vehicle generally uses a hub motor, installed directly on

2 Development of Methanol Fuelled Two-Wheeler …

13

the wheel of the scooter. While in case of motorcycle, there is a central brushless DC
motor (BLDC motor), which is connected to the rear wheel via chain or belt.

Cobalt is an essential part of the lithium-ion batteries used in electric vehicles.
Cobalt is available in very few underdeveloped countries, and its resources are rather
limited. Cobalt mining heavily relies on child labour in these underdeveloped and
poor African countries. Nickel used in battery cells is extremely poisonous to extricate
starting from the earliest stage. There are serious environmental concerns and land
use clashes associated with lithium mining in nations like Tibet and Bolivia. The
metals utilized in battery production are rather limited and in extremely constrained
supply. This makes it difﬁcult to cater to any signiﬁcant number of global transport
vehicles using current battery technology. In addition, there is no economical method
of reusing and recycling lithium-ion batteries, to recover and recycle scarce metal
resources used.

Ethanol Another feasible solution can be the use of primary fuels such as ethanol and
methanol. Ethanol can be produced from agricultural products such as sugarcane,
corn, potato etc. Advantage of using primary alcohols as fuel is that they can be
produced domestically and have the potential to reduce CO and HC emissions (Hsieh
et al. 2002). Alcohols tend to be much more efﬁcient and provide cleaner burning
characteristics compared to petroleum-based fuels such as gasoline. They have a
higher octane rating, which allows dedicated ethanol engines to be designed for higher
compression ratios without the fear of knocking. However, the use of ethanol puts
additional pressure on the already scarce food availability due to the diversiﬁcation of
land for ethanol feedstock production. Hence, alternate resources to produce alcohols
need to be explored for making it a sustainable fuel.

The potential of these alternative fuels for two-wheelers can, therefore, be sum-

marized as follows:
(cid:129) Hydrogen provides clean burning characteristics, but it is challenging to store and
manage and can be potentially unsafe compared to conventional petroleum-based
fuels.

(cid:129) Electric vehicles are zero tailpipe emission vehicles and do not degrade the urban
ambient air quality. However, since electricity is mostly produced from the tradi-
tional primary source of energy such as coal and gas, the zero-emission claim of
EV’s is rather meaningless. Also, hazards associated with rare metal mining for
manufacturing batteries and hazardous battery disposal pose a signiﬁcant threat to
the environment, making this technology environmentally unsustainable.

(cid:129) Alcohols seem to be a practical solution for resolving the transport energy crisis.
Alcohol adaptation in existing vehicles requires minimal changes in fuel trans-
portation infrastructure as well as in the engine technology. Ethanol seems to be a
potential alternative fuel. However, it’s limited availability, and agriculture linked
production makes it unsuitable for large-scale substitution of petroleum-based
fuels such as gasoline.

Above discussion indicates that we can possibly consider primary alcohol, which
is not limited by its scarce availability and production for large scale displacement

14

T. Agarwal et al.

of gasoline and diesel in the transport sector. One such primary alcohol with large
supply potential is methanol. It offers advantages of ethanol in addition to an abundant
fuel supply potential. Possibility of methanol as a potential alternative fuel for two-
wheelers is discussed in the following section.

2.2 Methanol as a Potential Alternative Fuel

for Two-Wheelers

Throughout the history of energy generation from carbon-based sources, there has
been a constant move towards low carbon fuels (lower C/H ratio). The transition from
ﬁrewood to fossilized coal, followed by a transition to petroleum and ﬁnally to natural
gas currently, suggests the natural adaptation of primary hydrogen-rich fuels such as
methanol. Advantages of methanol include lower emissions, improved brake thermal
efﬁciency of the engine and reduced ﬁre hazard due to lower ﬂammability range
compared to gasoline. Methanol can be produced from low-value agricultural waste,
biomass and other carbon-containing primary sources such as natural gas, coal, etc.
Thus, the use of methanol in the transportation sector can potentially reduce India’s
petroleum imports. According to the Methanol Institute USA, engines operating
on methanol show 50% energy-based efﬁciency gain over gasoline. Methanol is
therefore extensively used in motorsports (The Beneﬁts of Methanol as an Alternative
Fuel 2019; Ingham 2017).

Surplus methane can be used to produce methanol for transportation while poten-
tially reducing greenhouse emissions (Cheng et al. 2011). The CO2 produced from
methanol combustion is used up by plants and converted back to agricultural waste
in a short period of time, which can further be used to produce methanol. Thus,
methanol has a much shorter recycling time compared to fossil fuels, making it a
renewable fuel. Production of methanol from agricultural and municipal solid waste
(MSW) will use these resources, which otherwise are dispensed off to landﬁlls and
water bodies or burnt away. All these means are environmentally unfriendly. In addi-
tion, ~40% of India’s coal reserves consist of high ash coal (40–50%), which cannot
be used for power production or any other industrial application (High Ash content
2018; Kurose et al. 2001). This coal can, however, be converted to methanol via
gasiﬁcation process and put to use in the transport sector as fuel.

Unlike CNG or hydrogen, methanol does not require any unique distribution
network. It can potentially be dispensed from the existing gasoline and diesel petrol
pumps, thus saving a considerable amount of money, circumventing the need to build
additional infrastructure. The knowledge of fuel properties is essential to design
and engineer the combustion systems, fuel storage systems, and fuel handling and
dispensing systems.

Fuel properties affect engine performance, emission and combustion character-
istics signiﬁcantly; hence, it is essential to understand the properties of methanol
compared to conventional fuels. Methanol is a colourless, odourless primary alcohol,

2 Development of Methanol Fuelled Two-Wheeler …

15

Table 2.1 Important fuel properties of methanol compared to other fuels (Man energy solutions,
web resource. Accessed on 8 June 2019. https://www.man-es.com/)

Methanol

Ethanol

Diesel

Gasoline

CH3OH

C2H5OH

C8–C25

C4–C12

Property

Chemical formula

Carbon (wt%)

Hydrogen (wt%)

Oxygen (wt%)

Molar mass (kg/kmol)
Liquid density (kg/m3)
Lower heating value (MJ/kg)

Boiling temperature (°C at 1 bar)

Vapour pressure (bar at 20 °C)

Kinematic viscosity (cSt at 20 °C)
Bulk modulus (N/mm2 at 20 °C, 2 MPa)
Cetane number

Octane number

Auto ignition temperature in air (°C)

Heat of vaporization (kJ/kg at 1 bar)
Minimum ignition energy (mJ at (cid:2) = 1)
Stoichiometric air/fuel ratio

Peak ﬂame temperature (°C at 1 bar)

Flammability limits (vol.%)

Flash point (°C)

38

12

50

32

798

20.1

65

0.13

0.74

823

<5

109

470

1089

0.21

6.5

1890

6–36

12

180–360

27–245

0.059

~0

0.25-0.45

52

13

35

56

794

27.0

78

1.2

902

8

109

362

841

0.65

9.1

1920

3–19

14

85

15

0

183

840

42.7

2.5–3.0

553

38–53

15–25

250

0.23

14.6

2054

86

14

0

114

740

44

0.6

1300

–

90–100

375

0.8

14.7

2030

250–450

250–460

0.5–7.5

52

1.4–7.6
−45

which is a liquid at room temperature and can be handled like other petroleum-based
fuels such as gasoline and diesel. Table 2.1 compares some important fuel properties
of methanol, diesel, ethanol and gasoline.

Combustion Properties Methanol has a higher auto-ignition temperature compared
to gasoline, which makes it safer to transport. Higher auto-ignition temperature means
that in case of a CI engine, higher compression ratios can be used, which can poten-
tially lead to a superior BTE (Zhao et al. 2015). The octane rating of methanol (109) is
signiﬁcantly higher as compared to gasoline (90). This allows a dedicated methanol
engine to operate at a higher spark advance without knocking. Thus, it can potentially
be more thermodynamically efﬁcient and generate higher power output as compared
to the similar capacity gasoline engine.

Oxygenated Fuel Methanol has oxygen inherently present in its molecular structure,
which is responsible for the reduction in emissions of CO and HC, and it converts
them to carbon dioxide (CO2) and H2O. Fuel-bound oxygen helps in achieving more
complete combustion during expansion stroke (Datta and Mandal 2017).

16

T. Agarwal et al.

Latent Heat of Vaporization Methanol has signiﬁcantly higher latent heat of
vaporization compared to gasoline and diesel. Higher latent heat of vaporization of
methanol poses some advantages as well as disadvantages. Because of higher latent
heat of vaporization, methanol has superior engine cooling characteristics (Wanger
et al. 1979). This further improves the fuel efﬁciency by operating the engine on lean
fuel-air mixtures. On the other hand, higher latent heat of vaporization of methanol
can potentially lead to poor idling and cold starting issues. If 100% methanol or
even methanol-gasoline blends are used in the current generation vehicles without
proper adjustments, signiﬁcant cold starting and drivability issues may be experi-
enced (Hodgson et al. 1998).

Caloriﬁc Value Methanol has a lower caloriﬁc value compared to baseline gasoline.
Thus, higher fuel quantity needs to be injected in order to achieve equivalent brake
power output from a similar capacity gasoline engine.

2.3 Challenges of Using Methanol in IC Engines

Although methanol has several advantages over gasoline, its immediate utilization
in the IC engines is challenging, since there are several issues, which need to be
addressed. In this section, major challenges of using methanol as a fuel in the current
generation SI engines are discussed.

Material Compatibility Material compatibility issues of using methanol in the fuel
supply systems are prominent (Crowley et al. 1975). Brass and copper containing
components are prone to heavy corrosion with the use of methanol. However, syn-
thetic rubber components and seals made of Neoprene and Buna-N are not damaged
by methanol (Brinkman et al. 1975). High volatility and afﬁnity of methanol to water
hampers engine combustion and performance. When methanol-gasoline blends are
stored for extended periods, phase separation of methanol and gasoline can happen,
leading to poor drivability of the vehicle (Ingamells and Lindquist 1975). The polar-
ity of methanol is a major reason for its poor material compatibility. Methanol has
the tendency to corrode both metals as well as elastomers used in fuel supply systems
and engine seals (Crowley et al. 1975). Polarization of methanol molecules causes
dry corrosion in metals, which is further reinforced by chloride ion (Cl−) impuri-
ties present in the fuel (Yuen et al. 2010). Methanol is a hygroscopic compound,
and after absorbing moisture, it can trigger wet corrosion in metals. Combination of
methanol with other impurities such as ethyl acetate, acetic acid and chloride leads
to synergistic effects, which may result in a higher degree of corrosion than that from
a single impurity (Walker and Chance 1984). Methanol is very aggressive towards
copper, aluminum and magnesium, but steel and other ferrous metal are relatively
less affected (Bromberg and Cheng 2010). Thus, preferring steel over the aluminum
to manufacture components that come in direct contact with methanol, can reduce
corrosion related problems to some extent. The Methanol Institute, USA published a

2 Development of Methanol Fuelled Two-Wheeler …

17

complete list of metals and elastomers that are compatible with methanol and can be
used in engines. A careful material selection for manufacturing engine components
can resolve the material compatibility issue while using methanol.

Limited Operating Range Methanol (20.1 MJ/Kg) has half the caloriﬁc value com-
pared to gasoline (44 MJ/Kg). To quantify, for M85 blend, the engine gets only 52%
of the energy of gasoline for the same delivery quantity. This issue can be resolved
by using injectors with larger nozzle holes or by injecting a larger fuel quantity per
engine cycle to induct the same energy in the engine cylinder. Thus, for the same
power output in similar capacity methanol and gasoline-fuelled engines, the quantity
of methanol injected should be almost twice as much like that of gasoline injected.
To maintain the same range of the vehicle, the fuel tank of a methanol-fuelled vehicle
must be about twice as large compared to base gasoline-fuelled vehicle.

Cold Starting Cold starting is another major issue related to methanol utilization.
In 1977, Menrad experimented on a single cylinder Volkswagen engine to check the
feasibility of methanol fueling of an engine. In this investigation, it emerged that the
minimum ambient temperature required for successful methanol (M100) combustion
is 10 °C (Menrad et al. 1977). Later, in 1983, Gardiner tried to improve methanol
cold-starting by adjusting spark timing and fuel injection phasing. He reported that
methanol fuelled engine could not start below 0 °C (Gardiner and Bardon 1983).

Major factors leading to poor cold starting of methanol compared to gasoline are

summarized as follows (Nakata et al. 2006; Turner et al. 2012):

Low energy density: Methanol has a lower heating value (20 MJ/kg) as compared
gasoline (45 MJ/kg). Hence, compared to gasoline, more methanol quantity needs
to be vaporized to form a combustible charge and release an equal amount of heat in
an engine cycle.
Latent heat of vaporization: The heat of vaporization of methanol (1089 kJ/kg) is
much higher than gasoline (375 kJ/kg). Hence, higher energy investment is required
to vaporize methanol for equivalent energy release in an engine cycle.
Single component fuel: Unlike gasoline, methanol is a single component fuel with no
presence of readily volatile components. In gasoline, the presence of readily volatile
components greatly improves its cold startability.
Electrical conductivity: Methanol is a fairly good conductor of electricity and can
cause an electric short-circuit in the spark plug electrodes in case of spark plug
wetting, which needs to be taken into account.

Flame Visibility High ﬂame luminosity is one of the major requirements of auto-
motive fuel, from a safety point of view, since it helps in easy detection of ﬂames
in case of an accident (Fanick and Smith 1984). Luminosity occurs because of the
formation of microscopic soot particles during burning. These carbon particles, when
heated to a certain temperature, start emitting light in the visible light region because
of ‘grey-body’ radiation phenomenon (Fanick et al. 1984). During methanol com-
bustion, fewer soot particles are formed as compared to gasoline, due to which it

18

T. Agarwal et al.

burns with a very light blue colored ﬂame, which is almost invisible during daylight
and therefore it poses signiﬁcant safety challenge (Keller et al. 1978).

Some of the challenges associated with methanol combustion can be easily
resolved by using suitable additives. For example, adding boric acid to methanol
gives it a green color to the ﬂame, which is easily visible during daylight (Pearson
1985). Adding volatile compounds like butane or butene can improve also its cold
startability (Fanick et al. 1990). Fortunately, both of these issues can be resolved
by adding a small quantity of gasoline to the methanol as well. The properties of
methanol-gasoline blends in overcoming the limitations of 100% methanol is of great
interest and has been discussed in the next section.

2.4 M85: Fuel Properties and Advantages Over M100

Addition of a small quantity of gasoline to methanol, several fuel properties of blend
improve, which make methanol ﬁt for use in IC engines. M85 is one such typical
and popular methanol—gasoline blend containing 85% v/v methanol and 15% v/v
gasoline. In 1990, Fanick conducted a study on the effects of gasoline and other
additives on the ﬂame luminosity of methanol (Fanick et al. 1990). He investigated
the variations in the luminosity of methanol with increasing concentration of gasoline
in methanol-gasoline blends. The ﬂame luminosity of methanol—gasoline blend
rapidly increased with increasing gasoline concentration (v/v) beyond 12%. Fanick
also compared the luminosity of M85 to other methanol-gasoline blends such as
M88, M90 and M92. The luminosity of M85 was signiﬁcantly higher than 100%
methanol, thus making it safe for use in the engines used in the transport sector. M85
has superior visibility even in daylight compared to 100% methanol. Thus M85 is
easily detectable in case of an accident.

Apart from increasing the visibility of methanol ﬂame, gasoline also improves
its cold startability. Blending gasoline with methanol adds some volatile compounds
into the mixture and increases its vapor pressure. On addition of a small amount of
methanol to gasoline increases the Reid vapor pressure (RVP) by more than 30%,
resulting in values that are higher than those of base gasoline (61 kPa) and 100%
methanol (31 kPa) (Andersen et al. 2010). The RVP of methanol blends is higher
than that of base gasoline for concentrations up to 80% (v/v). Thus, adding 15%
gasoline (v/v) to methanol improves both its ﬂame visibility and cold startability.
This makes M85 much safer than methanol to store and transport and also suitable
for use in cold climate conditions. Table 2.2 lists the important properties of M85 in
comparison with methanol and gasoline.

2 Development of Methanol Fuelled Two-Wheeler …

19

Table 2.2 Comparative fuel properties of methanol, M85 and gasoline

Property

Methanol

Gasoline

Stoichiometric AFR
Density at 15 °C (g/cm3)
Latent heat of vaporization (kcal/ kg)

RON (Research Octane Number)

Reid Vapour pressure (RVP) (kPa)

6.5

0.798

260.7

110

31

M85

7.62

0.785

234

111

60.4

14.7

0.753

89.96

100

61

2.5 Methanol Utilization Strategies in Two-Wheelers

Dominance of two-wheelers in Indian automotive market, potentially economical
and abundant availability of methanol and clean burning characteristics of methanol
clearly show that utilization of methanol in two-wheelers is an effective way for
energy diversity in the near future. The next logical question is how to utilize methanol
efﬁciently in two-wheeler engines. Methanol utilization strategy for two-wheelers
should preferably be based on light spark-ignited (SI) gasoline engine, which makes it
easier to adapt not only to the new generation engines but also to provide a retroﬁtment
solution for the existing engines. Two different fuel injection technologies used in
two-wheelers are (a) fuel delivery using conventional carburetors in SI engines, and
(b) modern port fuel injected (PFI) electronic fuel injection (EFI) systems. These
two technologies are discussed below:

2.5.1 Conventional Carbureted Two-Wheelers

Carburetor is a mechanical device used to mix air and fuel in the required ratio (Air-
fuel ratio) in order to prepare suitable charge for combustion in an engine cylinder. A
carburetor consists of a ﬂoat chamber, which acts as a reservoir of fuel at atmospheric
pressure. The fuel quantity in the ﬂoat chamber is maintained at a constant level using
a ﬂoat. As the fuel from the ﬂoat chamber is consumed, the ﬂoat comes down, which
in turn causes the ﬂoat valve to open and allow more fuel to ﬂow from the fuel tank
to the ﬂoat chamber.

Once the fuel is in the ﬂoat chamber, it ﬂows into the venturi through a jet, based
on the pressure difference between atmosphere and static pressure inside the venturi.
As the engine piston moves from top dead centre (TDC) to bottom dead centre (BDC)
during the intake/ suction stroke, vacuum created causes the air to rush into the intake
manifold at high velocities depending on the engine speed. Fast-moving air causes
reduction in static pressure, leading to fuel ﬂow from the ﬂoat chamber via venturi
to the intake air stream in the carburetor throat.

Although carburetor works well for gasoline engine, it may not be the case for
methanol. Technological limitations of carburetor such as lack of dynamic fuel injec-
tion timing and absence of temperature or altitude-based compensations, coupled

20

T. Agarwal et al.

with poor cold-starting characteristics of methanol may render conventional carbu-
reted vehicles of little application. Another promising technology for utilization of
methanol in two-wheelers is Port Fuel Injection (PFI) System, which is discussed in
the next sub-section.

2.5.2 Modern Port Fuel Injected Two-Wheelers

Modern port fuel injection systems rely on Electronic Control Unit (ECU) for optimal
fuel delivery and spark timings. An ECU is a miniature on-board computer that
controls various actuators of engine. The ECU senses the physical conditions of
the engine and environmental parameters using multiple sensors in the engine bay
and then interprets the data from multi-dimensional performance tables to adjust the
actuators in the engine. Before advent of electronic fuel injection (EFI) systems, air-
fuel mixture, idle speed, ignition timing etc. were mechanically set and controlled
by the carburetor. In EFI systems, airﬂow continues to be regulated by a butterﬂy
valve, but the fuel delivery is controlled by the electronic fuel injector. The fuel and
air quantities in an EFI system can therefore be adjusted independently.

As shown in Fig. 2.3, ECU maintains the air/fuel ratio by adjusting various actu-
ators based on the data provided by multiple sensors. These include the inlet air
temperature sensor (IAT), coolant temperature sensor (CT), crank position sensor
(CPS), barometric pressure sensor, manifold pressure sensor (MAP), throttle posi-
tion sensor (TPS) etc. ECU computes the optimum fuel injection duration and the
spark timing. In summary, EFI system enables air—fuel ratio to be adjusted in real
time according to the environmental and the engine power output requirements.

EFI system offers several advantages over conventional carburetors such as lower
fuel consumption, higher power output, enhanced reliability, better cold starting,

Fig. 2.3 Schematic of an electronic control unit

2 Development of Methanol Fuelled Two-Wheeler …

21

altitude compensation, etc. The engine management system (EMS) continuously
monitors and adjusts the AFR but the carburetors deliver a fuel rich mixture at both
low and high-power output. In carburetor, it is challenging to optimize the AFR for all
throttle conditions and engine speeds. Altitude/barometric compensation is challeng-
ing to achieve with carburetors, whereas in the EFI system, altitude compensation is
done by measuring the actual atmospheric pressure using on-board sensors and the
injected fuel quantity is accordingly adjusted. EFI systems are signiﬁcantly reliable
as compared to carburetors. Arbitrary engine stops, spark plug wetting, high exhaust
emissions and other problems due to sub-optimal AFR are also taken care of by the
EFI system. Carburetors tend to go out of tune, which requires periodic adjustments,
which induces the risk of failure. EFI systems, on the other hand, continuously adjust
themselves and remain tuned.

2.5.3 Case-Study of Carburetor Versus PFI Systems

in Two-Wheelers

A comparative study of a 125 cc motorcycle engine equipped with a carburetor and
another one with an electronic port fuel injection system is discussed below. In 2012,
researchers from Robert Bosch GmbH conducted an experimental and numerical
study for comparing carburetor and EFI systems on a motorcycle engine (Schuerg
et al. 2012). The experiments were conducted on a single cylinder motorcycle engine
with the details given in Table 2.3.

Both engine conﬁgurations were tested on four test cycles: World Motorcycle Test
Cycle (WMTC), Indian Drive Cycle (IDC), Malaysian Cycle and Bangalore Cycle.
The EFI conﬁguration delivered better fuel economy compared to carburetor in both
chassis dynamometer tests and simulations at different temperatures. The EFI system
had a closed loop lambda control, which adjusted the fuel quantity with changing
driving conditions and maintained the air – fuel ratio close to the stoichiometric value
at all times.

In a study conducted by Latey et al. a single cylinder carbureted two-wheeler
engine was converted into a methanol (M20) fuelled port fuel injection (PFI) engine

Table 2.3 Comparison of
electronic fuel injection
Versus carburetion systems in
a two-wheeler (Schuerg et al.
2012)

Electronic Fuel
Injection

Carburetion

Engine

Single Cylinder, air cooled, four stroke,
two valves

Engine volume

125 cc

Power Output

11 bhp at 8000 rpm

Torque generated

11 Nm at 6500 rpm

11.6 bhp at
8000 rpm

11.2 Nm at
6250 rpm

22

T. Agarwal et al.

(Latey et al. 2005). The experiments were performed on a single cylinder, naturally
aspirated, 350 cc motorcycle engine using M20 (20% v/v methanol and 80% v/v gaso-
line). It was observed that operating engine hardware of the EFI system produced
higher power and provides superior fuel economy compared to the carburetor (Latey
et al. 2005). EFI system provided signiﬁcantly higher power than carburation system
for the same engine.

2.6 Tools for ECU Calibration

An electronic control unit (ECU) is a mini computer that controls the various actu-
ators in an internal combustion engine to ensure smooth running and optimal per-
formance of the engine. The production vehicles with a locked ECU in which the
calibration settings and performance tables come pre-conﬁgured by the automobile
manufacturer. The user cannot access or modify the program installed in such kind
of ECU’s. Another category of the electronic control unit is programmable ECUs,
which can be reconﬁgured by the user. When an engine is modiﬁed for alternate fuel,
stock ECUs can’t automatically make the required fuel compensations. To account
for the engine modiﬁcations, an open ECU is used to replace stock ECU. The per-
formance tables are modiﬁed based on engine sensor data, and by monitoring the
air/fuel ratio from exhausts using a wideband lambda sensor. This process is carried
out at an engine performance facility using engine and chassis dynamometer. Engine
dynamometer provides useful data such as engine speed, torque output, power out-
put, gear change events, etc. A chassis dynamometer is used for street and other
high-performance applications. Engine calibration parameters include fuel injection
duration, fuel injection timing, spark timing, throttle-fuel volume mapping, engine
load-fuel volume mapping etc. An open ECU is also equipped with a data logger
to record sensor data and ECU out-puts for performance analysis. This is useful to
monitor engine stalls, misﬁres or other undesired behaviors during street trials.

2.6.1 Engine Dynamometer

The overall experimental setup of engine dynamometer was divided into three parts:
test engine and dynamometer assembly, instrumentation for generating gasoline base
fuel maps and ECU recalibration setup. Experiment setup for engine dynamometer
testing and calibration is shown in Fig. 2.4. The test engine was mounted on a three
degree of freedom cast iron base and coupled to an eddy current engine dynamometer
via chain-sprocket arrangement. The engine is pre-equipped with various sensor
such as crank position sensor, throttle position sensor, manifold air pressure sensor,
ambient air temperature sensor and engine temperature sensor.

The data from these sensors was used by the stock ECU to adjust the fuel injection
duration and spark timings by actuating the fuel injector and ignition coil accordingly.

2 Development of Methanol Fuelled Two-Wheeler …

23

Fig. 2.4 Schematic of engine dynamometer test setup

The dynamometer applied the resistive force on the test engine for simulating the
road load driving conditions. To reverse engineer the stock ECU gasoline maps, a
combustion analyzer was used to measure various engine parameters such as engine
speed, spark timing, fuel injector duration and throttle opening. For interfacing the
engine with the combustion analyzer, minor changes were made in the engine. Stock
spark plug of engine was replaced with a spark plug pressure transducer to sense the
in-cylinder pressure during the intake and power strokes. Crank shaft of the engine
was extended out of left-hand side crank case cover (LH cover) in order to facilitate
installation of a precision angle encoder for measuring the engine crankshaft rotation.
To measure the spark timing and fuel injection duration, spark plug and fuel injector
input cables coming from the ECU were tapped using current clamps.

To recalibrate the ECU for M85, stock ECU was replaced with an open ECU. No
changes were in the engine wiring harness though. The open ECU was controlled
using a laptop connected to the ECU via an ethernet cable. ECU measured the
engine speed, throttle opening, intake manifold pressure, lambda value and engine
temperature using suitable sensors. Based on these values, it calculates the injector
open time and the spark timing, and accordingly actuated the ignition coil and fuel
injector.

2.6.2 Chassis Dynamometer

Chassis Dynamometer experimental setup can be divided into three sections:
Dynamometer room, Controller room and Underground (Fig. 2.5). Dynamometer

24

T. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 2.5 Schematic of chassis dynamometer test setup

room consists of a checkered base plate covering the underground pit. A small por-
tion of classis roller pops out of this checkered base plate, on which the rear/ driving
wheel of two-wheeler rest. Front wheel of the motorcycle is pneumatically clamped
to the test bed. The motorcycle is securely attached to the test bed using restraining
cables at multiple locations for safety. Dynamometer room is equipped with a driver
aid panel, which displays important test parameters such as vehicle speed, drive gear
and test cycle graph. This information is used by the rider to accordingly control the
throttle, brake and drive gear of the motorcycle. To cool the motorcycle and to sim-
ulate air resistance to the vehicle during actual road driving condition, a three-phase
heavy-duty blower with variable frequency drive is used. The speed of air coming
from the blower is synchronized with the motorcycle speed for accurately simulating
the road driving conditions. For tailpipe emission analysis, a portable raw emission
analyzer is used.

The dynamometer room and the controller room are separated by a double pane
glass window for easy communication between the vehicle rider and dynamometer
control operator. Rider and dynamometer control operator can additionally com-
municate via head phones too. The operator feeds testing cycles into dynamometer
control panel and logs the test results to the computer.

The underground pit houses an AC regenerative motor for simulating the vehicle
load conditions. This regenerative motor is connected to chassis roller, on which the
driving wheel of motorcycle rests. All the wirings of the cooling blower, driver aid
panel and AC regenerative motor are routed through underground trenches such that
the checkered base plate seats are mounted ﬂush with the dynamometer room ﬂoor.

2 Development of Methanol Fuelled Two-Wheeler …

25

Fig. 2.6 ECU calibration tools

2.6.3 Instrumentation for ECU Calibration

For ECU calibration, most of the stock engine sensors and actuators are used as it is,
except ECU and lambda sensor. Narrow band lambda sensor is replaced by a wide
band lambda sensor, which is connected to lambda signal conditioning unit. The
stock ECU is replaced by reprogrammable open ECU, which is connected to a data
logger via an Ethernet cable. The data logger hosts the ECU calibration software
required for ECU programming and interfaces with the wideband lambda sensor
module and other host of sensors and actuators as shown in Fig. 2.6.

2.6.4 Open ECU

Open ECU is a category of the electronic control units, which is reprogrammable by
the user. When an engine is modiﬁed for alternate fuel, stock ECUs can’t automat-
ically make the required fuel compensation. To account for engine modiﬁcations,
an open ECU is required to replace stock ECU. Recalibrating an ECU requires
interfacing the unit with a data logger; this interfacing is necessary so the data log-
ger can transfer the engine calibration settings to the ECU as well as monitor the
engine parameters in real-time. It comes with preview software and calibration tool.
The entire unit is protected in a water-resistant aluminum case, with highly rugged
automotive-grade connectors.

26

T. Agarwal et al.

2.6.5 Wide-Band Lambda Sensor and Conditioning Unit

It is essential to determine the inlet fuel-air mixture strength inside the combustion
chamber so that one can get a fair idea about the in-cylinder combustion process and
emissions from the engine, which varies with varying λ. For measuring the fuel-air
mixture ratio inside the combustion chamber, a wideband lambda sensor is required,
which measures the amount of oxygen present in the exhaust gas. A wide-band
lambda sensor is a planer zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) marginal current sensor with
integral heater. It consists of a combination of Nernst type potentiometric oxygen
concentration cell (sensor cell) and an amperometric oxygen pump cell transporting
oxygen ions. Nernst cell has the property that at a higher temperature, as soon as
there are partial oxygen pressure differences on both ends of its ceramic, oxygen ion
starts diffusing through the ceramic.

The transport of ions results in generation of electrical voltage signal between
them, which is measured by the sensor. This voltage signal is then used to determine
the amount of unused oxygen present in the engine exhaust. The voltage generated
by the sensor cell depends on the difference in the amount of oxygen present in the
exhaust with the ambient oxygen. The output from the lambda sensor goes to the
lambda signal-conditioning module for calculation of various parameters such as
oxygen content, lambda, air-fuel ratio etc.

2.7 ECU Calibration Strategies

ECU calibration is an extensive process of determining the most optimum calibra-
tion maps for engine operation. It is a multistep process, which involves designing
tests, data collection and analysis, and reconﬁguring ECU maps to optimize engine
combustion. ECU calibration helps in tuning the engine for optimal performance,
emissions and thermal efﬁciency, creating a balance for best combustion strategy.
Figure 2.7 gives a brief outline of the entire ECU calibration process for M85 adap-
tation

2.7.1 Engine Setup in Calibration Software

Before undertaking the actual calibration of the engine on a chassis or engine
dynamometer, there are some essential initial setups required in the ECU calibration
software, which are shown in Fig. 2.8.

Engine: In this tab, important physical parameters of the engine such as number of
cylinders, primary load control strategy (TPS or MAP), crank position sensor used,
cam position sensor used and conﬁguration (Even ﬁre or Odd ﬁre), are deﬁned. In

2 Development of Methanol Fuelled Two-Wheeler …

27

Fig. 2.7 ECU calibration process ﬂow diagram

this study, load control strategy is based on TPS, because in a single cylinder engine,
MAP sensor value is highly unstable and cannot be used for calibration.
Fuel: In this tab, fuel injection mode (Sequential, semi sequential, throttle body or
random sequential) for engine operation is selected. Since in this study, a single
cylinder engine with port fuel injection is used, any injection strategy can be used.
Results will be the same for all of them.

28

T. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 2.8 Engine conﬁguration in ‘Setup Engine’ menu

2 Development of Methanol Fuelled Two-Wheeler …

29

Fig. 2.9 Crank position
sensor and TDC sensor
conﬁguration

Ignition: The most important parameter of this tab is ‘Ignition Type’. The options
available in this tab are:

(cid:129) Distributor: Firing order is controlled by distributer
(cid:129) Wasted Spark: Ignition coil is ﬁred whenever the ECU sense TDC (both during

intake TDC and power stroke TDC); and

(cid:129) External coil driver: Ignition coil is triggered whenever rising edge of external

trigger is sensed at input pin.

Enables: This tab gives centralized location to switch on/off different engine tuning
parameters for fuel and ignition compensation. The ﬁnal injector open time and spark
timings are calculated by the ECU based on the settings enabled in this tab. Each of
these parameters has to be individually calibrated for the engine.
Deﬁne TDC: This tab is used to conﬁgure the ECU for different Sync and trigger
patterns. By deﬁning ‘Angle from tooth to sensor at TDC’ and ‘Trigger tooth before
TDC,’ it knows when TDC occurs.

This generally works with missing tooth conﬁguration denoted as m-n, where m
is total number of teeth and n is the number of missing teeth. The ECU registers the
ﬁrst tooth after missing tooth as #1 and then counts the subsequent teeth. The trigger
wheel and crank position sensor for 12-1 conﬁguration is shown in Fig. 2.9.

2.7.2 Sensor Setup in the Calibration Software

The sensors are electronic devices, which convert the changes in the physical param-
eter into electrical signals. Prior to use, sensors have had to be calibrated based on

30

T. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 2.10 Sensors conﬁguration in ‘Setup Sensors’ window

known physical principles and its corresponding electrical signals. In this window,
the calibration values of all the sensors used in the engine are registered. The ECU
contains a directory of commonly used sensors along with their calibration settings.
If the calibrator is using one of those sensors, we can choose that sensor from the
drop-down menu, otherwise sensor has to be ﬁrst calibrated on a suitable test rig and
then the calibration values are to be entered in the table. PE ECU used for this study
has inbuilt signal conditioning algorithms, which are used to ﬁlter the sensor data
and remove any unwanted noise (Fig. 2.10).

2.7.3 Fuel Injection and Ignition Calibration

The steady state calibration is done by modifying the primary fuel and ignition tables.
These look-up tables set the base fuel requirement and spark timings of the engine.
These tables are 3-D charts with engine load (in the base table, it is either TPS based
or MAP based depending on the calibrator) on the X-axis and engine speed on the
Y-axis. Whereas the Z-axis deﬁnes the value of injector open time or ignition timing.
An example fuel table is shown in Fig. 2.11.

2 Development of Methanol Fuelled Two-Wheeler …

31

Fig. 2.11 Primary fuel table

As seen in the table, the engine speeds and loads are at discrete intervals. All the
values in between are calculated based on the four-point interpolation method, as
seen in red color. The block moves in the table based on engine speed and load, as
sensed by the various engine sensors. This red block along with Cross-hairs (green
color cross) aids the calibrator in the tuning process. The values of injector open-time
and spark timings BTDC can be modiﬁed by the user in many ways. The values can
be directly entered by selecting a particular cell. If more than one cell is selected; the
same value is set for all those cells. In addition to that, user can also use Multiply,
Divide, Subtract and Add buttons from the console. Once the default tables are set,
calibration process is started for engine idle tuning and freezing lambda value for
Idling, which is generally 0.86–0.88. After that, start ignition timing calibration is
done to freeze the ignition timing with highest engine torque output. Along with it,
spark plug pressure transducer and combustion analyzer are used to ensure that there
is no pinging/ knocking tendency.

Once the ignition map is calibrated for each throttle positions and engine speed,
fuel maps are calibrated. For fuel map calibration, vehicle is operated on chassis
dynamometer at constant speed. Then injector open time is calibrated for each throttle
position at that engine speed to obtain maximum power output. Once the fueling is
set for each throttle position for that particular engine speed, one moves to next
engine speed in the fuel table and repeat the process. With this, the base engine
calibration in completed and calibrator can move to various types of compensations
such as lambda, air temperature, altitude, acceleration, deceleration, battery voltage
compensations.

32

T. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 2.12 Air temperature compensation tab

2.7.4 Fuel and Ignition Compensations

Air Temperature Compensation (Fuel): With change in air temperature, its den-
sity also changes. Cold air is denser; hence requires more fuel quantity for optimal
combustion. An example of intake air temperature calibration window is shown in
Fig. 2.12. For intake air temperature compensation, the vehicle is operated at Idle
below −20 to 120 °C in a temperature-controlled chamber and after every 3 min
interval, the value of lambda is logged. Based on the logged AFR, air temperature
compensation is such that λ = 1 for all temperature conditions. Once the temperature
calibration is done for idling, the same process has to be repeated for different values
of the throttle positions.
Coolant Temperature Compensation (Fuel): For this compensation, the vehicle is
operated on the chassis dynamometer at a constant speed of 60 kmph, keeping the
throttle value constant at 20, 40, 60 and 80%. For each throttle opening, value of
engine temperature is logged at a step of 40oC along with its corresponding lambda
value. Now based on the lambda, fuel compensation factor is adjusted in the coolant
temp compensation table. Typical coolant temp compensation table is shown in
Fig. 2.13.
Starting Compensation: At the time of start, the engines require some extra fuel.
For methanol, the cold start is even more important because of its poor vaporiza-
tion characteristics. For cold start calibration, the vehicle is cranked at pre-deﬁned
temperature and maintained at 0% throttle until lambda becomes equal to 1. Then
throttle in suddenly increases to 5% and then engine response is noted. This test is
performed at −10, −5, 0, 5 and 10 °C. For each test, engine response is qualitatively
noted and based on that, fuel compensation factor is adjusted. Starting compensation
factors are shown in Fig. 2.14.
Acceleration compensation: Acceleration compensation increases the injector open
time, whenever the throttle is increased rapidly. If acceleration compensation is not
calibrated, the engine runs lean until steady state is achieved. This results in poor
drivability and substandard throttle response. In extreme cases, it may also read to

2 Development of Methanol Fuelled Two-Wheeler …

33

Fig. 2.13 Coolant temperature compensation tab

Fig. 2.14 Starting/Acceleration/Deceleration compensation tab

34

T. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 2.15 Battery/Barometer compensation

engine stall. In acceleration compensation, ECU injects extra fuel into the engine,
based on the rate of change of throttle. This compensation is calibrated based on the
actual driver feedback on the track. Various factors, which need to be addressed in
acceleration compensation are shown in Fig. 2.15.
Deceleration compensation: Deceleration compensation has nothing to do with
engine performance. It is a feature used to increase the fuel economy of the vehicle.
This compensation enables Deceleration Fuel Cut-Off (DFCO), when the throttle is
less than ‘TPS min’, and engine speed is higher than ‘Max RPM’.
Altitude Compensation: As the vehicle goes to higher altitudes, the ambient air
density decreases, hence engine requires less fuel to operate. To compensate for
changing altitudes the ECU needs to be calibrated in a pressure-controlled chamber
on an engine/chassis dynamometer.
Battery Voltage: Battery compensation in necessary to account for increasing injector
deadtime (time between ECU output pulse and injector opening) with decreasing
battery voltage.
Material Compatibility Aspects
and Development of Methanol-Fueled
Engines
Abstract The environmental concern and the ﬁnancial markets over the global scale,
alternative fuels were developed to substitute convention fuel. Methanol is a substi-
tute for conventional fuel which can be used in an Internal Combustion (IC) engine.
Methanol is an alternative fuel for IC engines in terms of environment and economical
aspect. It is renewable, economically, and environmentally interesting. A sustainable
strategy is proposed to use methanol in the internal combustion engine in various
ranges of concentration. In this chapter, various research data were studied and cited
to understand material compatibility aspects and engineering challenges for engine
parts made of metals, elastomers, and plastics. The fuel chemistry and quality effects
on the engine are discussed. The effects of methanol on the various components of
internal combustion engines are studied. The corrosion and wear of engine com-
ponents are studied and suggested the suitable material for the engine parts which
are coming in contact with methanol. The implementations of methanol in spark
ignition engine and compression ignition are studied. The engineering path-way of
the implementation and design is explained in detail. The design of different engine
components such as engine head, fuel injection system, fuel pump, after treatment
for methanol fuelled engines are studied and suggested. The vehicle adaptation for
methanol fuel is also studied.
Keywords Methanol · Corrosion · Wear · IC engine

3.1 Introduction

In the contest of the current automotive engine landscape, there is a requirement
of an alternative viable source of energy. Alternative fuels are a substitute for the
convention source of energy in the global prospects for engines. Alcohols are an
alternative renewable source of energy which led to full-scale evolution and imple-
mentation as fuel in the engine which can operate at different percentages. Among
the alternative fuels, biofuels are one of the examples of such type of development in
the world scenario. Alcohol fueled engine is an IC engine which can run at a different
percentage of methanol or ethanol and fuel can be stored in the same tank. These
engines can burn any fraction of alcohol with conventional fuel by using controlling
fuel injection timing i.e. by varying injection stretegies and methods.

Currently, methanol is used as an alternative fuel in various applications, and its
trial was demonstrated in the early nineties. It is composed of coal, biomass, and
renewable source of energy by carbon capturing and its scheme of utilization. It is
a viable fuel having strong potential to cut down the carbon footprint of fossil fuel
in the transport sector. It is used as a fuel blend or pure form in internal combustion
engines. Thus methanol is a most attractive fuel as an alternative to conventional fuel
as its qualities like making, liquid fuel, easy to store and distribution. The physical
and chemical properties of convention fuel (gasoline), methanol, and ethanol are
compared, as shown in Table 3.1. Methanol application in internal combustion engine
increases the brake thermal efﬁciency hence enhances the energy utilization (Nichols
2003). It produces higher hydrocarbon and reduced NOx and soot in exhaust gas

Table 3.1 Physical and chemical properties of gasoline methanol and ethanol (Yates et al. 2010)

C4–C12 and H10–H26

Methanol

Ethanol

CH3OH
790

C2H5OH
790

Property

Chemical formula
Density (STP) (kg/m3)
Vapour density (STP) (kg/m3)
Boiling point at 1 bar (°C)

Heat of vaporization (kJ/kg)

Surface tension (@20°C) (mN/m)

Dynamic viscosity (@20 °C) mPas

Molecular weight (kg/kmol)

Oxygen content by mass (%)

Hydrogen content by mass (%)

Carbon content by mass (%)

Lower heating value (MJ/kg)

Higher heating value (MJ/kg)
Volumetric energy content (MJ/m3)
Stoichiometric AFR (kg/kg)

Stoichiometric AFR (kmol/kmol)

Speciﬁc CO2 emissions (g/MJ)
Speciﬁc CO2 emissions relative to
gasoline

Gasoline

740

3.88

25–215

180–350

21.6

0.6

107.00

0.00

14

86

42.90

48.00

31,745

14.70

54.49

73.95

1.00

Autoignition temperature (K)

465–743

Adiabatic ﬂame temperature (K)

2275

1.42

65

1100

22.1

0.57

32.04

49.93

12.58

37.48

20.09

22.88

6.50

7.33

68.44

0.93

738

2143

2.06

79

838

22.3

1.2

46.07

34.73

13.13

52.14

26.96

29.85

9.00

14.33

70.99

0.96

698

2193

15,871

21,291

3 Material Compatibility Aspects and Development …

39

emission than convention fuel (Shamun et al. 2016). Thus it has advantages like
sustainability, energy security, and air quality point of view.

Methanol chemical structure (CH3OH) contains oxygen which separates from
convention fuel and causes wear or degradation and corrosion of engine components.
Therefore engine parts components which come in contact with fuel are required to
upgrade. As the current fuel price increased day-by-day, it is necessary to reduce
by applying other fuel without changing the operational cost. The engine parts (fuel
pump, engine valves, engine valve seats, fuel, and oil sealing materials) upgradation
is necessary for compatibility of methanol (Hagen 1977).

In this study, methanol application as fuel in the internal combustion engine and
the effect of methanol on the materials of engine components are elaborated in detail.
The engine modiﬁcation and design of methanol-fueled engine components are also
studied.

3.2 Material Compatibility Issues for Methanol

The polarity of methanol leads to the challenge regarding material compatibility,
which needs the changes in the fuel system of engines. Metals and elastomers used
in fuel systems are attacked by methanol if the proper material selection is not
done. Amongst alcohol methanol is most aggressive. Methanol and wet methanol
are corrosive to iron, steel, magnesium, aluminum, zinc, copper and their alloys.
Anodized aluminum is corrosion resistant to methanol (West and McGill 1992).
Some rubber and plastic materials are sensitive to methanol, but there are some
polymers which are not affected by methanol.

3.2.1 Fuel Chemistry and Quality Issues

Chemical structure and quality of fuel is important for the compatibility of the fuel
delivery systems. Fuel delivery system is affected by the chemistry of fuel. The
material testing of the components with methanol is necessary for the durability
of the fuel delivery system. Methanol is very reactive with coating materials like
aluminum oxide or aluminum. The reactions of methanol with aluminum and their
oxides are as follows

6CH3OH + Al2O3 → 2Al(OCH3)

+ 3H2O

3

(3.1)

The reaction product, methoxide salts are soluble in methanol. Aluminum also

react with methanol to form methoxide.

6CH3OH + 2Al → 2Al(OCH3)
3

+ 3H2

(3.2)

40

V. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

The quality of fuel is very important for the robustness of the fuel delivery com-
ponents. Impurities present in fuel would also affect the fuel delivery systems. For
example injector operations are very much affected by sulfates, which are recorded
as deposits in fuel injector and ﬁlter plugging (ASTM Standard 2009; Dumont et al.
2007; Devlin et al. 2005). Corrosion because of impurities like chlorides, and per-
oxides which are formed due to copper, would affected the elastomers seals and fuel
delivery system, fuel economy, and emissions (Dumont et al. 2007; Brinkman et al.
1994). Hence, fuel speciﬁcation of methanol should be improved.

3.2.2 Corrosion

Alcohols exposed to ferrous metals cause more corrosion than conventional fuels.
Generally, corrosion is due to the impurities such as formic acid, acetic acid, and
chlorides. Contaminant like chloride ion, formic acids present in alcohols causes
enhanced corrosion (Walker and Chance 1983). Ethyl acetate, acetic acid and chlo-
ride ion all three together are more prone to corrosion than a single one. Formation
of formic acid and acetic acid in alcohol fuel are common during combustion and
enhance their corrosiveness. Methanol or ethanol which absorbed water make them
electrically conductive, and any contaminant containing ions increases their con-
ductivity, which enhances the electrochemical and galvanic corrosion. Azeotropic
water present in alcohol causes the wet corrosion which oxidizes most of the metals
(Brink et al. 1986). Methanol or ethanol and absorbed water enhanced the electrical
conductivity of alcohol, resulting in higher corrosion. Organic contamination, such
as formic acid enhances the corrosiveness of exhaust gases produced by alcohol
combustion. Formic acid is an alcohol combustion product which brings down the
corrosion temperature below the dew point of the engine exhaust gas. Peroxides are
the alcohols combustion product, which increases the corrosion growth due to the
alcohol combustion product. Metals like magnesium, aluminum, and lead are more
susceptible to alcohol attack, which causes corrosion (Dela Harpe 1988). Contam-
inant in alcohol fuel enhanced the corrosion of the fuel handling system and also
corrosiveness of combustion product. The main corrosion outcome is hydrated fer-
rous chloride, and it enhances the rust formation (Otto et al. 1986, 1988). Metals in
contact with alcohols are prone to stress corrosion failure. The crack formed in fuel
line enhances the corrosion possibility as metal exposes to alcohol.

Wing et al. (1993) have studied the corrosion of steel and aluminum substrate and
also coated with a moderate and high percentage of phosphorus electroless nickel
(chemical plating of nickel) for the gasoline and gasoline/methanol fuel test. The
test was carried for the gasoline as reference fuel and gasoline with 15 and 85% of
methanol for pure substrate and coatings. The electroless coatings over aluminum
and steel and anodized aluminum exhibited the best corrosion protection under test
conditions. Anodizing is an electrochemical process in which the metal surfaces are
converted into an anodic oxide that is corrosion-resistant and highly durable. So these
coatings can be used for methanol-fueled engines (Table 3.2).

3 Material Compatibility Aspects and Development …

41

Table 3.2 Corrosion performance methanol-fueled engine for different materials and coatings
(Saarialho et al. 1982)

Material/fuel

1010 steel

15% Methanol

85% Methanol

Moderate corrosion rate

High corrosion rate

Base 1010 steel coated with
phosphorous nickel

Excellent corrosion
protection

Excellent corrosion
protection

Moderate corrosion rate

Higher corrosion rate

Corroded the substrate

Corroded the substrate

Protected from corrosion

Little corrosion

Anodized 356 aluminum

Protected from corrosion

Little corrosion

304 stainless steel

356 aluminum

356 aluminum with
phosphorous nickel

3.2.3 Wear

Alcohols used as an alternative fuel causes the wear of metallic components. Wear
of engine component is a very detracting concern, and numerous investigations have
been performed to understand their sensitivity. Application of methanol as fuel in
IC engine enhanced the wear of engine components. This is due to the formation of
corrosive combustion products, which causes a reduction of oil ﬁlms thickness. The
intermediate combustion product such as formic acid promotes the wear of engine
cylinder liner and piston ring assembly (Naegeli et al. 1997). Corrosion of piston
ring and cam follower with the application of 15% blends of ethanol and methanol
with conventional fuel (E15 and M15) is causes a signiﬁcant amount of wear. The
wear of engine components due to gasohol is ﬁrmly related to the corrosion of those
components.

3.2.4 Components Affected by Methanol

Many engine components are affected by using alcohol and their blends as fuel. The
compatibility of components material like metal or plastic or elastomers is studied.
These components are fuel pumps, seals, fuel tanks, injectors, piston rings, pistons,
engine cylinders, valves and valve seats. Fuel pump material must be changed or
upgraded to enhance the fuel ﬂow rate because the alcohols and their blends have
lesser heating value. The fuel electrical conductivity increases when alcohol is used,
so the fuel level sender (consist of an electrical resister) is upgraded or changed.
The fuel line materials (metal or polymer) are affected by alcohols presence in the
fuel. The improper material selection causes the wear, degradation, and corrosion
of engine components and results in the fuel leaks. Therefore, engines are at higher
risk by using alcohol fuel and material compatibility and hardware robustness are
under suspects. The materials used in engine components (fuel injectors, fuel rails,
and their seals) are inﬂuenced by the application of alcohols as a substitute fuels for

42

V. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

IC engine. The other engine parts like cylinder head, piston rings, valve seat, engine
valve, intake manifold, intake port, and various oil seals are also affected by the use
of alcohols. Wear of some components increases due to combustion characteristics
(peak pressure, temperature, emissions etc.) and the use of different fuels.

3.2.5 Fuel Handling

Material selection and design of fuel systems must be taken care when alcohols are
used in the engine as fuel. Design of metallic components in contact with alcohol is
very critical for fuel composition variation, thermal, and pressure effect. Different
metals have been selected for the design of fuel tanks, fuel lines, fuel ﬁlters, level
sensors, fuel pumps, pressure control valves, the liquid containing sensors, regulators
and fuel modules. The metallic components materials and their design have been
changed according to materials changing regulations. Many older designs which
were according to conventional fuel should be validated for alcohols and modiﬁed
by protective coating for methanol. So, optimal designs of components for alcohol
fuels are taken care for the sustainability of methanol. The review of protective
coating and metals used is necessary for the application of alcohols. Compatibility
of components material is taken care of all ranges of operating conditions.

3.2.6 Fuel Tank Assembly

Compatibility of material and their corrosion resistance properties was considered
for the application of alcohol as a fuel. Fuel tank materials are made of carbon steels,
which are corroded by alcohols application. These carbon steels fuel tanks are coated
with coating materials which are not reactive with alcohols. The coating materials
are compatible and withstand for a long duration. These coatings should also ﬁll the
spout and ﬁller pipes. This area is attacked by alcohol fuels.

3.2.7 Fuel Supply Assembly

Fuel tube bundles are another important part of the engine by which fuel is trans-
ported to or from the engine. It includes the feed line, the return line, and any other
component attached to the fuel pipe bundle. These components are fuel composition
sensors, liquid pressure sensors, fuel ﬁlters, and quick connect. These components
are made of austenitic stainless steel, and also some of them are of made of carbon
steel coated with anti-corrosion materials. The small amount of other materials used
to the components affects the components when alcohol fuels are used. There may
be a chance of corrosion by using alcohol, if interior part of the tube is not taken

3 Material Compatibility Aspects and Development …

43

care by applying appropriate coatings. Thus the interior parts become an issue of
corrosion origination and damage the materials. The coating materials may be nickel
or zinc-alloy based.

3.2.8 Fuel Pump Module

Fuel pumps are made of many materials. Fuel pump contains many components such
as ﬂoat arms, springs, fuel ﬁlters, pressure regulators, electrical terminals, ﬂanges
and polymer ﬂanges ﬁlled with metals. Metals used in fuel pump assembly are
coated steel, stainless steel, aluminum, copper, silver, gold, palladium, and platinum.
Design details and material selection are necessary for the application of alcohol as
an alternative fuel. The older fuel pump systems are incompatible for alcohol fuel
exposure and affect the performance of the system and greatly reduced the life of the
component.

The internal component of the fuel pump system is also considered when alcohol
fuel is used in the engine as fuel. It contains electrical contact, armature, motor
features, and pumping section. Materials used in these components are aluminum,
copper, and zinc and these materials are very reactive with alcohols. The electrical
devices used to reduce the electronic noise produced by the electric motor of the fuel
pump are a major concern by using alcohols and taken care. These components and
their joining (solder or weld) and electrical leads should be protected by a coating or
enclosing the whole subassembly into an encapsulation. A compatible coating must
be applied to the armature and points where they are attached. The copper commutator
face used in brush type motor is replaced with the carbon to avoid degradation in
alternator by use alcohol fuels. Another option is the selection of brushless motor
for fuel pump systems. Another part of the fuel pump system is pumping section,
which is to be studied. Pumping section material is an aluminum plate which is used
in turbine style pumping and protected. The application of ionized aluminum which
is sealed has no issue degradation with the application of alcohols. Unprotected
aluminum causes premature wear and degradation when exposed to alcohol. The
old type of pump design (vane style or gear style with unprotected steel pumping
section) is modiﬁed for the higher durability with the application of alcohol fuels
(Galante-Fox et al. 2007).

Materials for fuel ﬁlter and pressure regulators are major challenges for the use of
alcohol fuel in the engine. The moisture present in the alcohol fuel is accumulating
in the fuel ﬁlter when the fuel pump system is inactive. There is a generation of the
static ﬁeld in the presence of fuel which is electrically conductive cause corrosion
of components. The corrosion of the pressure regulator is avoided by using a good
quality seal, and pressure is maintained when the pump is on. Fuel pressure regulator
and fuel ﬁlters are made of austenitic stainless steel to avoid corrosion. The old design
materials of ﬁlters and regulator are stainless steel and zinc coated carbon steel
respectively which is changed according to the alcohols fuel compatible materials.
The other components of fuel pump systems materials are changed according to

44

V. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

alcohol compatible materials. These components are springs, guide rods, ﬂoat arms,
electrical terminals, wires, and level sensor contacts and their compatibility with
alcohol fuel must be reviewed. These parts are generally made of austenitic steel
and wires and terminals are protected from alcohol by insulation and tin plating,
respectively. The terminal of level sensors is also taken care as a small electrical
load generates stress on terminals and causes corrosion when exposing to alcohol
(Matthias and Thomas 2009). Other challenges of a modern fuel pump are high
voltage electrical interface. Improperly timed motor cause the wear of carbon brushes
which in contact with carbon or copper commutator of the armature. Thus electrical
connector design is such that electrical cross-talk should be avoided which lead to
terminal corrosion by application of alcohol fuel.

3.2.9 Fuel Rails and Injectors

Most of the fuels contacting parts are made of stainless steel. These components
which handle fuels are fuel injectors and fuel rails. Generally, stainless steel is cor-
rosion resistant but not corrosion proof with alcohol as fuels (Shiﬂer2009; Scholz
and Ellermeier 2006). Presence of chloride contamination, which is easily solu-
ble in alcohol may cause the corrosion and at stressed point cause the corrosion
cracking. Fuel delivery components experience higher stress in spark ignited direct
injection technology than conventional port injection due to higher fuel pressure.
Many researchers have studied that aluminum components exposed to alcohol are
corroded signiﬁcantly (Yuen et al. 2010; Priyanto 2017). Thus the improper design of
material and aluminum components which are direct contact with alcohol exhibited
problem and should be taken care of. Aluminum fuel delivery pipes are corroded in
the presence of moisture in alcohol fuels. The rust of corroded components may plug
the injectors and causes the rough running of the engine. The continuous operation of
the engine, the corrosion of fuel rail increased, and pin holes may develop resulting
leakage of fuel rails. The dry corrosion is due to the reaction between aluminum and
alcohol. Thus alcohols may cause dry corrosion as well as wet corrosion of the fuel
components so, the material robustness is optimized.

3.2.10 Engine Valve and Valve Seat

There is a signiﬁcant amount of valve wear and increase of insert of the valve seat
due to the application of alcohols as a substitute for gasoline. So the appropriate
materials for the valve train design and materials are selected to meet the end-user
life expectations. Various parameters are taken into account for the selection of
materials. These parameters are machinability, wear resistance, tribo-oxidative wear,
and corrosion of the metal materials and also have a higher cost. Several paths have
been used to make the valve seat. These paths involve higher tool steel percentage in

3 Material Compatibility Aspects and Development …

45

powder metal mixture and inclusion of powder metal components like molybdenum
and cobalt in powder metal technology of sintering. With the use of alcohol, there is
a possibility of wear of valve face and valve seat and lead to an engine misﬁre.

3.3 Methanol-Fueled Engines

Methanol is used in an internal combustion engine as fuel in many ways such as direct
injection of methanol in the combustion chamber or by mixing with conventional fuel.
Mixing of methanol with convention fuels is taken place inside combustion chamber
or outside combustion chamber. Blending of methanol with diesel or gasoline is
performed for outside mixing, however methanol is injected in port fuel injection.

3.3.1 Methanol Application in Spark Ignition Engine

As methanol is resistance to auto-ignition due to lower in-cylinder temperature, and
also the higher auto-ignition temperature cause resistance to knocking. However,
properties of methanol in terms of output power, efﬁciency, and emission are similar
to spark ignited engine. Methanol is suitable fuel for spark ignition engines as it
has high heat of vaporization and also high autoignition resistance Table 3.1. It can
be used as a blend with gasoline or in pure form. Methanol can also be used as an
octane booster for gasoline to avoid the knocking as it has a high octane number and
also lowers the combustion temperature. Engine modiﬁcation for a lower percentage
of methanol as blend in spark ignition engine operation is not necessary. Caution
is required for using the splash blending of methanol with gasoline as the pump is
not tailored for methanol in the fuel blend causes higher volatility and resulting fuel
evaporation. The volumetric content of energy is necessary for the design of the fuel
injection system and fuel tank. As the methanol volumetric content of energy is half
of the gasoline, so injection duration of methanol fuel should be nearly double of
the gasoline for the same amount of power generation thus suitable injector design is
required. For the similar driving condition as the gasoline vehicle, the larger fuel tank
is required for methanol. As methanol is resistance to auto-ignition due to lower in-
cylinder temperature, and also the higher autoignition temperature cause resistance
to knocking.

3.3.2 Methanol Application in Compression Ignition Engine

Compression ignition engines are most commercially used, so there is a very strong
interest of using methanol in compression ignition engine. Methanol has very low
cetane numbers, which indicate the autoignibility of methanol. As the methanol has

46

V. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

high autoignition resistance, it is used in diesel engine application and requires major
modiﬁcation in the engine. Use of methanol/diesel mixture requires co-solvent or
emulsiﬁer agent as methanol diesel do not mix and also methanol fraction is limited.
A simultaneously higher fraction of methanol reduces the volumetric energy content
and difﬁcult to maintain the same power applying the same injectors. Lubricity of
fuel is also decreased and need some lubricating additives. Dual fuel mode is very
common, where diesel and methanol are injected in engine separately. Methanol
applications in large diesel engines are as dual fuel mode. Recently dual fuel mode
is used in many large ships engines where methanol is injected separately, and diesel
is used as a source of ignition. This application required modiﬁcation in the engine
cylinder heads and the fuel injection system. The fuel injection system contains
separate direct injection methanol injectors or custom built injectors, which allows
injecting diesel and methanol to the cylinder (Bünger et al. 2012). In the dual fuel
application in an engine, port fuel injection is used for the injection of methanol, and
it improves the emissions. The glow plug is used as an ignition source in place of pilot
fuel injection for methanol-fueled compression ignition engine (Verhelst and Wallner
2009). Recently compression ignition research engine fueled with methanol is run-
ning in the homogeneous compression ignition (HCCI) mode and partially premixed
combustion (PPC) mode (Shamun et al. 2016, 2017). These type of combustion mode
reduce the soot formation. Most recent research of methanol used in a compression
ignition engine is reactivity control compression ignition, which reduced the NOx
and soot simultaneously by complete combustion of fuel (Dempsey et al. 2013).

3.3.3 Methanol-Fueled Engine Design Customisation

There is a requirement of changes or modiﬁcations of the hardware of engines or
vehicles due to corrosiveness of methanol and its blends with gasoline or diesel.
All the vehicle engines running by using a low percentage of methanol (methanol
less than 5%) need not require any modiﬁcation. Low concentration of methanol
increases the vapor pressure of gasoline and requires changing the formulation of
the base fuel gasoline. Older vehicles cause the problems even at the low level
of methanol blends with conventional fuel because methanol acts as a solvent and
dissolve the deposits in the fuel system and blockages the down the line. For the use
of a high percentage of methanol or neat methanol, there is a requirement of changing
of engine hardware materials. Fuel additives are required to improved lubricity and
anti corrosivity property to protect the metals (Xiang 2015).

IC engines running on methanol are specially designed to overcome the corro-
siveness of the fuel. The engine components design and materials are customized
according to the methanol as a fuel in the engine. The new materials such as polyethy-
lene or stainless steel and chrome or nickel plating are selected for fuel tank and fuel
system, respectively. The port fuel injection technique is best for the methanol to
achieve better fuel air mixing and vaporization.

3 Material Compatibility Aspects and Development …

47

3.3.4 Cold Start Challenges

There is a problem of cold start of a high percentage of methanol in gasoline. For the
successful cold start of methanol blended gasoline engine, the combustible mixture
of fuel-air is required and should generate sufﬁcient heat to retain engine running
(Yuen et al. 2010; Pearson et al. 2012). Solutions for the cold start and minimize the
addition systems requirement by optimizing the following components:
Engine Block: Cold starts problem can be reduced by heating the engine intake and
block electrically (Bergstrom et al. 2007; Cowart et al. 1995).
Injector: Startability issues of an engine can also be suppressed by heating injectors
individually or fuel rail to enhance the vapor formation of methanol (Kabasin et al.
2009). Second option to enhance vaporization is by heating the intake air (Gong
et al. 2011; Colpin et al. 2009). Another way, the injection pressure is enhanced to
improve the vaporization and atomization of spray.
Valve: Some researchers have investigated the valve timing effect on the cold starta-
bility and observe that both exhaust and intake valve opening and closing would
affect the cold startabilty (Colpin et al. 2009; Nakata et al. 2006).
Ignition: Ignition timing adaptation is very important for the cold start. Sometimes
multiple sparks are used. Some researchers have proposed the plasma jet spark to
enhance startability (Markel and Bailey 1998).
Direct Injection: Late injection and stratiﬁcation are an effective way of improving
cold start performance. Siewart et al. (1987) investigated cold start successfully at
the temperature less than −29 °C for methanol (Marriott et al. 2009).

3.3.5 Fueling Systems Customisation and Ignition

As the volumetric energy content of methanol is lower than the conventional fuel, so
injectors and fuel pumps of methanol-fueled engines should be with increased ﬂow
rate to achieve peak power. Fuel pumps and injectors have the material compatibility
issue with methanol (Galante-Fox et al. 2007; Priyanto 2017).

Methanol has been easily pre-ignited due to the presence of a hot spot in the
combustion chamber. Methanol generates no soot in ﬂames causes the overheating
of ignition source like spark plug electrode (Kalghatgi and Bradley 2012). The tem-
perature of the electrode is in between 700 and 925 °C and suitable for gasoline.
So for reducing the electrode temperature, a low heat grade spark plug is needed
(Kabasin et al. 2009). Suga et al. (1989) investigated the pre-ignition tendency using
various spark plugs with similar heating range. It was observed that spark plugs
with platinum tipped electrodes were prone to pre-ignition. Many other researchers
had also investigated the spark plug electrode of noble metal with high pre-ignition
temperature tendency (Naegeli et al. 1997; Yuen et al. 2010).

48

V. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

3.3.6 Engine Cylinder Head Modiﬁcation for Methanol

Methanol has very high heat of vaporization, which causes the cooling of intake port
and leads to a low temperature of intake. This starts increasing thermo-mechanical
stress in the head, and its measurement is necessary (Bergstrom et al. 2007). Valves
seat inserts and valve suffer from higher wear during methanol operation due to
non-lubricating nature of alcohols and produces lesser lubricating soot. Inlet valve
experience increased contact forces due to enhance combustion pressure and thermal
shocks (Bergstrom et al. 2007). Thus selected materials for these components are
with higher hardness and chrome content (Giroldo et al. 2005; Bergstrom et al. 2007).
Ignition retard is not necessary for the knock suppression at peak power as
methanol is knocked resistance but lead to higher peak cylinder pressure. Thus
ignition retard is necessary to suppress peak pressure within the allowable limit.
Thus methanol engine should have variable valve timing systems with wider timing
window for the advantages of internal exhaust gas recirculation rates.

3.3.7 Vehicle Adaptation and Durability

As the volumetric energy density of methanol is much lower than gasoline and diesel,
the larger size fuel tank is required for the same driving range. Thus, the additional
weight has to carry the vehicle when it fully fueled. Formaldehyde (HCHO) emission
from the methanol-fueled engine is increased as compared to gasoline and concern as
these emissions are currently unregulated. It is a human carcinogen and plays a very
crucial role in tropospheric photochemistry (Wei et al. 2009). Formaldehyde is an
intermediate product during combustion at a temperature around 1000 K (Svensson
et al. 2016) and leads to formaldehyde emission in case of port fuel injection (PFI)
in which methanol goes to crevices and escapes during the expansion stroke. But
in case of direct injection of methanol formaldehyde emission is minimized. For
methanol application in the engine, there should be speciﬁc after treatment catalyst
formulation to reduce the formaldehyde emissions.

Engine durability is the proper functioning and reliability of an engine over a long
period of time. Durability of existing engine is major technical hurdle for application
of methanol as fuel. This is because of corrosive nature of methanol which causes
corrosion and wear of engine components. The durability of methanol fuelled engines
is improved by engine modiﬁcations like using new materials and design features of
the engine. These modiﬁcations in the engine components are fuel supply systems,
fuel mixture delivery, engine cylinder liner, piston rings and engine oil formulations
(Ernst and Peﬂey 1983).

3 Material Compatibility Aspects and Development …

49

3.4 Summary

This chapter provides a comprehensive review of materials compatibility for the
methanol-fueled engines and design of engine components. The above study covers
all the aspect of material compatibility and design are discussed, which are as follows:
• Material compatibility of automotive engines and material selection for that
• Wear and corrosion of engine component due to methanol and prevention
• The storage of methanol fuel and their handling
• Design of engine components and subsystem compatible with methanol

The reality of the study is that automotive engineers have to develop the engine for
the methanol application in advance for their use. The consumers need transparency
about legality of fuel, economy, and durability of engines. They also keen for the
easy modiﬁcation of the engine for methanol.
Prospects of Methanol-Fuelled
Carburetted Two Wheelers in Developing
Countries
Abstract Most developed countries use indigenous fuels for powering their trans-
port sector, however developing countries have to import transport fuels/petroleum to
produce transport fuels and they struggle for fuel production from domestic resources.
India is focusing on reduction of fuel import by introducing indigenous transport fuels
such as variety of biofuels. High ash content coal is available in India, which cannot
be used for electricity generation, however this can be used for methanol produc-
tion using gasiﬁcation route that can be used to power the Indian transport sector.
Although methanol production is already done in India and the current production
capacity cannot fulﬁl the huge demand of the transport sector currently. However
methanol economy initiative is gaining momentum due to active intervention of
Government of India (GoI) and the technology is being developed for methanol
production from high ash coal, municipal solid waste (MSW) and low value agri-
cultural resides. Methanol has great potential to be utilized in spark ignition (SI)
engines. This chapter is explores methanol utilization in small carburetor assisted
two-wheelers. Two-wheelers population in Indian road transport sector is more than
70% in terms of number of vehicles registered. Carburetor is used to induct the fuel
in these small capacity (100–150 cc) SI engines. Existing engines are designed to
operate on gasoline therefore slight modiﬁcations become essential for adaptation of
methanol in these existing two-wheelers. Currently, India is preparing a road map for
large scale adaptation of M15 (15% v/v methanol and 85% v/v gasoline) in the exist-
ing SI engines, which has several challenges. This chapter summarises challenges
and possible solutions for adaptation of M15 in carburetor assisted two-wheelers.
Keywords SI engine · Methanol · Carburetor · M15
4.1 Transport Fuel Scenario in Developing Countries

Transport fuels are one of the most important factors affecting the economy of any
country. Price of crude oil is increasing and cyclic in nature due to rapid depletion
and limited reserves. Increasing crude oil prices lead to increase in price of transport
fuels such as gasoline, diesel and natural gas. Statistical data of reserves-to-product
ratio of coal, oil and natural gas of 2016 shows that these global reserves will exhaust
in next 114 years, 50.7 years, and 52.8 years respectively (BP Statistical Review of
World Energy 2016). Increasing fuel prices affect the economy from micro level
to macro level. Micro level affects because of the price increase of commodities,
used in daily life because transportation cost of these items is dependent on vehicles
powered by fossil-fuels. Macro level affects because increased fuel prices increase
inﬂation by increasing the price of manufacturing. Developing countries like India
are affected to a greater degree by increasing crude oil prices because their net fuel
imports are signiﬁcantly higher compared to several developed countries. India has
to explore more options for alternative fuel production and utilization in transport
sector. Crude oil import of India in last ﬁve years is shown in Table 4.1 (Indian
Petroleum and Natural Gas Statistics 2017).

India is aiming to reduce fuel imports by introducing indigenous transport fuels.
Therefore India is looking for a sustainable alternative fuel, which can be utilized
in all sectors of the economy. For transport sector, fuel properties become more
important because the quality of fuel affects engine performance as well as exhaust
emissions (Bharj et al. 2019). Among different options, methanol has shown sig-
niﬁcant potential to be utilized in transport sector due to triple P factors namely
production, pollutants, and price. Methanol can be produced from coal, natural gas,
biomass, and atmospheric CO2. It is a clean burning fuel because it has ~50% inher-
ent fuel oxygen, which helps reduce emissions such as CO, HC, etc. (Valera and
Agarwal 2019). Methanol price is approximately one third that of conventional fuels
however methanol has ~50% lower energy density. This leads to double the amount

Table 4.1 Crude oil imports (Indian Petroleum and Natural Gas Statistics 2017)

Year

Import crude oil
(MMT)

% Growth in
import of crude
oil

Average crude oil
prices (US$/bbl)

% Growth in
average crude oil
prices

2011–12

2012–13

2013–14

2014–15

2015–16

2016–17

171.73

184.80

189.24

189.43

202.85

213.93

4.97

7.61

2.40

0.10

7.08

5.46

3.04

111.89

107.97

105.52

84.16

46.17

47.56

56.43

31.50
−3.50
−2.27
−20.25
−45.14
3.02

18.65

2017–18 (P)

220.43

MMT million metric tons, P provisional

4 Prospects of Methanol-Fuelled Carburetted …

55

of methanol usage compared to conventional fuels for harnessing the same engine
power output. Higher energy-to-cost ratio compared to conventional fuels is the
most important feature of methanol i.e. it’s per unit energy cost is signiﬁcantly lower
than conventional fuels, which makes it cheaper to operate the vehicles on per km
basis. Other developing countries like China have already started mass production
of methanol and dimethyl ether (DME) using coal as a feedstock (Yang and Jackson
2012). In China, it is mandatory to blend small fraction of methanol with gasoline
for vehicular application and DME is blended with liqueﬁed petroleum gas (LPG)
for household stoves and water heaters. There are 44 regional standards already
adopted by China by FY 2009 for low methanol blends.1 In China, several automo-
tive companies participated enthusiastically in this green methanol economy (GME)
vision initiative and demonstrated methanol-fuelled models. These include Chery
Automobiles, Shanghai Maple Automotive, Chang’s Auto Group and Greely Group.
In India, methanol seems to be a better alternate compared to hydrogen, biodiesel
and electric batteries and it can reduce 10% crude oil dependency by 2022 and reduce
GHG emissions by 33–35% (Natarajan 2018). According to the Geological Survey
of India, the country has 315 billion tonnes of coal resources as on April 2017,2 out
of which only less than 25% can be utilised in power plants and for Industrial use.
75% of Indian coal reserves have high ash content, which prohibits its commercial
utilisation. Therefore, ministry of road transport and highways, National Institution
for Transforming India (NITI Ayog) are preparing a road map to reduce crude import
bill by up to US$100 Billion by 2030 by adopting ‘Methanol Economy’ (Methanol
Economy 2018). This vision can be achieved if all segments of road transport shift
from conventional fuels to alternative fuel to a large extent. Two-wheelers are the
most dominant segment in Indian road transport sector, compared to other segments
such as three-wheelers, four-wheelers and heavy-duty vehicles as shown in Fig. 4.1,3
therefore their methanol adaptation will be crucial for achieving this national mission.
Indian two-wheelers segment is the largest vehicle class with variety of two-
wheelers such as mopeds, scooters, and motorcycles. During FY 2017–18, two-
wheelers industry showed a total sale of ~20 million units in Indian market with
20% increase in exports. The sales for FY 2017–18 showed that sales of scooters and
motorcycles increased by ~20% and ~14% respectively, however sales of mopeds
declined by ~3.5% compared to sales in FY 2016–17.4

Most two-wheelers in India use small SI engines in which the combustible
fuel-air mixture is prepared outside the engine using carburetor. Sometimes these
two-wheelers face startability issues due to inferior vaporization characteristics of
gasoline in cold climatic conditions due to domination of high boiling point hydrocar-
bons known as ‘heavy ends’ (Sharma and Mathur 2012). These hydrocarbons remain

coal

reserves

1Standards for methanol blends. https://www.iea-amf.org.
2India’s
indoasiancommodities.com/2018/03/07/indias-coal-reserves-estimated-315-billion-tonnes/.
3Two-wheeler industry. www.ﬁntapp.com.
4Two-wheeler
pgidtrail=50&pid=413.

tonnes—ministry.

http://www.siamindia.com/pressreleasedetails.aspx?mpgid=48&

https://www.

estimated

statistics.

billion

315

at

56

H. Valera et al.

Fig. 4.1 Indian automotive sector (see Footnote 4)

in liquid form and stick inside the combustion chamber walls, leading to startability
issues. Therefore, it is important to consider the design aspects of carburetor so that
such issues can be avoided. A carburetor is designed to perform three main tasks
namely fuel atomization, fuel vaporization, and fuel-air mixing.5 Following factors
are important for these tasks: (i) Time available for fuel-air mixing; (ii) Temperature
of the incoming air; (iii) Boiling range of fuel; and (iv) Length of manifold used to
connect a carburetor and the test engine.

Primarily, carburetor prepares three types of mixtures: rich mixture for idling
condition, lean mixture for superior fuel economy, and stoichiometric mixture for
achieving complete combustion. The carburetor has to supply the required air-fuel
ratio at steady-state and transient conditions of the vehicle. Steady-state means vehi-
cle can run at a constant speed and achieve constant power output from the engine.
Transient condition means speed and load of the vehicle varies continuously, thereby
getting variable power from the engine.

5Fuel
20NOTES/AT6301/UNIT%20II.pdf.

system.

https://svce.ac.in/departments/auto/Lesson%20plan/II%20YEAR%20CLASS%

4 Prospects of Methanol-Fuelled Carburetted …

57

4.2 Methanol as an Alternative Fuel for Vehicles

Methanol offers numerous advantages over conventional fuels such as gasoline, com-
pressed natural gas (CNG), and diesel. Some of the advantages are:
• Methanol is a colorless, volatile, and ﬂammable liquid, having lower molecular

weight compared to conventional fuels.

• Methanol can be produced from coal, biomass, and MSW or from stranded natural

gas6.

• Methanol has inherent fuel oxygen, which reduces harmful tailpipe emissions.

Presence of –OH radicals improves the combustion.

• Methanol has higher latent heat of vaporization, which provides extra cooling
effects, which improves brake thermal efﬁciency and reduces the NOx emissions.
• Methanol is a safer transport fuel due to signiﬁcantly higher self-ignition tem-
perature, hence is recommended as an alternate to conventional fuels. Due to
this, methanol-fuelled engine can be operated at higher compression ratios, which
results in higher thermal efﬁciency compared to gasoline engines.

• Methanol burns without black smoke at high temperatures (Cheng et al. 2008).
• Methanol is a sulfur-free fuel, which results in zero-sulfur based tailpipe emissions

such as SO2 and SO3.

• Methanol is degradable in aerobic (in the presence of air) and anaerobic (in the

absence of air) conditions without any bioaccumulation.

• Accidental methanol release into environment is less harmful compared to spills

of crude oil or gasoline.

Due to these advantages, methanol seems to be a strong contender as an alternate
fuel for IC engines, especially for SI engines. High octane rating of methanol also
makes it more suitable for SI engines, however utilization of pure methanol in an SI
engines is a challenging task due to the following reasons.
Methanol Availability: India is in nascent stage of methanol production for fuel use.
As of now, only ﬁve Indian companies namely Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilizer
and Chemicals Limited, Deepak Fertilizers, Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers,
Assam Petrochemicals and National Fertilizers Limited are producing methanol as
commodity chemical. Methanol production data from domestic companies of India
is given in Table 4.2.

Above data shows that India cannot shift to 100% methanol for transport sector
at this stage, without augmenting its methanol production capacity, especially from
domestic resources such as high-ash coal, MSW and low value biomass. Therefore,
it is logical to utilize low fraction of methanol blends with conventional fuels, until
domestic production reaches up to the desired level.
Technological Challenges: Methanol has higher latent heat of vaporization com-
pared to gasoline, which is one of the main reason for modiﬁcations in the existing
engines. Major modiﬁcations for methanol adaptation include advancement in spark

6Methanol as an alternative transportation fuel in the US: options for sustainable and/or energy-
secure transportation. https://afdc.energy.gov/ﬁles/pdfs/mit_methanol_white_paper.pdf.

58

H. Valera et al.

Table 4.2 Domestic
methanol production in Indiaa

Financial
year

2010–11

2011–12

2012–13

2013–14

2014–15

2015–16

Domestic
production
(MT)

Consumption
(MT)

Exports
(MT)

0.375

0.360

0.255

0.307

0.210

0.163

1.14

1.44

1.47

1.54

1.80

1.83

0.044

0.120

0.185

0.082

0.049

0.044

aIndia’s Leapfrog to methanol economy. http://www.niti.gov.
in/writereaddata/ﬁles/document_publication/Article%20on%
20Methanol%20Economy_Website.pdf
MT million tons

timing for carburetor-assisted vehicles and correction in fuel maps and spark timing
for port fuel injected engines/vehicles. Methanol is more corrosive than gasoline,
which adversely affects elastomers (soft components used for seals and fuel lines)
as well as metal components (pumps, lines, and spigots) (Brinkman et al. 1994).
Relatively lower energy density of methanol compared to gasoline is another major
concern of methanol, which requires more amount of methanol blend to be injected
for producing same power as gasoline. This also requires modiﬁcations in fuel injec-
tion parameters as well as fuel delivery system. This aspect also supports gradual shift
from gasoline to methanol so that modiﬁcations can be done in an orderly manner.
Formaldehyde Emissions: Methanol-fuelled vehicles emit higher formaldehyde
emissions compared to gasoline-fuelled vehicles. Formaldehyde reacts with the
atmospheric gases and forms formic acid which is hazardous for humans and ani-
mals.7 Zhao et al. (2011) performed a comparative study of formaldehyde emissions
using four different vehicles of 1.8 L capacity. They reported signiﬁcantly higher
formaldehyde emissions from methanol-fuelled vehicles compared to baseline gaso-
line fuelled vehicles.
Public Acceptance: Methanol is highly poisonous for the nervous system. Ingestion
of 28.5 g methanol can cause irreversible injury to the nervous system, blindness, and
even death.8 It has been reported that a person can die due to consumption of 15 mL
liquid containing 40% methanol (Naraqi et al. 1979). Hence lower blend (M15) is
a more feasible solution, keeping in mind the public perception of methanol being
poisonous. Once public is comfortable using lower methanol blends as fuel, higher
blends of methanol could be introduced to power the transport sector.

7Formaldehyde. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formaldehyde.
8Methanol Institute. https://biodiesel.org/docs/ffs-methanol/faq-about-the-safe-handling-and-use-
of-methanol.pdf?sfvrsn=6.

4 Prospects of Methanol-Fuelled Carburetted …

59

4.3 Construction of Carburetor

The carburetor works on the principle of pressure difference across a throat, in which
air exerts a pressure force on its contact surface and pressure difference causes the
ﬂow of fuel in the form of spray in depression zone. This pressure difference principle
is used in the carburetor to supply the air-fuel mixture as per engine requirement at
different engine operating conditions. During suction stroke, piston moves from the
top dead center (TDC) to the bottom dead center (BDC), which creates vacuum in
the engine cylinder. In a carburetor, intake air passes through a narrow area created
by venturi. Venturi is a tube with a continuously decreasing cross-sectional area up
to the throat. When air passes through the throat, velocity of air increases, which
reduces the pressure (Bernoulli’s principle).

P
ρg

+ V2
2g

+ Z = Constant

(4.1)

= Pressure head

where, P
ρg
V2
= Velocity head
2g
Z = Potential head
This causes pressure difference between the fuel tank in the carburetor and the
throat, which are connected by an oriﬁce, resulting in fuel-ﬂow from the oriﬁce
into the incoming air stream (Bansal 2004). Carburetor has a mixture outlet and air
inlet area at the same level, which results in zero potential head, therefore maximum
pressure head generated at the throat area leads to discharge of fuel into the air stream,
as shown in Fig. 4.2.

The pressure difference varies with the engine speeds proportionally. Generally
suction pressure (vacuum at the carburetor throat) of a 100 cc engine varies from
36.7 kPa at idling to 2.3 kPa at 90 Kmph vehicle speed. Different parts of carburetor
such as air adjusting screw, pilot jet, main jet, jet needle, needle jet, air adjusting screw,
rpm screw, ﬂoat valve and ﬂoat for delivering required air-fuel ratio are discussed
below.9
Air Screw: It is a slotted brass screw used to adjust the air-ﬂow rate for idling at
the air inlet side of the carburetor. This air screw provides ﬂexibility to adjust the
air-ﬂow rate so that required air-fuel ratio for idling during different seasons can be
maintained (Table 4.3).
Pilot Jet: It is a medium size jet with metering holes to adjust the required air-fuel
ratio. It meters the fuel quantity during starting and idling in the ﬁrst quarter of throttle
opening. It can be used either in a lean pilot jet setting or in a rich pilot jet setting.
Lean pilot jet setting is not suitable for engines at low engine speeds, however rich
pilot jet setting creates problems in engine starting. Available size for the pilot jet

9Keihin carburetor
5bf1a09b6d2a7391b5a84730/1542561947962/KeihinCarbJetting-2015.pdf.

jetting. https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5be4d5b35ffd2095efa9bdff/t/

60

H. Valera et al.

Fig. 4.2 Venturi

Table 4.3 Atmospheric
conditionsa

Seasons

Winter

Summer

Rainy

Temperature (°C)
−5 to 25
30–50

20–40

Density (kg/m3)

1.316–1.184

1.164–1.093

1.204–1.127

aAir density. https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/air-density-
speciﬁc-weight-d_600.html

varies from #35 to #80, where the number represents the diameter of the metering
hole (×10 μm) (see Footnote 9).
Needle: It is a most critical part of the carburetor, which affects air-fuel ratio from
the ﬁrst quarter to the third quarter throttle opening. Different geometrical param-
eters such as diameter, length, and taper section affect the functioning of needle.
Needle diameter controls the air-fuel ratio during the ﬁrst quarter throttle opening
position. At lean diameter setting, engine loses power during third quarter throttle
opening however rich diameter setting results in choked condition. Needle length is
determined by clip position (number of grooves) on the top position of the needle.
Needle length ranges from #1 to #5, where #1 corresponds to the leanest setting
of the carburetor, and #5 corresponds to the richest setting of the carburetor. The
taper section is an angle available on the lower end of the needle, which affects the
air-fuel ratio between medium loads to the maximum load range. It affects the size
of the main jet since leaner needle taper requires richer main jet to fulﬁl the engine
requirements.

4 Prospects of Methanol-Fuelled Carburetted …

61

Main Jet: It is a jet having a single metering hole for adjusting the required air-fuel
ratio during the third quarter to fourth quarter throttle opening positions. It does
not play any signiﬁcant role during the ﬁrst quarter to third quarter throttle opening
positions. Lean main jet setting causes detonation and rich main jet setting affects
the sound quality of vehicle especially from the silencer. Generally available sizes
for the main jet ranges from #90 to #230, where the number presents the diameter of
the metering hole (×10 μm) (see Footnote 9).
Float Chamber: It is used to reserve the fuel inside the carburetor at constant level
at constant height. High fuel level inside the ﬂoat chamber discharges more fuel
quantity from the jets, and low fuel level discharges lower fuel quantity from the jets.
Both conditions adversely affect the engine operation.
Float Valve: It is used to maintain a constant level of fuel in the carburetor dur-
ing engine operations. It helps during transient driving conditions when the fuel
requirement varies continuously.
RPM Screw: It is a slotted brass screw used for adjusting the fuel-air mixture quantity
during idling. Its position deﬁnes a default jet needle lift position in idling. High jet
needle lift results in more quantity of fuel-air mixture supplied to the engine, which
increases the engine speed. On the other hand, low jet needle lift results in a less
mixture quantity being supplied to the engine, which reduced the engine speed.
Needle Jet Holder/Emulsion Tube: It is used to accommodate jet needle during
various throttle positions. In the ﬁrst quarter throttle opening, emulsion tube accom-
modates more height of the jet needle, which results in a small fuel quantity emerging
from the main jet. In the second quarter throttle opening, emulsion tube accommo-
dates lesser height of jet needle, which results in more fuel quantity emerging from
the main jet compared to the ﬁrst quarter throttle opening. In the third quarter throttle
opening with lesser height of the jet, needle accommodates inside the emulsion tube,
which results in more fuel quantity emerging from the main jet compared to the
second quarter throttle opening. In fourth quarter throttle opening, entire jet needle
comes out of the emulsion tube, leading to maximum fuel quantity emerging from
the main jet compared to other throttle opening positions.
Choke: It is used for cold starting. During winters, low atmospheric temperature
results in inferior spray atomization and vaporization of fuel in the carburetor. This
leads to cold startability issues of the engine. This can be resolved by supplying a
rich fuel-air mixture using choke.
Needle Jet: It guides the jet needle, and provides a path, through which it enters the
emulsion tube.

4.3.1 Conventional Carburetors

There are three types of conventional carburetors namely horizontal draft, updraft
and downdraft (Fig. 4.3). In a downdraft carburetor, air ﬂows from upward to the
downward direction due to gravity. In an updraft carburetor, air ﬂows from down-
ward to the upward direction, against the gravity. Engine with this type of carburetor

62

H. Valera et al.

Fig. 4.3 Carburetor based on air supply direction

provides low mechanical efﬁciency because it requires an additional device to force
the air-ﬂow against the gravity. Therefore it has become obsolete now. In a hori-
zontal draft carburetor, air ﬂows in horizontal direction. This type of carburetor is
used, where size of the carburetor is rather constrained. Downdraft and horizontal
draft carburetors are more popular and widely used for vehicular application. These
carburetors give higher mechanical efﬁciency of the engine compared to the engine
equipped with updraft carburetor. Modern carburetors have some unique features,
which provide superior fuel economy compared to conventional carburetors. Modern
carburetors are explained comprehensively in the next section.

4.3.2 Modern Carburetors

In the modern carburetors, venturi size varies according to throttle position, which
makes them different from conventional carburetors. Venturi size increases when
the throttle position changes from idle to wide open throttle (WOT) position and
decreases when it changes from WOT to idling position; thereby pressure difference
remains constant at the throat. Therefore variable venturi type carburetor is called as
‘constant velocity’ or ‘constant vacuum-type’ carburetor. Base on variable venturi
type, it can be classiﬁed as PB type carburetor and CV type carburetor.

4.3.2.1 PB Type Carburetor

PB type carburetor is used in both two-stroke and four-stroke small SI engines, with
the engine capacity varying from 50 to 100 cc. It is a lightweight, compact and

4 Prospects of Methanol-Fuelled Carburetted …

63

(a) Fuel circuit

(b) Pilot circuit 

(c) Main circuit

(d) Cold start circuit

Fig. 4.4 Schematic of various circuits in a PB type carburetor

horizontal draft type carburetor, generally having a mounting angle of 5° to 15°.10
Air-fuel ratio adjustment can be made by using an air screw. Generally, this type of
carburetor is available with different venturi sizes (such as 14, 16, 18 and 20 mm air
inlet bore diameter) compatible with atmospheric temperatures varying from −30 to
+80 °C.

PB type carburetors have four different circuits namely fuel inlet circuits, pilot
circuits, main circuit and cold-start circuit (Fig. 4.4). The drivers use different throt-
tle positions to meet different conditions on the road such as trafﬁc, full speed on

10PB type carburetor. http://www.keihinﬁe.com/html/pbtype.htm.

64

H. Valera et al.

highways, and coast down. As shown in the fuel circuit (Fig. 4.4a), fuel comes from
the fuel tank to the ﬂoat chamber where the ﬂoat valve maintains a constant fuel
level. Drop in fuel level changes the ﬂoat position thereby ﬂoat valve opens up for
entry of the fuel into the ﬂoat chamber. Float valve controls the fuel delivery from
the fuel tank to the ﬂoat chamber. Figure 4.4b shows the pilot circuit, which works
during idling to the ﬁrst quarter throttle opening positions. The air-fuel ratio can
be adjusted using this circuit, where the air ﬂow can increase or decrease to supply
rich/ lean mixture using the air adjustment screw. Figure 4.4c shows the main circuit,
which works from the ﬁrst quarter throttle opening positions to the WOT position.
Accelerator wire directly connects to the throttle valve for regulating different throt-
tle positions in order to ensure better drivability. Figure 4.4d shows the cold starting
circuit, where the choke valve is used to prepare rich fuel-air mixture via blocking
the air passage from the main intake air path. This circuit is usually deployed by the
driver during winter season so that the engine starts quickly and cold-starting issues
can be tackled.

4.3.2.2 CV Type Carburetor

CV type carburetor is used in both two-stroke and four-stroke small SI engines, with
the engine capacity varying from 50 to 200 cc. It is a lightweight, compact, horizontal
draft type carburetor. In this type of carburetor, mixture quantity can be adjusted by
the mixture screw. Generally, the carburetor is available with different venturi sizes
(such as 18, 20, 22, 24 and 26 mm air inlet bore diameter), which are compatible
with different atmospheric temperatures ranging from −30 to 80 °C.

CV type carburetor follows four different circuits namely fuel inlet circuit, pilot
circuit, main circuit and cold-start circuit, in order to meet different engine require-
ments as per different load conditions ranging from idle to full load conditions via
transient conditions (Fig. 4.5). Figure 4.5a shows the fuel circuit, through which
the fuel supply from the fuel tank to the ﬂoat chamber takes place, essentially for
creating a fuel reserve in the ﬂoat chamber, so that issues with pulsating fuel levels
could be avoided, particularly under transient conditions. The ﬂoat valve is used for
maintaining a constant fuel level in the ﬂoat chamber. Figure 4.5b shows the pilot
circuit, which gets activated during idling to ﬁrst quarter throttle opening position.
Here, Pilot jet directly connects to the by-pass holes situated after the butterﬂy valve,
in order to run the engine during idling. Figure 4.5c shows the main circuit, where
a diaphragm arrangement is used to lift the jet needle, which gets activated during
the ﬁrst quarter to third quarter throttle opening positions. Here the butterﬂy valve
operates in sync with the accelerator for achieving different throttle positions as per
requirements. Figure 4.5d shows a cold-start circuit, where a cold-start valve is used
for supplying fuel rich mixtures by blocking the small air passage and utilizing extra
jets for making a fuel rich mixture. This circuit helps drivers during winters, when
ambient temperatures are signiﬁcantly lower compared to summer.

4 Prospects of Methanol-Fuelled Carburetted …

65

(a) Fuel circuit

(b) Pilot circuit

(c) Main circuit 

(d) Cold-start circuit

Fig. 4.5 Schematic of various circuits in a CV type carburetor

4.4 Methanol Fueling in Two-Wheelers

Various techniques to induct M15 in carburetor assisted SI engine included blend-
ing and fumigation. Blending is most reliable techniques for M15 utilization in IC
engines. Both techniques are explained in the following sub-sections.

4.4.1 Methanol Blending

Methanol is blended with gasoline outside the fuel tank to prepare homogeneous
miscible blend to supply the carburetor. M15 blend is emerging as a very popular
blend for two wheeler applications. M15 induction is the most economical because
it does not require any hardware modiﬁcations in the engine nor does it require any
external device for separate methanol induction. Based on different mixing devices,

66

H. Valera et al.

blending can be divided into three types namely (i) ultrasonication blending, (ii)
mechanical agitator blending, and (iii) magnetic stirrer blending. Ultrasonication
blending is a process where sound waves are utilized for agitating the molecules
of M15 at micro level for homogeneous mixing of methanol with gasoline such
that phase separation can be avoided. In this blending method, a sample of M15
was put in a ﬂask, dipped into the water bath, and sound waves are generated at
different frequencies. Frequency deﬁnes how often molecules vibrate for preparing
homogeneous M15 blend.

Mechanical agitator blending is the blending where a small impeller is used for
preparation of M15 blend into a mixing glass/plastic vessel. Centrifugal force is uti-
lized for mixing of molecules of gasoline and methanol. In this blending method,
mechanical agitator provides ﬂexibility to utilize different motor rpm for blend prepa-
ration.

Magnetic stirrer blending is the one where a rotating magnetic ﬁeld is enforced by
a stirrer bar, which spins quickly for preparation of homogeneous M15 blend. This
blending is preferable compared to mechanical agitator blending because it does not
have a moving external part, which can damage the mixing glass/plastic vessel.

Further, the blending methods can be divided into four types based on endothermic
reactions, used for the preparation of homogeneous blending.11 These techniques
include (i) splash blending, (ii) sequential blending, (iii) ratio blending, and (iv)
wild/side stream blending. In splash blending, 85% gasoline and 15% methanol are
splashed one after another into the fuel supply tank using fuel meters. In sequential
blending, fuels mix sequentially using the same fuel meters. In ratio blending, 85%
gasoline and 15% methanol are mixed into the fuel supply tank simultaneously using
two ﬂow meters in the downstream connection. In wild/ side stream blending, 85%
gasoline is mixed with 15% methanol, and blending occurs upstream of the larger
delivery fuel meter. Several researchers have investigated variety of methanol blends
for different engines/ vehicles, and their results are summarised in Table 4.4.

Above-mentioned studies showed that M15 can be used as a substitute fuel in SI
engines. In general, researchers found that NOX emissions decreased and CO, HC
emissions increase for methanol blends compared to baseline gasoline.

4.4.2 Methanol Fumigation

In this method, M15 is injected into the intake manifold of the engine to prepare
homogeneous gasoline-methanol-air mixture for smoother combustion. Homoge-
neous mixture helps to overcome cold-starting problem, which mostly occurs during
the starting of a methanol-fuelled engine. This method is considered as the preferred
method for M15 utilization because it reduces the effect of high latent heat of vapor-
ization of methanol due to separate injection in the intake manifold. In fumigation

11Renewable fuels blending solutions—measurement solutions. http://info.smithmeter.com/
literature/docs/tp0a015.pdf.

4 Prospects of Methanol-Fuelled Carburetted …

67

Table 4.4 Vehicle studies on different methanol blends

Researcher

Fuel used

Engine test
bed/vehicle/simulation

Conclusions

Li et al.
(2015)

G100
G85M15

Motorcycle

Zhao et al.
(2011)

Passenger car

Using G85M15, HC and CO emissions
decreased and NOX emissions increased,
compared to G100

Using methanol blends, CO and HC emissions
decreased and NOx emissions increased
compared to G100

G100
G85M15
G80M20
G70M30
G50M50
G15M85

G100
M100

G100
G90M10
G80M20
G70M30

G100
G97M3
G93M7
G90M10

G90M10
G80M20
G70M30
G50M50
G100

G95M5
G90M10
G100

Wu et al.
(2016)

Liu et al.
(2007)

Engine test bed

Engine test bed

Elfasakhany
(2015)

Engine test bed

Vancoillie
et al. (2013)

G100
M100

Engine test bed

Iliev (2015) G95M5

Simulation

Canakci
et al. (2013)

Passenger car

M100-fuelled engine showed reduction in CO
and HC emissions however NOx emissions
increased compared to G100

Using M30, HC emissions reduced during
cold-start and warm up period and CO
emission reduced

CO2 emissions increased by ~3, 8 and 9.2%
for 3, 7 and 10% methanol blended in
gasoline. CO emission decreased by ~17.7,
51.5 and 55.5% for 3, 7 and 10% methanol
blended in gasoline. HC emissions decreased
by ~19.6, 16 and 26% for 3, 7 and 10%
methanol blended in gasoline

NOx and CO2 emissions reduced by
5–10 g/kWh and ~10% compared to gasoline

CO and HC emissions decreased with
increasing methanol content compared to
G100. Lowest CO and HC emissions were
observed for G50M50. NOx emission
increased with increasing methanol content in
test blend

At 80 km/h speed
CO2 emission decreased by ~11.3 and 3%
compared to G100 using M5 and M10. HC
emissions decreased by ~35 and 30%
compared to G100 using M5 and M10. NOx
emissions decreased by ~9 and 1.3%
compared to G100 using M5 and M10
At 100 km/h speed
CO2 emission increased by ~0.3% using M10
and decreased by ~7% using M5 compared to
G100. HC emissions decreased by ~10 and
~17% using M5 and M10 respectively
compared to G100. NOx emissions decreased
by ~5% using M5 and increased by ~2.8%
using M10 compared to G100

(continued)

68

Table 4.4 (continued)

Researcher

Fuel used

Ozsezen
and
Canakci
(2011)

G95M5
G90M10
G100

Engine test
bed/vehicle/simulation

Conclusions

Passenger car

Elrod and
Bata (1991)

G80M20
G100

Engine dyno

H. Valera et al.

HC emissions decreased by ~16 and 10%
using M5 and M10 compared to G100. CO
emission increased by ~1.2% at 80 and
100 km/h vehicle speed using M5 and M10
compared to G100. NOX emissions decreased
by ~1.8 and 2.3% using M5 and M10
compared to G100

At 2200 rpm
CO emission decreased by ~18%, HC
emissions increased by ~144%, and NOX
emissions decreased by ~14% for M20
compared to G100
At 2500 rpm
HC emissions decreased by ~143%, and NOX
emissions decreased by ~47% for M20
compared to G100

method, two carburetors are used, where one is used for gasoline and another is used
for methanol supply (Fig. 4.6). Fumigation can also be achieved by both mechanical
and electronic fuel injection techniques. Mechanical technology is the one where
throttle opening of both carburetors was controlled mechanically in such a way that
85% v/v gasoline and 15% v/v methanol is supplied to the manifold to prepare a
homogeneous mixture for engine operation. In electronic fuel injection technique,
throttle opening position was controlled electronically using either a small circuits or
ECU, which control fuel quantities supplied into the manifold to be 85% v/v gasoline
and 15% v/v methanol. However, this method increases the net weight of the system
since an additional, second carburetor is employed for methanol induction (Abedin
et al. 2016). No research has been reported for methanol introduction in SI engine
using two carburetors. Globally, this method is in the nascent stage because elec-
tronic injectors are preferred for fuel induction these days. Some Indian companies
are however considering introduction of this method because Indian market is price
sensitive, and carburetor is ~70% cheaper compared to fuel injectors.
Blending is a preferred over fumigation due to following reasons.

Economical: Blending inducts M15 in manifold using existing carburetor whereas
fumigation requires an additional carburetor for induction of 15% v/v methanol sep-
arately. Further, a separate tank is also required to store methanol for supplying 15%
v/v methanol to the additional carburetor. If mechanical fuel induction technology
is employed for methanol induction, then additional mechanical components are
required. If electronic fuel induction technology is employed, then it requires an
additional electronic circuit to ensures required opening of throttle positions for both
carburetors. Additional carburetor, additional fuel tank, additional mechanical con-
trols/ electronic circuit results in higher cost for separate 15% v/v methanol supply.

4 Prospects of Methanol-Fuelled Carburetted …

69

Fig. 4.6 Fumigation technology

Therefore blending method is considered to be economical compared to fumigation
technology.
Technical: Blending inducts homogeneous fuel-air mixture (15% v/v methanol and
85% v/v gasoline) into the manifold, which avoids cold-start problems in the vehicle.
Fumigation inducts methanol separately in the intake manifold, which creates cold-
start issues because methanol has high latent heat of vaporization and during suction
stroke, less time is available for homogeneous air-methanol-gasoline mixing, which
eventually leads to inferior combustion. Therefore, blending is preferred because
homogeneously mixed blends quickly ignite, resulting in higher break thermal efﬁ-
ciency.
Functional: Fumigation requires additional mechanical/ electronic components to
induct 15% v/v methanol separately, whereas, blending does not require any addi-
tional component for fuel supply. Requirement of additional components in fumi-
gation causes mechanical losses, thereby resulting in lower mechanical efﬁciency
compared to blending. Hence blending is a preferred method for M15 induction into
the engine. Existing carburetors are designed optimally for maximum fuel economy

70

H. Valera et al.

Table 4.5 Properties of gasoline, methanol and M15

Property

Gasoline

Methanol

Chemical formulae

C4–C12
Incorporate one space
before C12
740

CH3–OH
Incorporate one space
before OH

Liquid density (kg/m3)
Lower heating value
(MJ/kg)

Stoichiometric air/fuel
ratio

42

6.5

Octane number

90–100

798

20.1

15.05

109

M15

–

748.7

38.7

14.25

–

and minimum tailpipe emissions. However both test fuels have different physico-
chemical properties (Table 4.5). Induction of M15 into existing engines using exist-
ing carburetors is therefore quite challenging. All these challenges are mentioned in
the following section.

4.5 Technical Challenges of Methanol-Fuelled Carburetor

Operated Vehicles

• Introduction of 15% v/v methanol into 85% v/v gasoline makes a leaner mixture
for optimally designed existing carburetor because methanol has ~50% inherent
oxygen in its molecular structure.

• M15 has ~38.715 kJ/kg energy density whereas gasoline has ~42 kJ/kg energy

density, which results in drivability issues.

• Latent heat of vaporization of M15 is higher than baseline gasoline, which causes

poor spray atomization of the fuel injected by existing carburetor jets.

• M15 is quite corrosive, and can corrode sensitive carburetor components such as
ﬂoat valve, jet needle, and emulsion tube. Due to its corrosive nature, sometimes
it reacts with ‘o’ rings of the ﬂoat chamber and makes powdered residues, which
can possibly clog the fuel supply.

• M15 has higher latent heat of vaporization, leading to inferior combustion if exist-

ing spark timings are used for igniting the fuel.

• For stoichiometric mixtures, complete combustion takes place therefore it is impor-
tant to compensate for the difference in stoichiometric air-fuel ratio of any new fuel.
Stoichiometric air-fuel ratios for gasoline and M15 are 15.05 and 14.25 respec-
tively as calculated subsequently. M15 stoichiometric air-fuel ratio is ~5% lower
than baseline gasoline. However due to use of additives, gasoline stoichiometric
A/F is considered to be 14.7 generally.

4 Prospects of Methanol-Fuelled Carburetted …

71

Stoichiometric Air-Fuel ratio calculations for gasoline:

C8H18 + 12.5 (O2 + 3.76 N2) → 8CO2 + 9H2O + 47N2

ma
mf

= 12.5(32 + (28 ∗ 3.76))
96 + 18

= ∼ 15.05

Stoichiometric Air-Fuel ratio calculation for M15;

0.85 C8H18 + 10.56 (O2 + 3.76 N2) + 0.15 CH3OH → 6.95 CO2 + 7.72 H2O + 39.7N2

ma
m f

= 10.56(32 + (28 ∗ 3.76))
0.85(96 + 18) + 0.15(32)

= ∼ 14.25

Some essential modiﬁcations in PB type carburetor (vehicle with 50–100 cc engine
capacity) and CV type carburetor (vehicle with 50–200 cc engine capacity) are
required to be done for M15 adaption, in order to avoid drivability issues due to
above-mentioned challenges.

4.6 Action Plan for Developing M15-Fuelled Dedicated

Carburetors for Two-Wheelers

For India, M15 is considered as the best fuel option for small SI engines used in
two-wheelers. However there is a need for some design modiﬁcations in the existing
carburetors. Apart from carburetor, development of the new design of air inlet venturi
is also required for adaptation of M15. Few other important steps for adaptation of
M15 in two-wheeler sector are given below.
• Development of compatible material for carburetor components
• Development of optimized geometry of main jet and needle jet
• Emission regulations compliances for M15-fuelled vehicles
• Modiﬁcations in air bleeder holes and cost reduction
• Reduction in existing venturi dimensions and cost reduction
• Trials of newly designed carburetor on vehicle using M15 and Gasoline
• Durability studies of the carburetor
• Homogeneous blending of 85% v/v gasoline and 15% v/v methanol
• Development of compatible materials for nozzle
• Certiﬁcation of M15 as automotive fuel based on its physico-chemical properties

72

4.7 Conclusions

H. Valera et al.

In this chapter, a comprehensive review of the carburetor technology and its classi-
ﬁcations are presented. Main objective of this chapter was to explore the scope of
methanol as an alternative fuel in carbureted two-wheelers. In India, 100% replace-
ment of gasoline with methanol is very difﬁcult due to very low domestic methanol
production compared to potential demands, technical difﬁculties associated with
methanol utilization in existing engines, high formaldehyde emissions and public
acceptance. Therefore, M15 has been planned to be introduced as SI engine fuel to
start with. M15 would play a vital role to reduce India’s high fuel import bill and
promote development of indigenous technology for converting waste resources such
as MSW, high ash coal and agricultural residues to methanol. M15-fuelled vehicles
offer superior economic beneﬁts compared to gasoline-fuelled vehicles. Utilization
of M15 in carbureted vehicles has several challenges though, which need to be
resolved before its large-scale implementation. Few carburetor components such as
metering holes of the main jet and diameter of the jet needle would be required to
be optimised. Relatively bigger metering hole diameter compared to existing jets
can resolve the issue of lower energy density of methanol. Reduction in the air inlet
diameter of the carburetor is necessary to meet the transient conditions by achieving
stoichiometric mixture. Overall, M15-fuelled vehicles are capable of offering supe-
rior drivability compared to gasoline-fuelled vehicles. M15 is capable of meeting
upcoming Bharat Stage-VI emission legislations, which is a quite challenging task
for existing gasoline-fuelled vehicles.
Advanced Engine Technologies

Chapter 5
Prospects of Gasoline Compression
Ignition (GCI) Engine Technology
in Transport Sector
Abstract Compression ignition (CI) engines are mainly fuelled by diesel-like high
cetane fuels, and they have higher overall efﬁciency due to higher compression ratio
compared to their spark ignition (SI) engine counterparts. However, modern diesel
engines are more expensive, complicated, and emit high nitrogen oxides (NOx) and
particulate matter (PM). Simultaneous control of soot and NOx emissions in diesel
engines is quite challenging and expensive. Thermal efﬁciency of SI engines, on the
other hand is limited by the tendency of abnormal combustion at higher compression
ratios therefore use of high octane fuel is essential for developing more efﬁcient
higher compression ratio SI engines in near future. In the foreseeable future, reﬁner-
ies will process heavier crude oil to produce relatively inferior petroleum products
to power the IC engines. Also, fuel demand will shift more towards diesel and jet
fuels, which would lead to availability of surplus amounts of low octane gasoline
with oil marketing companies, with little apparent use for operating the engines. This
low octane gasoline will be cheaper and would be available in excess quantities in
foreseeable future as the demand for gasoline will further drop due to increase in the
fuel economy of modern generation gasoline fuelled vehicles. For addressing these
issues, Gasoline compression ignition (GCI) engine technology is being developed,
which is a futuristic engine technology that takes advantage of higher volatility, and
higher auto-ignition temperature of gasoline and higher compression ratio (CR) of a
diesel engine simultaneously to take care of soot and NOx emissions without com-
promising diesel engine like efﬁciency. GCI engines can efﬁciently operate on low
octane gasoline (RON of ~70) with better controls at part load conditions. However
cold starting, high CO and HC emissions, combustion stability at part load, and high
combustion noise at medium-to-full load operations are some of the challenges asso-
ciated with GCI engine technology. Introductory sections of this chapter highlights
future energy and transport scenario, trends of future fuel demand, availability of low
octane fuels and development in advanced engine combustion technologies such as
HCCI, PCCI, RCCI, and GDI. GCI engine development, its combustion character-
istics and controls are discussed in detail. Particular emphasis is given to the effect
of various control strategies on GCI combustion, performance and emissions, fuel
quality requirement and adaption of GCI technology in modern CI engines. In addi-
tion, this chapter reviews initial experimental studies to assess the potential beneﬁts
of GCI technology.
Keywords IC engines · GCI engine technology · Combustion control · Low
octane gasoline · Oxides of nitrogen (NOx) · Particulates

5.1 Introduction

Growth of transport sector plays a vital role in overall development of the country.
At present, ~99% of global transport ﬂeet is powered by internal combustion (IC)
engines, in which, liquid petroleum products power ~95% vehicles. This trend would
continue to rise due to high energy density, easy processing and transportation of
liquid petroleum fuels, and availability of desired infrastructure (Kalghatgi 2018).
By the end of 2014, ~910 million passenger cars and ~330 million commercial vehi-
cles were available in the market (Statista 2016). In coming decades, these numbers
would continue to rise at a growth rate of 1%, especially in non-OECD (Organization
for Economic Co-operation and Development) countries like India and China (U.S.
Energy Information Administration 2016; World Economic Forum 2016; Exxonmo-
bil 2019). Transport sector consumes ~20% of global energy and is responsible for
~23% of global carbon di-oxide (CO2) emissions. However, overall GHG emissions
from transport sector are only ~14%, which is comparable to GHG emissions from
farming and dairy Industry (U.S. Energy Information Administration 2016; Outlook
2017; IPCC 2019). Figure 5.1 shows sector-wise global GHG emissions.

Fig. 5.1 Global anthropogenic GHG emissions sector-wise (Web Source http://www.climate-
change-knowledge.org/ghg_sources.html)

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

79

Global daily consumption of petroleum products in terms of million barrels of oil
equivalent (BoE) by the end of 2017 is presented in Table 5.1 (International Energy
Agency 2017). By 2040, energy demand for non-OECD countries will be 40% higher
than today’s demand. Reﬁneries would have no choice but to utilize residual heavier
crude oil to meet such a massive demand of fuel in future.

However, now the question is that, is there enough reserves of oil so that the
growth of the IC engine will not be affected by the oil demand? Mainly supply
of oil depends on the discoveries and efﬁciency of oil extraction. Since last some
decades, the availability of oil is more than the demand. Figure 5.2 (BP Statistical
Review of World Energy 2017) shows evolution of oil reserves and the ratio of oil
reserves-to-annual production between 1980 and 2010.

Table 5.1 Daily global oil demand at the end of 2017 (International Energy Agency 2017)

Million Barrels of oil
Equivalent (BoE)

Energy, exa-joules

Fuel volume,
billion liters

OECD

Non-OECD

Total

Gasoline

Diesel/Gasoil

Jet/Kerosene

Residual Oil
Othersa
Total

14.5

13.7

4.3

2.1

12.8

47.4

11.3

14.6

3.2

5.4

16.1

50.7

25.8

28.4

7.5

7.5

28.9

98.1

0.158

0.174

0.046

0.046

0.177

0.601

aOther includes naphtha, LPG and ethane
1 exajoule = 1018 Joules = 277,778 GWh = 163.4 million BoE

4.85

4.83

1.27

Fig. 5.2 Oil reserves-to-annual production ratio and evolution of proven oil reserves (BP Statistical
Review of World Energy 2017)

80

V. S. Solanki et al.

In 1980, oil reserve capacity was 29 years, which increases to 50 years by 2016.
Discoveries and efﬁcient oil extraction techniques would further increase the oil
supply in future, hopefully. In 2007, according to worldwide recovery factor, only
a small fraction (~27%) of oil could be recovered from the oil wells (Sandrea and
Sandrea 2007). Recovery rate can be further enhanced by advanced technologies
such as injecting ﬂuid and gas (e.g., CO2). Introduction of alternative fuels such as
shale oil and gas, methanol, and DME will also help the availability of fuel resources
for powering IC engines based transport system. Hence the supply of petroleum
products will not constrain the growth of engines in foreseeable future.

Currently gasoline-fueled light-duty vehicles (LDV) consume ~44% of total trans-
port energy (U.S. Energy Information Administration 2016). It is easier to replace
gasoline-fueled LDV’s by the electric, hybrid, fuel-cell vehicles. In future, passen-
ger cars will be travelling relatively shorter distances due to development of smart
cities (U.S. Energy Information Administration 2019; World Energy Outlook 2011;
U.S. Energy Information Administration 2013; International Energy Agency 2015;
Kalghatgi 2014). Hence dependency on gasoline will be relatively lesser in future.
Heavy-duty engines will be fueled by more clean fuels than today’s diesel. Therefore
transport fuel demand domination will shift from light-duty cars to heavy-duty com-
mercial vehicles such as trucks, buses, rail, and marine engines in near future (World
Energy Outlook 2011). It would mean that demand for diesel would be higher than
that for gasoline in foreseeable future. Projections of gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel
demands in the coming decades are captured in Fig. 5.3 (BP Statistical Review of
World Energy 2014).

This transition of transport fuel may create abundance/surplus low octane gasoline
in reﬁneries and oil marketing companies, which can be used for mitigating the
imbalance in future demand for fuel for heavier commercial transport, that uses
diesel as of now.

Fig. 5.3 World Energy Council projections for gasoline, jet-fuel and diesel demand up to 2050 (BP
Statistical Review of World Energy 2014)

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

81

Fig. 5.4 Opportunities and challenges of the fuel-engine system in near future

Current IC engines generally operate on two conventional combustion modes
namely spark ignition (SI) and compression ignition (CI) modes. SI engines mainly
operate under stoichiometric conditions and utilize 3-way catalytic converters to
control high emissions of hydrocarbons (HC), carbon monoxides (CO) and nitrogen
oxides (NOx). SI engines would require improvement in fuel’s octane rating for
further efﬁciency improvement, which would increase demand for higher octane
gasoline. Reﬁneries would therefore require additional investments to produce high-
octane gasoline from the heavier crude oil, which is going to be energy-intensive
and would entail higher greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions during fuel production
process. Opportunities and challenges for the fuel-engine system in near future are
captured in Fig. 5.4.

Modern diesel engines are more efﬁcient and emit lower tail-pipe CO and HC
emissions than SI engines, but emit higher PM and NOx, which are toxic to human
health and the environment. For controlling NOx and PM emissions simultaneously,
a diesel engine requires advanced exhaust gas after-treatment system such as diesel
particulate ﬁlter (DPF) and SCR system, which would increase system complex-
ity and total cost of the vehicle. PM and NOx emissions from CI engines can be
controlled by enhancing the fuel-air mixing (turbulence) before the start of com-
bustion (SoC). Gasoline has higher volatility and longer ignition delay than diesel.
Higher resistance to auto-ignition allows gasoline more time for mixing with air
before the start of combustion (SoC), and higher volatility promotes homogenous
mixing of fuel and air. In summary, greater stock of cheaper low octane rating fuel
would be available in the market in future to power IC engines, which could be used
to reduce GHG emissions as well. GCI engines can operate on low-octane gaso-
line with a substantial reduction in PM and NOx emissions without compromise in

82

V. S. Solanki et al.

engine efﬁciency. Introduction of this new GCI engine-fuel system would reduce
capital investments in the reﬁnery, well-to-wheel (WTW) emissions, and total cost
of vehicle ownership (Kalghatgi and Johansson 2018).

5.2 Conventional Fuels and Fuel Properties

IC engines mainly operate on petroleum-based liquid or gaseous fuels, which are
processed from the crude oil in reﬁneries. As crude oil temperature increases in
a fractional distillation column, gas comes out from the crude oil, which is called
liquid petroleum gas (LPG). Straight run gasoline (SRG) is recovered between 20 and
200 °C, and diesel is recovered between 160 and 380 °C. The term ‘naphtha’ is used
for the product that lie close to the gasoline boiling temperature range. 40–60% of
the petroleum products (by weight) are heavy components, with boiling range higher
than 380 °C. Heavy components are further cracked down to light hydrocarbons for
improving their cetane or octane rating. Many additives are added to reﬁned products
to meet fuel speciﬁcations. In addition to petroleum-based fuels, biofuels, alcohols,
and other gaseous fuels (such as NG, biogas etc.) are used to power IC engines
(Kalghatgi and Johansson 2018). Important fuel properties of diesel and gasoline
are listed in Table 5.2 (Web Source: http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2010/ph240/
veltman2/docs/Propertiesoffuels.pdf).

Some critical fuel properties, which signiﬁcantly inﬂuence engine combustion,

performance and emissions, are discussed.

Auto-ignition Temperature and Volatility These are two crucial fuel properties
that play a vital role for air-fuel mixture homogeneity thus strongly inﬂuence
engine combustion characteristics. Gasoline has higher auto-ignition temperature
and volatility than diesel, which facilitates better homogenous mixtures of gasoline.

Octane/Cetane Number Cetane and octane rating measures the ability of spon-
taneous ignition of fuel. Octane rating expresses gasoline’s ignitability and Cetane
rating for diesel. In other words, octane rating measures the strength of resistance to
auto-ignition/pre-ignition of gasoline. Higher octane number provides greater resis-
tance to auto-ignition/pre-ignition under high combustion temperature and pressure,
which enhances combustion efﬁciency in gasoline engines. Cetane number measures
the ignition delay period before the start of combustion (SoC). High cetane num-
ber means a shorter delay period, resulting in better combustion efﬁciency in diesel
engines. High octane fuel has a low cetane rating and vice versa.

Molar Mass Gasoline has lower molecular weight compared to diesel (gasoline:
100–105 kg/kmol; diesel: 200 kg/kmol). Due to lower molecular weight, diffusion
rate of gasoline is higher than diesel, which helps in reducing tailpipe emissions.

Latent Heat of Vaporization Gasoline has higher latent heat of vaporization than
diesel (gasoline: 375 kJ/kg; diesel: 250 kJ/kg). Higher heat of vaporization of gasoline

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

83

Table 5.2 Comparison of diesel and gasoline speciﬁcations (Web Source http://large.stanford.edu/
courses/2010/ph240/veltman2/docs/Propertiesoffuels.pdf)

Property

Chemical formula

Fuel carbon

Fuel hydrogen

Molecular weight

Density at 15 °C

Lower heating value

Net caloriﬁc value

Cetane number

Boiling temperature

Reid vapor pressure

Viscosity (at 15 °C)

Research octane number (RON)

Auto ignition temperature in air

Latent heat of vaporization (at 1 bar)
Minimum ignition energy (at ϕ = 1)
Stoichiometric air/fuel ratio

Flammability limits

Flash point

Unit

wt%

wt%

kg/m3
MJ/kg

MJ/l

°C

psi

°C

kJ/kg

mJ

vol.%

°C

Diesel

C8–C25
84–87

16–33

200

810–890

40–55

187–343

42.7

36

–

0.2

210

250

0.23

14.6

0.5–7.5

73

Gasoline

C4–C12
85–88

12–15

100–105

720–780

43.4

32

90–100

5–20

26–225

8–15

280

375

0.8

14.7

1.4–7.6
−42

Centipoise

2.6–4.1

0.37–0.44

provides better cooling of intake charge compared to diesel, leading to improved
engine efﬁciency and power.

Lower Heating Value The caloriﬁc value of gasoline (on mass basis) is slightly
higher than diesel (gasoline: 43.4 MJ/kg; diesel: 42.7 MJ/kg). However, diesel has
higher density than petrol (gasoline: 750 kg/m3; diesel: 835 kg/m3) and have ~12.5%
higher energy content per unit volume (gasoline: 32 MJ/m3; Diesel: 36 MJ/m3). Apart
from difference in energy density, diesel engines are 20% more efﬁcient than gasoline
engines and hence more gasoline quantity will be required to be injected for achieving
the same power output from a diesel engine.

Lubricity and Viscosity Gasoline provides lower lubrication than diesel and injec-
tion of gasoline at high-pressure results in more wear and tear of the fuel injection
equipment. Additionally, viscosity of gasoline is also lower than diesel. Therefore
suitable additives will be required for utilization of gasoline in CI engines.

84

V. S. Solanki et al.

5.3 Gasoline and Diesel Spray Characteristics

Fuel spray characteristics are important since they play a vital role in mixing of fuel
with air in the combustion chamber (direct injection engines) or in the intake port (port
fuel injection engines). Macroscopic spray characteristics include spray penetration
length, spray cone angle, spray area and microscopic spray characteristics include
droplet size-velocity, and size-number distributions.

Fuel properties signiﬁcantly affect spray characteristics and consequent fuel-air
mixing characteristics. Spray penetration length of gasoline was reported to be shorter
than diesel spray due to lower fuel density and viscosity but higher volatility (higher
evaporation rate) of gasoline (Kim et al. 2013). It helps in early direct injection of
gasoline in CI engines without the wall impingement. However gasoline spray has
larger cone angle than diesel sprays due to higher Reynolds number. These effects are
more dominant in case of increased fuel injection pressure (FIP) as shown in Figs. 5.5
and 5.6. Results from other studies (Payri et al. 2012) suggested that momentum ﬂux

Fig. 5.5 liquid penetration
length traces for a diesel and
b gasoline sprays at different
fuel injection pressures and
ﬁxed injection timing of −10
CAD aTDC in evaporative
conditions. (Kim et al. 2013)

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

85

Fig. 5.6 a Spray penetration
length, b spray cone angle
for gasoline and diesel at
different fuel injection
pressures according to the
time after the start of the
injection in non-evaporative
conditions (Kim et al. 2013)

was similar for both gasoline and diesel sprays and was independent of fuel density
and injector hole diameter.

5.4 Engine Combustion

SI engines are commonly preferred for light-duty applications and currently, ~80%
of global transport vehicles operate on SI engines, whereas CI engines are mostly
preferred for heavy-duty vehicles such as bus, heavy duty truck, and off-road machin-
ery (OPEC, Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries 2013). In SI engines,
premixed fuel-air charge is supplied into the combustion chamber, and a spark plug
is used as an ignition source for initiating the ﬂame propagation. However, in most
diesel engines, fuel is directly injected into the combustion chamber at a high tem-
perature near TDC, just before the end of the compression stroke. Unlike SI engines,

86

V. S. Solanki et al.

ignition initiates in diesel engines by auto-ignition of combustible charge, once it
reaches its self-ignition temperature (Kalghatgi and Johansson 2018). CI engines
are characterized by higher compression ratio (CR) and zero throttling losses (Stone
2012). Compression of fuel-air mixture increases pumping losses in a SI engine
(OPEC, Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries 2013; Heywood 1988;
Stone 2012; Boot 2016). SI engine efﬁciency is usually limited by abnormal com-
bustion or knocking, which is mainly due to pre-ignition of end-gas before ﬂame
front reaches to it. SI engines normally operate under stoichiometric to slightly
rich fuel-air mixtures, whereas diesel engines always operate under lean condition.
Effectiveness of SI engines at low load conditions is inferior because of increase
in pumping losses. IC engines are facing huge challenges now-a-days for stringent
emission norm compliance. Researchers are focusing on advanced engine combus-
tion techniques, aiming to attain improved engine efﬁciency, while meeting tail-pipe
emission standards. Relative merits, demerits and challenges associated with these
combustion techniques are discussed below.

Modern SI engines mostly apply two injection strategies: Port Fuel Injection (PFI)
and Gasoline Direct Injection (GDI) techniques. In PFI system, fuel is injected in the
intake port before the intake valve. It leads to fuel metering error, wall wetting, timing
lag in fuel delivery, and high unburned hydrocarbon emissions. Direct injection of
gasoline inside the combustion chamber can overcome most problems associated
with PFI engines, and termed it as gasoline direct injection (GDI) engines. High FIP
in GDI engines provides better fuel atomization and lower tailpipe emissions with
improved fuel economy (Nohira and Ito 1997; Rottenkolber et al. 2002). However,
there are some issues associated with GDI techniques such as high NOx and PM
emissions, difﬁculty in controlling stratiﬁed combustion, and high unburned HC and
CO emissions at low load (Chincholkar and Suryawanshi 2016).

Low-Temperature Combustion (LTC) technique exhibits relatively lower adia-
batic ﬂame temperature than conventional combustion techniques, resulting in lower
NOx and PM emissions, while maintaining diesel like high efﬁciencies. Different
LTC techniques are homogenous charge compression ignition (HCCI), reactivity
controlled compression ignition (RCCI), and partially premixed charge compression
ignition (PCCI). All LTC techniques provide ﬂameless, homogenous combustion of
premixed fuel-air mixture ensuring very low NOx formation due to lower adiabatic
temperature, and negligible soot formation due to the absence of a fuel-rich zone
in the combustion chamber. However, LTC produces higher CO and HC tail-pipe
emissions due to reduction in the exhaust gas temperature (EGT) therefore exhaust
gas after-treatment devices are essential for controlling CO and HC emissions.

In HCCI engines, fully premixed fuel-air mixture is compressed, and in-cylinder
chemical kinetics controls ignition via combustion chamber pressure and temper-
ature. Premixed charge reduces the combustion temperature and local equivalence
ratio. Shorter combustion duration leads to a reduction in the heat transfer losses with
improved engine efﬁciency. However high rate of pressure rise (RoPR) and limit-
ing operation under high load range are the main issues encountered in the HCCI
engines, which can be manipulated by using combustion phasing.

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

87

In RCCI engines, fuels having high auto-ignition temperature such as gasoline,
methanol, and ethanol are injected into the port and high reactivity fuels such as
diesel or biodiesel is directly injected into the combustion chamber as usual. Best
alternative for port injection in RCCI engines is a mixture of alcohols and gasoline.
The proportion of each of these two fuels depends on the engine operating condition
and other engine parameters. However, only ~10% diesel of total fuel mass is injected
into the cylinder to trigger RCCI combustion under most operating conditions. RCCI
combustion is capable of achieving near-zero NOx and PM emissions along with high
engine efﬁciency. However requirement of two fuel injection systems increases the
cost and complexity of the vehicle signiﬁcantly.

Premixed Charge Compression Ignition (PCCI) engine (Kimura et al. 1999; Fuer-
hapter et al. 2003; Cao et al. 2009; Parks II et al. 2010) provides more stable com-
bustion compared to the HCCI engine. It offers more time for mixture preparation
before SoC compared to conventional diesel combustion. Ignition of partially pre-
mixed fuel-air charge is similar to that of HCCI combustion. Majority of fuel is
burned in the premixed phase in PCCI combustion like HCCI combustion, which
reduces NOx and PM emissions simultaneously. Similar to other LTC techniques,
PCCI combustion faces the same challenges of higher CO and HC emissions com-
pared to diesel engines. However, these CO and HC emissions in PCCI combustion
are lower than the HCCI combustion.

5.5 Gasoline Compression Ignition Engine Technology

Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) is an advanced engine technology, utilizing
low-octane gasoline in place of diesel in CI engines. Gasoline is more volatile with
high resistant to auto-ignition, which facilitates homogenous mixing of fuel-air
before SoC compared to diesel operation. GCI technology combines the beneﬁts
of higher compression ratio (CR) operation of CI engines and positive features of
gasoline. It is expected that this new engine-fuel system will be cost-effective because
of use of low-octane gasoline, which would be cheaper, and can help reduce exhaust
emissions such as NOx and PM simaltaneously. Scope of utilizing a higher percent-
age of exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) exists, which can further help reduce PM and
NOx emissions. Mazda recently launched a new car SkyAktiv X, operating on GCI
technology (Mazda 2017).

5.5.1 Principle of GCI Combustion

Gasoline compression ignition (GCI) is an advanced LTC technique that can address
the problems associated with diesel engines. GCI engine operates on fully pre-mixed
homogenous combustion mode (like HCCI) at low load, on partially pre-mixed com-
bustion (PPC) mode at medium load, and on diffusion-controlled combustion (like

88

V. S. Solanki et al.

a diesel engine) mode at high load condition. Based on the level of mixture homo-
geneity, partially pre-mixed combustion (PPC) lies in-between the HCCI and CI
combustion modes. In PPC mode, fuel-air mixture is burned in combination of both
diffusion and pre-mixed mechanisms with bulk auto-ignition. At low loads, fuel is
injected in the intake stroke or at the start of compression stroke so that more mixture
homogeneity can be achieved whereas at high loads, gasoline is directly injected like
diesel near the top dead center (TDC) in the combustion chamber. In GCI engine,
level of fuel stratiﬁcation needs to be improved with increasing engine load, since
the ignition delay decreases with increasing load. Therefore, a small amount of com-
bustion takes place by auto-ignition, and the remaining majority of fuel combustion
dominated by diffusion process.

5.5.2 GCI Engine Fuel Reﬁning Process

GCI engines can operate efﬁciently on the low octane gasoline like fuels such as
naphtha. Previous studies (Hildingsson et al. 2009) on a single cylinder engine with
a compression ratio 16:1 showed that the optimum research octane number (RON)
for GCI combustion lies between 75 and 85. Another experimental investigation on
a heavy-duty CI engine suggested that optimum RON for GCI combustion should
be in the 70’s range (Manente et al. 2011). Optimum fuel properties for GCI engines
are listed in Table 5.3 (Kalghatgi et al. 2016).

Mixture of diesel and gasoline or low octane gasoline can extend GCI operating
range with enhanced fuel stratiﬁcation (Won et al. 2012a). Gasoline and diesel blend
can easily match the required GCI fuel properties although safety and ﬂash point
demand of fuel can be an issue. By only adding >25% components from diesel boiling
range in the gasoline/diesel blends, GCI fuel can easily meet safety requirement
(Algunaibet et al. 2016; Al-Abdullah et al. 2015). Low octane gasoline has a higher
hydrogen/carbon ratio and more parafﬁnic components. Distillation range of GCI
fuel is closer to gasoline than diesel, and new fuel has a higher ﬁnal boiling point

Table 5.3 Optimum fuel
properties for a GCI engine
(Kalghatgi et al. 2016)

Properties

Optimum value

Research octane number (RON)

Cetane number
Density @ 15 °C, kg/m3
Initial Boiling Point, (IBP) °C

Final Boiling Point, (FBP) °C

Oleﬁns, lv%

Aromatics, lv%

Sulfur, wt ppm

Benzene, vol. %

70–85

<27

720–800

28

250

<18

<35

<10

<1

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

89

Fig. 5.7 Reﬁnery conﬁguration for new GCI fuel (Kalghatgi et al. 2016) (CDU—crude distillation
unit, VDU—vacuum distillation unit, CU—coking unit, HC—hydrocracking unit, DHT—distillate
hydrotreating unit, FCC—ﬂuid catalytic cracking unit, HFA—HF alkylation unit, GHT—gasoline
hydrotreating unit, NHT—naphtha hydrotreating unit, ISOM—isomerization unit, and CNR—con-
tinuous naphtha reforming unit)

compared to baseline gasoline. Reﬁnery conﬁguration for the GCI fuel is almost
similar to traditional one except different unit capabilities. Reﬁnery conﬁguration
for new GCI fuel is shown in Fig. 5.7 (Kalghatgi et al. 2016).

GHG emissions in reﬁning process for low octane gasoline (12.8 g CO2-eq/MJ)
are lower than that of gasoline (14.8 g CO2-eq/MJ) and diesel (13.5 g CO2-eq/MJ)
production. Well-to-wheel GHG emissions from a GCI engine is 22% less than an
equivalent SI engine and ~9% lower than an equivalent diesel engine. Experimental
results of Lu Z. et al. (Lu et al. 2016) suggested that a GCI engine operating on low
octane gasoline has 125% higher fuel economy compared to SI engine operating on
US gasoline.

5.5.3 GCI Combustion Modes

Depending on engine operating conditions, the level of fuel stratiﬁcation signiﬁ-
cantly affects the auto-ignitability, combustion phasing, combustion stability, and
emissions in a GCI engine. Fuel stratiﬁcation can be controlled by using the fuel
injection strategy. Due to this, GCI is a more practical technique compared to HCCI
and can be utilized in commercial diesel engines for a wider operating range with
better-combustion stability (Manente et al. 2011; Dec et al. 2011, 2015; Hao et al.

90

V. S. Solanki et al.

2016; Borgqvist et al. 2012). GCI combustion modes are classiﬁed into three cat-
egories according to the level of fuel stratiﬁcation: partial fuel stratiﬁcation (PFS),
medium fuel stratiﬁcation (MFS), and high fuel stratiﬁcation (HFS). Multiple injec-
tion strategy is utilized in GCI engines for achieving stable combustion and level
of fuel stratiﬁcation, which is determined by using the injection centroid formula
(Dempsey et al. 2016):

θin j =

(cid:2)Nin j

i=1 Yi S O Ii
(cid:2)Nin j
i=1 Yi

=

Nin j(cid:3)

i=1

Yi S O Ii

where N inj = Number of injections, Y i is the fraction of fuel mass in ith injection,
and SOI i is the start of injection of ith injection.

PFS is used for preparation of homogeneous charge at part-load conditions, in
which the ﬁrst injection takes place either into the port or direct injection in the intake
stroke. Main injection takes place in the compression stroke to create desired level
of fuel stratiﬁcation and to auto-ignite the charge so that the engine can achieve low
emissions with an acceptable combustion noise. In MFS, level of premixed charge
slightly decreases with a slight increase in the fuel stratiﬁcation level. All injections
in MFS mode take place during the compression stroke, in which ﬁnal injection takes
place near TDC to trigger the premixed charge. High level of fuel stratiﬁcation, with
no or very less premixed charge is utilized in the GCI engine at high load condition.
In HFS mode, all injection events take place near TDC in the compression stroke
(Dempsey et al. 2016). FIP varies to achieve the desired level of fuel stratiﬁcation
in GCI combustion. Higher FIP is utilized in case of HFS compared to MFS and
PFS to complete the injection before the SoC. However FIP requirement of HFS is
still signiﬁcantly lower than diesel PCCI due to high self-ignition temperature and
high volatility of gasoline. GCI combustion requires lower fuel stratiﬁcation for the
operation with a high level of EGR (Dempsey et al. 2016; Noehre et al. 2006). Effect
of different parameters on GCI combustion modes such as PFS, MFS, and HFS are
discussed brieﬂy in Table 5.4 (Dempsey et al. 2016). And comparison of various
conventional and advanced engine combustion techniques based on the level of fuel
stratiﬁcation before the SoC is captured in Fig. 5.8 (Singh and Agarwal 2019).

5.5.4 GCI Versus Other Combustion Concepts

Implementation of efﬁcient and eco-friendly combustion techniques is the focus of
engine researchers at present. Due to increased concerns about emissions and fuel
economy, researchers have started to work on alternative combustion technologies
such as low temperature combustion (HCCI, PCCI, and RCCI), GDI, and GCI. Com-
parative analysis of the GCI engine technology with other combustion technologies
is discussed in Table 5.5.

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

91

Table 5.4 Effects of fuel stratiﬁcation levels on GCI engine performance, combustion and emis-
sions Parameters (Dempsey et al. 2016)

Partial fuel
stratiﬁcation

Medium fuel
stratiﬁcation

High fuel
stratiﬁcation

Parameters

Injection Period

FIP

Premixing level

Combustion and its
control

First injection either
in the port or very
early in the intake
stroke and main
injection in the
mid-compression
stroke
Pinj: 320–120°bTDC
Low

Highly premixed
before SOC

Similar to HCCI
combustion with
same opportunities
and challenges and
kinetically controlled
combustion identical
to HCCI

All Direct Injection
(DI) events take
place during
compression stroke
and main injection
near the TDC
Pinj:
120°–140°bTDC

Medium

Medium

More closer to diesel
PCCI with advanced
injection and longer
ignition delay,
injection driven
concept and
combustion control
mainly by injection
near the TDC

Lowest combustion
noise and RoPR
among all GCI
strategies

Modest combustion
efﬁciency, NOx and
soot emissions

Multiple DI events
take place near the
TDC
Pinj: 40°–0°bTDC

High, but less than
diesel PCCI

No or very less
premixed fuel

Combustion identical
to diesel PCCI and
injection-induced
concept, combustion
managed like CDC
and diesel PCCI

High combustion
efﬁciency similar to
CDC. Low soot
emissions

High NOx emissions,
But lower than diesel
PCCI. High RoPR
and high combustion
noise

Opportunities

Ultra-low NOx and
soot emissions

Challenge

Low combustion
efﬁciency, high
combustion noise,
limited operating
range, little control
over combustion
phasing

5.5.5 Opportunities and Challenges Associated with GCI

High volatility and long ignition delay period of gasoline facilitates superior mixture
homogeneity, which eventually allows the GCI engine to operate at lower FIP. Hence,
GCI vehicles can be equipped with low-pressure fuel pump, leading to signiﬁcantly
lower cost and complexity of the fuel injection system. Lower FIP improves the GCI
combustion stability at part loads and helps in reducing CO and HC emissions as
well. By controlling the fuel stratiﬁcation level, fuel over-mixing and over-leaning of
the mixture can be avoided in GCI engine (Kalghatgi and Johansson 2018). GCI tech-
nique helps in mitigating the pumping losses and it could be operated at wide-open

92

V. S. Solanki et al.

Fig. 5.8 Comparison of various conventional and advanced engine combustion techniques based
on the level of fuel stratiﬁcation before the SoC (Singh and Agarwal 2019)

throttle (WOT) condition at higher compression ratio thus engine can achieve higher
efﬁciency quite similar to conventional diesel engines. Pilot injection is employed
in diesel engine at low load condition to reduce combustion noise, but it lowers the
engine efﬁciency and increases the smoke level. This problem can be tackled by GCI
fuel, which provides longer ignition delay. Reduced parasitic losses due to lower
FIP and less frequently regeneration of particulate ﬁlter helps in engine efﬁciency
improvement. However, it is necessary to control high HC and CO emissions of
GCI engine by using exhaust gas after-treatment devices. The focus of exhaust gas
after-treatment shifts to oxidation of HC and CO in GCI engines, which is much
easier and cost-effective compared to controlling NOx and PM emissions in case of
a diesel engine. In GCI engines, soot emission increase with increasing engine load.
However, its level is always less than that of diesel engine with the same fuel injection
system because mixture homogeneity is far better in the previous case. Heavy-duty
GCI engine requires a gasoline particulate ﬁlter (GPF) to control the soot emissions
at high engine load conditions. At high load condition, GPF self-regenerates due to
high exhaust gas temperature.

Though a GCI engine produces low NOx emissions, it would require NOx after-
treatment device in order to comply with stringent emission norms, however it will
be less loaded compared to a DPF. There is scope for developing cost-effective and
straightforward after-treatment systems for GCI engines compared to modern diesel
engines. Besides, it is necessary to develop oxidation catalysts and GPF that could
work at low exhaust temperatures. Figure 5.9 shows that GCI engine technology

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

e
h
t
n
i
g
n
i
t
a
r

e
n
a
t
c
O

n
i

l
e
u
f

e
n
a
t
c
o

h
g
i
H

n
o
p
u

s
d
n
e
p
e
D

n
o
p
u

s
d
n
e
p
e
D

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
i
-
o
t
u
a
y
s
a
E

o
t

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
r

h
g
i
H

N
O
R
m
u
m

i
t
p
O

(

5
8
–
0
7

f
o

e
g
n
a
r

I

D
a
i
v

l
e
u
f

e
n
a
t
e
C

h
g
i
h

d
n
a

t
r
o
p

e
h
t

o
i
t
a
r

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
m
o
c

o
i
t
a
r

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
m
o
c

)
e
n
a
t
e
C
h
g
i
h
(

h
g
i
h
(
n
o
i
t
i
n
g
i
-
o
t
u
a

)

R
C

(

)

R
C

(

)
e
n
a
t
c
O

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
i

l
e
u
F

e
n
a
t
c
o
w
o
L

e
n
i
l
o
s
a
g

I

C
G

I

C
C
R

s
l
e
u
f

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
n
i
b
m
o
C

l
e
u
f

e
l
b
i
x
e
l

F

l
e
u
f

e
l
b
i
x
e
l

F

s
l
e
u
f

e
k
i
l

l
e
s
e
i
D

s
l
e
u
f

e
k
i
l

e
n
i
l
o
s
a
G

l
e
u
F

n
o
i
t
s
u
b
m
o
C
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T
w
o
L

I

C
C
P

I

C
C
H

I

C

I
S

s
e
u
q
i
n
h
c
e
T

l
a
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
n
o
C

s
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
P
c
i
s
a
B

s
e
i
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
t

n
o
i
t
s
u
b
m
o
c

e
n
i
g
n
e
C

I

t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d

f
o
s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

e
v
i
t
a
r
a
p
m
o
C

5
5

.

e
l
b
a
T

e
h
t

y
b

d
e
t
i
n
g
I

n
i
a
m
e
h
t

y
b

d
e
t
i
n
g
I

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
i
-
o
t
u
A

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
i
-
o
t
u
A

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
i

k
r
a
p
S

e
c
r
u
o
S
n
o
i
t
i
n
g
I

e
h
t

y
b

d
e
r
e
g
g
i
r
T

n
o
i
t
c
e
j
n
i

n
i
a
m

)
0
7
~

n
o
i
t
a
c
ﬁ
i
t
a
r
t
s

l
e
u
f

n
o
p
u

g
n
i
d
n
e
p
e
d

n
o
i
t
s
u
b
m
o
c

d
e
x
i
m
e
r
P

I

D
e
l
p
i
t
l
u
M

I

D
d
n
a

t
r
o
P
h
t
o
B

n
o
i
t
c
e
j
n
i

t
c
e
r
i
d

y
b

d
e
l
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

n
o
i
t
s
u
b
m
o
c

d
e
x
i
m
e
r
P

d
n
a

d
e
x
i
m
e
r
P

s
u
o
n
e
g
o
m
o
h

n
o
i
t
s
u
b
m
o
c

I

D
e
l
p
i
t
l
u
M

n
o
i
t
c
e
j
n
i

s
c
i
t
e
n
i
k
l
a
c
i
m
e
h
c

t
n
o
r
f

e
m
a
ﬂ

t
u
o
h
t
i

w

)
1
>
ň
(

n
a
e
L

c
i
r
t
e
m
o
i
h
c
i
o
t
s
/
n
a
e
L

)
1
=

,

1
>
ň
(

)
1
>
ň
(

n
a
e
L

93

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
C (
D
C
e
k
i
l

g
n
i
m

i
t

n
o
i
t
c
e
j
n
i
n
i
a

M
y
B

n
o
i
t
c
e
j
n
i

n
i
a

M

x
O
N
d
n
a

M
P
w
o
L

d
n
a
O
C
h
g
i
h

h
t
i

w

C
H

h
t
i

w
x
O
N
d
n
a

M
P

C
H
d
n
a
O
C
h
g
i
h

g
n
i
m

i
t

w
o
L

g
n
i
m

i
t
n
o
i
t
c
e
j
n
I

r
e
d
n
i
l
y
c
-
n
i

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

x
O
N
d
n
a

M
P

x
O
N
d
n
a

M
P

w
o
L

w
o
L

x
O
N
d
n
a

M
P
h
g
i
H

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
E
h
g
i
H

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
E
h
g
i
H

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
E
h
g
i
H

R
C
n
o

s
d
n
e
p
e
D

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
E
h
g
i
H

d
e
l
t
t
o
r
h
t
n
U

d
e
l
t
t
o
r
h
t
n
U

d
e
l
t
t
o
r
h
t
n
U

d
e
l
t
t
o
r
h
t
n
U

d
e
l
t
t
o
r
h
t
n
U
/
d
e
l
t
t
o
r
h
T

g
n
i
l
t
t
o
r
h
T

g
n
i
m

i
t
n
o
i
t
c
e
j
n
I

g
n
i
m

i
t

k
r
a
p
S

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
I

,

C
H
d
n
a
O
C
h
g
i
H

d
n
a

x
O
N
w
o
l
d
n
a

M
P

d
a
o
l

t
r
a
p

r
o
o
P

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
E

s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
E

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
E

.

p
m
e
t

d
n
a

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p

d
e
l
t
t
o
r
h
t
n
U

y
l
l
a
c
i
t
e
n
i
K

d
e
l
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

)
1
>
ň
(

n
a
e
L

n
o
i
t
s
u
b
m
o
c

y
b

d
e
n
r
e
v
o
g

r
e
d
n
i
l
y
c
-
n
i

d
e
x
i
m
e
r
P

)
s
u
o
e
n
e
g
o
r
e
t
e
h
(

e
m
a
ﬂ

t
u
o
h
t
i

w

n
o
i
t
s
u
b
m
o
c

n
o
i
s
u
f
f
i

D

I

D

/
I
F
P

n
o
i
t
c
e
j
n
i

t
c
e
r
i

D

e
m
a
ﬂ
t
n
e
l
u
b
r
u
t

)
d
e
ﬁ
i
t
a
r
t
s
/
s
u
o
n

-
e
g
o
m
o
h
(

I

D
G

/
I
F
P

d
e
x
i
m
e
r
P

h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
s
u
b
m
o
c

d
n
a

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

n
o
i
t
c
e
j
n
I

l
e
u
F

n
o
i
t
s
u
b
m
o
C

t
n
o
r
f

e
m
a
l
F

t
n
a
d
n
e
p
e
d
y
l
r
a
e
n
i
l

d
a
o
l

e
n
i
g
n
e

n
o

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n
i

d
a
o
l

,
)
1
=

.

2
2
–
2
.
1
=
ň

ň
(

c
i
r
t
e
m
o
i
h
c
i
o
t
S

o
i
t
a
r

r
i
a
-
l
e
u
F

94

V. S. Solanki et al.

C
H
d
n
a
O
C
h
g
i
H

m
u
i
d
e
m

t
a
R
P
o
R

h
g
i
h

,
s
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
e

r
o
o
p
,
d
a
o
l

h
g
i
h

d
n
a

w
o
l

t
a
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
s

n
o
i
t
s
u
b
m
o
c

s
d
a
o
l

s
e
t
a
r
e
p
o

,
s
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
e

,
y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

h
g
i
H

,
x
O
N

,

M
P
l
l
a
m
s

G
H
G
d
n
a

d
n
a
d
e
t
a
c
i
l
p
m
o
c

o
t

e
u
d

e
v
i
s
n
e
p
x
e

I
F
P
a

f
o

n
o
i
t
i
d
d
a

d
n
a
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
e

C
H
d
n
a
O
C

m
e
t
s
y
s

t
s
o
c
-
w
o
l

,
e
n
i
l
o
s
a
g

e
l
c
i
h
e
v

n
o
i
t
s
u
b
m
o
c

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
s

e
n
a
t
c
o
w
o
l

n
o

n
o

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

r
e
t
t
e
b

I

C
G

n
o
i
t
s
u
b
m
o
C
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T
w
o
L

s
e
u
q
i
n
h
c
e
T

l
a
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
n
o
C

s
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
P
c
i
s
a
B

I

C
C
R

I

C
C
P

I

C
C
H

I

C

I
S

s
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
e
C
H
d
n
a

s
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
e
C
H
d
n
a

h
g
i
h

,
s
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
e

h
g
i
h

d
n
a
y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

r
e
h
g
i
h
y
t
i
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

O
C
h
g
i
h
y
t
i
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

O
C
h
g
i
h
y
t
i
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

x
O
N
d
n
a

M
P
h
g
i
H

e
n
i
g
n
e
w
o
L

s
e
g
n
e
l
l
a
h
C

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

5
5

.

e
l
b
a
T

x
O
N
d
n
a

M
P

d
n
a

s
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
e

w
o
l
h
t
i

w
y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

d
n
a

M
P
e
l
t
t
i
l
h
t
i

w

w
o
l
h
t
i

w
y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

s
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
e

x
O
N

s
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
e

r
e
t
r
e
v
n
o
c

c
i
t
y
l
a
t
a
c

y
a
w
-
3
a

g
n
i
s
u

l
a
m
r
e
h
t

h
g
i
H

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

h
g
i
H

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
E
h
g
i
H

s
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
e
w
o
l
y
r
e
V

s
e
g
a
t
n
a
v
d
A

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t
-
r
e
t
f
a

E
I
F
d
n
a
m
e
t
s
y
s

m
e
t
s
y
s

n
o
i
t
s
u
b
m
o
c

r
o
o
p
h
t
i

w

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
s

t
s
u
a
h
x
e

e
v
i
s
n
e
p
x
e

f
o
n
o
i
t
a
l
l
a
t
s
n
i

o
t

e
u
d

t
s
o
c

e
l
c
i
h
e
v

s
e
s
s
o
l
g
n
i
l
t
t
o
r
h
t

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

95

Fig. 5.9 Advantages of GCI engine technology

can reduce vehicle operating cost by using low octane fuel, while maintaining high
engine efﬁciency.

Therefore R&D efforts are required to address the issues associated with GCI
engine technology before its adoptation in commercial vehicles. Main challenges
associated with GCI technology are captured in Fig. 5.10 (Kalghatgi and Johansson
2018). However, most problems can be resolved by optimizing the combustion. It

Wear & tear of fuel
injection system

Availability of low octane
gasoline

Cold starting & idle
condition

Hardware optimization
such as chamber design,
piston etc.

Challenges associated
with Gasoline
compression ignition (GCI)
technology

Combustion stability at
low load

Fuel quality specially
lubricity and detergency

High CO & HC emissions

Combustion noise and
RoPR at medium and high
load

Fig. 5.10 Challenges for GCI engine technology

96

V. S. Solanki et al.

is much simpler to address the issues associated with GCI engines than the existing
diesel engines because diesel engines (CI engines) are the “right engine” operating
with the “wrong fuel”. Control of PM and NOx emissions from the diesel engine
has reached their practical limits. GCI will be an alternative technology to reduce
the emissions from CI engines without compromising the engine efﬁciency. Also
it would help in reducing GHG emission footprint (Kalghatgi and Johansson 2018;
Mazda 2017). Therefore implementation of GCI technology could be beneﬁcial to
both the automotive industry and the oil companies. It opens a path to mitigate
imbalance in the future fuel demand for light and heavy fuel oils.

5.6 Effect of Various Control Strategies on GCI Engine

Main issues associated with GCI technique include cold starting problems, high HC
and CO emissions, combustion instability at low loads, and high RoPR at medium,
and high loads. Like other engine combustion processes, GCI combustion also signiﬁ-
cantly depends on fuel properties, optimum injection strategies, and engine operating
characteristics. GCI technology can be effectively implemented by optimizing injec-
tion strategies. Different control strategies that can be employed in GCI combustion
towards satisfactory engine performance are described in the following sub-sections.

5.6.1 Injection Strategy

Fuel injection strategies greatly inﬂuence engine combustion, performance, and tail-
pipe emissions. By utilizing split injection strategies in GCI engine, desired level of
combustion noise, and knock resistance can be achieved. Split injections (multi-
injections) use two or more-injection pulses to control the rate of pressure rise
(RoPR), apparent heat release rate (aHRR), and combustion noise. In multi-injection
technology, ﬁrst injection pulse controls the level of premixed charge (mixture homo-
geneity), and second injection pulse controls the combustion phasing (ignition tim-
ing). The effect of pilot injection quantity and fuel quality on mixture condition is
shown in Fig. 5.11 (Goyal et al. 2019).

Pilot injection timing and quantity affects the level of fuel stratiﬁcation and pre-
pares a thermodynamic state for auto-ignition of fuel injected in main injection.
It also helps in controlling heat release rate and engine out-emissions (Lu et al.
2011). An optimized injection strategy can help achieve greater productive control
on GCI combustion and stretched heat release proﬁle for full engine operating range
(Kalghatgi et al. 2007; Sellnau et al. 2012; Manente et al. 2009; Ra et al. 2011; Goyal
et al. 2017). Due to long ignition delay of gasoline, injection process and combustion
event cannot be easily separated at full load. Extended injection duration and ignition
delay result in substantial soot emissions due to diffusion combustion domination at
high load (Manente et al. 2010; Lewander et al. 2011). By using multiple injection

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

97

Fig. 5.11 Effect of pilot injection quantity and fuel quality on mixture quality (Goyal et al. 2019)

Fig. 5.12 In-cylinder pressure and HRR of GCI combustion engine under a single injection and
b double injection (Mao et al. 2018)

strategy, lower PM and NOx emissions from a GCI engine can be achieved due to
improved charge homogeneity, similar to HCCI engines (Kalghatgi et al. 2007; Ra
et al. 2012; Zhao et al. 2003; Gray III and Ryan III 1997; Thring 1989), while oxi-
dation of unburned species can lower HC and CO emissions at high temperature due
to superior premixing of charge.

Mao et al. (2018) optimized injection strategies of a GCI engine and suggested
that a single injection strategy could not be employed effectively in GCI combustion
engine due to knocking and substantial reduction in fuel economy (Fig. 5.12). Pilot
injection reduced the ignition delay, improved combustion noise and controllability,
and reduced the emissions. They achieved a peak brake thermal efﬁciency (BTE) of
~44% at 1350 rpm in a multi-cylinder GCI engine with Euro-VI NOx emissions.

Goyal et al. (2019) investigated the effect of pilot injection quantity and fuel
quality (RON 91, 95 and 98) on a single-cylinder GCI engine operating at 2000 rpm
at 940 kPa IMEP. They reported that at ﬁxed RON, an increased proportion of pilot
fuel quantity leads to an improvement in mixture homogeneity and slows down initial
burning rate, as shown in Fig. 5.13.

98

Fig. 5.13 Indicated thermal
efﬁciency (ITE) at different
pilot/ﬁrst injection
proportion and fuel ignition
quality at ﬁxed combustion
phasing (CA50 at 10°CA
aTDC) (Goyal et al. 2019)

V. S. Solanki et al.

Increased pilot injection quantity provided stretched heat release proﬁle with lower
combustion noise. Results suggested that 50% ﬁrst injection proportion with 91 RON
achieved the lowest combustion noise and peak pressure rise rate (PPRR). Enhanced
mixture homogeneity reduced the in-cylinder reaction temperature resulting in NOx
reductions. However, a more moderate reaction temperature can reduce the oxida-
tion rate, which results in increased emissions of CO, HC, and smoke. Researchers
obtained an indicated thermal efﬁciency (ITE) ranging from 45 to 50% in the GCI
engines (Fig. 5.13). Even the lowest efﬁciency (41%) of GCI engine was relatively
higher than the reference diesel engine efﬁciency.

5.6.2 Fuel Ignition Quality

Gasoline has a lower cetane number (usually <15) which provides longer ignition
delay before SoC. It should be injected earlier in the compression stroke at lower
in-cylinder pressure and temperature conditions, which are not favorable for auto-
ignition of gasoline. Utilization of EGR in GCI combustion further retards the ignition
reactions (Cracknell et al. 2008). Ignition delay model was developed for diesel
combustion in warmed-up engine conditions (Vallinayagam et al. 2018), and it was
extended to estimate ignition delay at lower temperatures or for the fuels having
different Cetane ratings. Results showed that ignition delay increased by three times,

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

99

Fig. 5.14 Effect of intake air pressure (IP) on the ignition delay and combustion duration at different
engine load conditions (Jiang et al. 2019)

when the engine coolant temperature dropped from 100 to 0°C and was doubled for
gasoline (CN15) as compared to baseline diesel.

Jiang et al. (2019) investigated the performance and emissions characteristics of
GCI engine fueled with four different primary reference fuels (PRFs) having research
octane number of 60, 70, 80, and 90. Figure 5.14 (Jiang et al. 2019) shows the effects
on intake air pressure (IP) on combustion duration and ignition delay. Results showed
that combustion was unstable with PRF90 at 2 bar IMEP because of longer ignition
delay period. Researchers suggested that GCI engine delivered better performance
and engine efﬁciency using PRF70 with intake air heating at part load (IMEP between
1 and 4 bar). PRF70 provided good results at medium loads (IMEP between 4 and
8 bars) and PRF90 above IMEP of 8 bar without intake air heating. Up to 47% ITE
with PRF70 under medium load was observed in this study.

Cho et al. (2017) et al. conducted experiments with the US market gasoline
(RON92 E10) and RON80 gasoline on Delphi’s 2nd generation GCI engine at differ-
ent load conditions. GCI engine utilized a high amount of EGR (~44%) with RON80
compared to conventional gasoline (EGR ~39%) for the same combustion phasing
at lower temperature and pressure. Due to difference in fuel reactivity, they achieved
10.9% lower BSFC, and improved combustion stability (COV 0.50% for RON80
and 0.99% for conventional gasoline) at part and medium loads. Overall, RON80
was better in terms of efﬁciency, stability, and emissions compared to RON92 E10
gasoline.

Goyal et al. (2019) reported that higher RON fuels and ﬁxed pilot injection quan-
tity leads to higher premixing of fuel injected during main injection event, which
increases combustion noise and peak aHRR. Researchers added that engine efﬁciency

100

V. S. Solanki et al.

Fig. 5.15 Engine out NOx/HC/CO and smoke emissions at different pilot injection proportions
and fuel ignition quality at ﬁxed combustion phasing (CA50 at 10°CA aTDC) (Goyal et al. 2019)

improved with increasing RON of the test fuel but decreased with increasing ﬁrst
injection quantity. However higher RON with ﬁxed mixture homogeneity resulted
in over-premixing of the second injection. It increased engine-out NOx emissions
due to high reaction temperatures but it reduced the engine-out HC, CO and smoke
emissions. Effect of pilot mass and fuel ignition quality is shown in Fig. 5.15 (Goyal
et al. 2019) with ﬁxed combustion phasing.

5.6.3 EGR Strategy

Effective control of used EGR reduces NOx emissions by controlling the in-cylinder
temperature and oxygen level. Ra et al. (2011) investigated the effect of EGR, injec-
tion timing, and fuel split ratio on a light-duty diesel engine in GCI mode at full load
(16 bar IMEP, 2500 rpm). They obtained lower PM and NOx emissions (0.1 g/kg-f)
and low ISFC (180 g/kWh) due to lower combustion temperature by utilizing high
EGR, high volatility and high octane rating of gasoline. Decreasing EGR ratio helped
in retarding injection timing for optimum GCI combustion. Similarly Kolodziej et al.
(2016) suggested that increased fuel reactivity (lower octane rating) required more
EGR for controlled GCI combustion. Yao et al. (2015) reported that lower octane
gasoline improved the NOx-PM tradeoff with a high level of EGR. They utilized
multiple injection strategy with 50% EGR and demonstrated an ITE of 51.57% with
lower maximum RoPR and regulated emissions.

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

101

5.6.4 Other Control Techniques

5.6.4.1 Negative Valve Overlapping

Higher RON gasoline has longer ignition delay that creates a problem in combus-
tion at low loads in GCI engine. This can be resolved by a strategy called negative
valve overlapping (NVO), i.e. closing the exhaust valve very early in the cycle. Valli-
nayagam et al. (2018) extended idle and low load stability of GCI combustion using
NVO strategy. They varied the exhaust cam phasing so that exhaust valve closes
very early. Recompression of hot gases took place before opening of intake valves,
which helped in auto-ignition of charge and improved the combustion stability at
low loads. With NVO, intake air temperature requirement decreased by 15–20 °C.
NVO reduced engine efﬁciency at low loads due to more heat losses, but it helped in
reduction of CO and HC emissions.

5.6.4.2 Controlling Intake Temperature and Pressure

Jiang et al. (2019) investigated the effect of intake temperature and pressure on the
GCI engine combustion and emissions. Increasing intake pressure to 8 bar enhanced
GCI engine fuel economy by 20 g/kWh at low RON of 70. They reported that
increasing intake pressure advanced the combustion and the combustion phasing.
Supercharging helped reduce HC and CO emissions due to proper burning and led to
a reduction in NOx emissions. However total PM increased at part load conditions.
Increasing intake temperature decreased engine’s volumetric efﬁciency, and HC and
CO emissions at part load but increased NOx emissions due to relatively higher peak
in-cylinder temperature. ITE improved by 16% using PRF70 at intake temperature
of 50 °C compared to PRF90 at 30 °C.

5.6.4.3 Effect of Ozone Seeding on GCI Engine

Seeding ozone in intake air improves gasoline reactivity thus can enhance the low
load limit of a GCI engine as reported by Pinazzi and Foucher (2017). Ozone seed-
ing reduces the intake air temperature, and subsequently lowered the combustion
temperature, resulting in reduction of NOx emissions. Researchers suggested that
ﬁrst injection should be in intake stroke so that ozone get more residence time, and
second injection should be in compression stroke to control the level of fuel stratiﬁca-
tion, avoiding excessive heat release rate. However overall combustion and indicated
efﬁciency can be affected because of large time gap in the injection events.

102

V. S. Solanki et al.

5.7 Critical Parts of a GCI Engine

GCI technique can be adopted in modern CI engines with minimal modiﬁcations in
engine design and fuel injection system. It requires a simple fuel injection system and
exhaust after-treatment system that can reduce vehicle cost and complexity. In this
section, adoption of GCI technique in the contemporary CI engines is summarized.

5.7.1 Fuel Injection System

Fuel injection system is a critical part of a CI engine that affects engine performance,
combustion, and tail-pipe emissions. High FIP is required for adequate atomization
and mixing of the charge. As the FIP increases, cost, and complexity of the system
increases simultaneously. In case of GCI engine, FIP depends on the operating condi-
tion and desired level of fuel stratiﬁcation. Even with high volatility of gasoline, FIP
can go up to 1000 bar at full capacity of a GCI engine. CRDI fuel injection system
would be a better choice for GCI engine with minor modiﬁcations in fuel injector
geometry. Fuel injector design should be such that it can provide sufﬁcient fuel quan-
tity at desired FIP. Lower FIP helps reduce power requirement for the fuel pump. For
example, reducing FIP from 1460 bar to 960 bar reduces fuel pump power by about
100 W. GCI engines can operate at half of diesel engine’s FIP. A GCI engine can
achieve the lowest BSFC in between 80 and 110 MPa injection pressure. Gasoline
has lower density and caloriﬁc value (by volume) compared to diesel, hence more
quantity is required to be injected to achieve diesel-like power output. Therefore
gasoline fuel injector holes for a GCI engine would be slightly larger than the diesel
injector holes. Otherwise, fuel injection period needs to be increased, if a diesel
injector is to be used to inject gasoline in a GCI engine.

Lubricity of market gasoline is not adequate to protect the fuel injection system
from wear and tear. Hence it requires either a careful selection of material for the
fuel injection system or addition of suitable additives in gasoline for improving its
lubricity (Rose et al. 2013). Won et al. (2012) suggested that large injector hole
and lower FIP could be beneﬁcial for GCI combustion. In contrast to these results,
Rose et al. (2013) reported that a smaller injector diameter performs better at full
operating range of the engine. With a ﬁxed nozzle size, it is better to utilize multiple
fuel injections at low FIP in GCI combustion in order to control the combustion
noise.

5.7.2 Compression Ratio

Compression ratio (CR) dramatically changes the ignition delay period. Previous
studies (Stone 2012; Al-Abdullah et al. 2015; Ra et al. 2011) conﬁrmed that GCI

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

103

engines can work efﬁciently using similar compression ratios, ranging from 16.5
to 19, as that of conventional diesel engines. Rose et al. (2013) investigated the
effect of two different compression ratios (CR17 and CR19) in a GCI engine. Higher
CR (19:1) provided shorter ignition delay period, allowing better control on GCI
combustion at low engine loads. At full capacity, CR19 provided better efﬁciency
due to reduced losses. However, use of higher CR was limited by smoke emission,
noise, and exhaust gas temperature. Researchers concluded that utilization of variable
compression ratio (VCR) could be beneﬁcial for GCI engines. However, another
study showed that lowering CR of heavy-duty Cummins engine from 18.9 to 15.7
improved soot-NOx tradeoff at the expense of engine efﬁciency (Won et al. 2012b),
without altering the bowl geometry.

5.7.3 Engine Management System

Optimum performance of an engine depends on different operating parameters such
as FIP, injection timing, injection quantity, intake air conditions, and EGR. These
parameters must be controlled simultaneously in order to achieve optimum engine
performance at given operating conditions. Automobile companies use a preset non-
programmable electronic control unit (closed ECU) in vehicle for attaining optimum
performance of the engine. As mentioned previously, GCI engines would require
multiple injections strategy for achieving better combustion stability and engine
performance. Therefore, an open ECU (programmable ECU) has to be used instead
of a closed ECU to control and optimize different inﬂuencing parameters mentioned
earlier. Different sensors and actuators such as lambda sensor, cam sensor, crank
sensor, and various temperature and pressure sensors are usually connected to an open
ECU and a user can reprogram the ECU as per requirement. Thus an optimized engine
management system can effectively and efﬁciently control in-cylinder conditions by
varying the EGR rate, boost level, and valve timing (Fig. 5.16).

5.7.4 GCI Exhaust After-Treatment System

GCI engine emits lower tailpipe NOx and PM emissions but higher HC and CO
emissions than diesel engine. Fortunately, it is much simpler to control NOx and
PM emissions in GCI engines (Rose et al. 2013). However, GCI will require efﬁcient
oxidation catalyst to control the HC and CO emissions at low exhaust gas temperature
and gasoline particulate ﬁlter (GPF) in order to comply with emission regulations.
Regeneration interval of GPF in GCI vehicles will increase and save ~1.5% fuel
compared to diesel DPF equipped vehicles.

104

V. S. Solanki et al.

High pressure fuel 
pump

Rail 
pressure 
sensor

Fuel tank

Pressure 
regulator 
valve

Injectors

Open ECU Control system

Dongle

Wiring

Interface
Box

ECU Control Interface

Open ECU

Closed ECU

Intake Air 
Temperature 
Sensor

Coolant 
Temperature 
Sensor

Camshaft 
position 
Sensor

Crankshaft 
position 
Sensor

Actuator Signal

Sensor Signal

Interface wiring

Power cable

Fuel line

Battery

Ignition key

Starter

EGR Valve

Pedal Position sensor

Fig. 5.16 Open ECU interface and engine management system

5.8 Path Forward for GCI Engine Technology

Gasoline compression ignition (GCI) offers an efﬁcient and eco-friendly combustion
technique at a reasonable cost. GCI engine can operate efﬁciently with low octane
fuels (RON 70) in the diesel boiling range. Straight run gasoline after the ﬁrst distil-
lation can be utilized in GCI engines without any post-processing. In initial phase,
GCI vehicles can be operated with gasoline-diesel blend in case of unavailability
of low octane fuel. However, in order to commercialize GCI vehicles in the current
market, signiﬁcant R&D efforts are needed in the following directions:

(i) GCI engines need to improve combustion stability at part loads. GCI engine
fuelled with conventional gasoline has poor combustion stability at low loads
due to higher ignition delay, lower cylinder pressure and temperature. Oper-
ating parameters such as fuel injection strategy, fuel ignition quality (octane
rating), EGR rate, intake pressure and temperature, and piston bowl geometry
need to be optimized for effective control of combustion at low loads. Strategies
like advanced fuel injection, multiple-injection, low octane fuel usage, neg-
ative valve overlap, intake air heating, and EGR usage effectively addresses
this issue.

(ii) Combustion control at cold start and idle condition is still an issue with GCI
technology. In-cylinder environment at this condition (i.e. low pressure and
temperature) is not favorable to auto-ignition of low reactive fuels. To over-
come this problem, a suitable combination of fuel ignition quality, advanced
injection timing, preheating of intake air, EGR, and NVO can be employed.
Glow plug or spark plug can also be used to address the issue of cold start.

5 Prospects of Gasoline Compression Ignition (GCI) …

105

(iii) Optimized injection strategies would be needed to control high noise and high
rate of pressure rise (RoPR) at medium and high engine loads. Double and triple
fuel injections, optimized injection timing and fuel quantity can be beneﬁcial,
depending on engine operating conditions.

(iv) GCI engines emit lower NOx and PM emissions but higher HC and CO emis-
sions than a diesel engine. Therefore development of an exhaust gas after-
treatment system consisting of efﬁcient oxidation catalysts to control HC and
CO emissions at low exhaust gas temperature is essential. Additionally, devel-
opment of particulate ﬁlter will also be required to capture ﬁne soot particles
coming out from the engine tailpipe.

(v) Development of close-loop control and sophisticated engine management sys-
tem can help GCI engine to operate efﬁcienctly in transient operating condi-
tions. Close loop control can help optimize the operating parameters as per
driving cycle requirements instantaneously.

(vi) Fuel injector (with optimum hole size and number), fuel pump, piston geome-
try, and inlet port are some of the crucial parts, that are needed to be designed
properly for effective implementation of GCI technique. R&D efforts are
needed to develop suitable additives to improve gasoline lubricity without
affecting engine tailpipe emissions.

(vii) Availability of low octane fuel in the market is a major concern associated
with implementation of GCI fuel-engine system. A blend of iso-octane and
n-hexane with suitable additives can be a suitable test fuel for GCI engine.

In addition to the points mentioned above, R&D efforts should be directed towards
the reduction of overall system complexity, and costs, while ensuring easy adapt-
ability of GCI technique to existing CI engines.

5.9 Summary

GCI is an advanced engine combustion technology, which improves engine efﬁ-
ciency, while maintaining low levels of tail-pipe NOx and PM emissions. The issues
of high PM and soot formation in diesel engines can be minimized by substituting
diesel injection quantity by more volatile and medium reactivity fuels such as low
octane gasoline. Investigations of microscopic and macroscopic spray characteristics
show that gasoline has a lower spray penetration length than diesel under evapora-
tive ambient conditions, which reduce the chances of wall-wetting in GCI engines.
GCI engine can therefore operate efﬁciently with low octane gasoline fuels. Low
octane requirement of GCI engine is beneﬁcial since it can reduce well-to-wheel
GHG emissions as well as reﬁning costs. GCI engine operates on three levels of
fuel stratiﬁcation such as partial, moderate, and high, which facilitate optimization
of vehicle’s performance and emissions under variable operating conditions. Oppor-
tunities and challenges associated with all combustion modes like PFS, MFS, and
HFS have been discussed in detail.

106

V. S. Solanki et al.

Gasoline Compression Igni(cid:415)on
(GCI)

Low-Octane Gasoline
and
Low GHG emissions

Low Emission
and
High Eﬃciency

GCI

Low Cost and Eco-friendly Vehicle

Fig. 5.17 Future of GCI fuel-engine system

Spilt fuel injections strategy can help reduce the combustion noise to a desired level
in a GCI engine. Part-load stability of GCI engines can be improved by using NVO,
early ﬁrst injection, EGR and glow-plug. GCI engines would require a robust fuel
injection system with a slightly larger injector hole diameter. Maximum compression
ratio of a GCI engine depends on operating conditions but is usually between 16:1 to
19:1. Although remarkable progress has been made in the ﬁeld of GCI technology,
high RoHR and combustion noise at medium and full loads, high HC and CO emis-
sions, combustion stability at low loads, cold and idle conditions, and unavailability
of low octane fuel are the major obstacles in adoption of GCI technology commer-
cially. Proper optimization of different key inﬂuencing parameters discussed in this
chapter as well as continuous R&D efforts are quite crucial to address these chal-
lenges associated with GCI engines. It can be concluded that it would be easier to
work with GCI fuel-engine systems rather than controlling the emissions from diesel
engines, hence GCI technology has a bright future in transport sector, as shown in
Fig. 5.17.
Overview, Advancements and Challenges
in Gasoline Direct Injection Engine
Technology
Abstract Gasoline direct injection engines have become the popular powertrain for
commercial cars in the market. The technology is known for its characteristics of
high power output, thermal efﬁciency and fuel economy. Accurate metering of fuel
injection with better fuel utilization makes the engine possible to run on lean mixtures
and operation under higher compression ratio relatively makes it of greater potential
than PFI engines. Due to its capability of being operated under dual combustion
mode by varying fuel injection timing, it can be realized as a cornerstone for future
engine technology. Under mode switching, the homogeneous mixture for higher
power output at medium and high load-rpm conditions, and stratiﬁed mixture for
greater fuel economy at low load-rpm conditions are achieved respectively. It can
be considered as the technology having the beneﬁts of both diesel engine of higher
thermal efﬁciency and gasoline engine of higher speciﬁc power output. But, with the
growing concerns towards the limited fuel reserves and the deteriorated environment
conditions, strict norms for tail-pipe emissions have been regulated. And considering
the higher particulate matter and particle number emissions as a major drawback
for GDI engine, upgradation and improvement in designs is needed to meet the
required norms of emissions. In the initial section, the chapter gives a brief idea of
the overview of the GDI combustion system and its operating modes. Subsequently,
the improvements and researches in various aspects like fuel injection parameters and
strategies, dual fuel utilization, mixture formation, lean burn control and application
of providing turbocharging and residual gas fraction, are elaborately discussed in the
direction of optimizing the performance of the engine. Further, the following section
explains the major challenges and overcoming of this technology. Review of the
work done by various researchers is discussed, focussing on the effect of operating
parameters on particulates emissions, injector deposits and knocking in GDI engine.
Finally, the chapter presents the concluding ways for enhancing the performance,
way forward for making it more efﬁcient and reliable by overcoming the limitations
of GDI engine technologies.
Keyword Gasoline direct injection technology · Homogenous charge · Lean-burn
mixture · Fuel economy · PM emissions
6.1 Introduction

Rising consumption of petroleum products and deteriorating condition of the envi-
ronment has caused the implementation of the stringent emission standards globally
and the development of notable engine technology. The research in engine tech-
nology focuses on meeting the objectives of minimizing the fuel consumption and
engine emissions, and maximizing combustion efﬁciency and speciﬁc power output
of the engine. All these parameters are directly or indirectly inﬂuenced by the pro-
cess of mixture formation which can be either external, internal or both. Gasoline
direct injection technology involves creating an air-fuel mixture inside the cylin-
der by injecting high pressure gasoline fuel directly into the air present in cylinder
unlike port fuel injection and ignited with a spark plug. Thus, we get the combined
advantages of both diesel and petrol engine i.e., brake speciﬁc fuel consumption
approaches that of diesel engine and speciﬁc power output of petrol engine (Blair
1996). Formation of air-fuel mixture externally using carburetor and injection of fuel
in low-pressure manifold has totally occupied 20th century for SI engine develop-
ment. It has beneﬁts of allowing larger time for mixture formation as it is independent
of phase transformation inside the cylinder, thus leads to better ﬂuid dynamic condi-
tion and control (Zhao et al. 1999). But still, it has disadvantages of throttling, inlet
valve-wetting and charge loss due to valve overlap. GDI overcomes these limitations
and its unthrottled operation during part-load conditions signiﬁcantly improve fuel
economy, cause fewer emissions and allow for leaner combustion. Early fuel injec-
tion for homogeneous condition results in charge cooling which certainly allows
provision for higher compression ratio and lower octane rating fuels as comparison
to that of PFI engines.

With the beneﬁts of high thermal efﬁciency and substantially less HC and NOx
emissions, GDI engines are likely to dominate the powertrains of passenger cars.
Although signiﬁcant work in research and design is required for tackling the chal-
lenges of high particulate matter (PM) emissions and knocking tendency. Worldwide,
countries have formulated strict legislations towards exhaust emissions from vehi-
cles. In Europe, the target of approaching CO2 emission of 95 g/km by 2020 for major
light-vehicles has to be achieved. Average annual reductions in CO2 emissions have
to be 3.5 and 5% from 2017 to 2021 and 2022 to 2025 respectively, in the USA. India
has decided to adopt Bharat stage 6 (BS-VI) from April 2020 directly from Bharat
stage 4 (BS-IV) countrywide in order to curb the pollutant level. Euro 6 emission
norms with 0.0045 g/km of particulate matter and the particulate number of 6 ×
1011 particle number per km, are some of the examples showing stringent norms for
emissions globally (China 2016). It requires more advancement in GDI technology,
keeping in view of these regulations. Mazda SKYACTIV sets an example in this
direction.1 In Japan, industry-academia initiative of Research Association of Auto-
motive Internal Combustion Engines aims at achieving the thermal efﬁciency up to
50% for GDI engine by 2020 (Aubernon 2014).

1Mazda Corporation, Skyactiv Technology. http://www.mazda.com/en/innovation/technology/
skyactiv/.

114

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

Thus, examining the developments of GDI technology will be beneﬁcial as the
technology has signiﬁcantly evolved and it has the potential of improvements in
energy efﬁciency and emission reductions.

6.1.1 Evolution of Gasoline Induction Technologies

The strategies of mixture formation differentiate PFI from GDI engine as shown
in Fig. 6.1. In PFI, fuel injection takes place over the back face of the inlet valve
when it is in a closed state during exhaust stroke. Thus, it leads to the formation
of liquid ﬁlm on the back side of the inlet valve and on the walls of the intake
port, causing wall-wetting phenomenon. These are the major concerns of the PFI
engine which creates an error in metering and delay in fuel delivery. Injecting the
fuel directly into the cylinder overcomes the problem of wall-wetting in the port;
thus, much lesser time is required for fuel to transport. Also, better control of fuel
to be injected helps the mixture burn leaner. Although, the port injection has the
advantage of washing out the carbon deposits build up on the back of inlet valve
due to positive crankcase ventilation and EGR. This trouble is mainly faced by
GDI engines. Higher fuel injection pressure (4–15 MPa) in case of GDI enables the
spray to atomize properly compared to PFI, where injection pressure is in range of
0.3–0.6 MPa. Better atomization of fuel results in a higher vaporization rate thus
helps in tackling cold-start problems. Other advantages include fuel cut-off during
deceleration and cooling effect by absorbing enthalpy of vaporization during phase
change of liquid droplets. This increases the volumetric efﬁciency if fuel is injecting
during the intake stroke (Chincholkar and Suryawanshi 2016).

Fig. 6.1 PFI versus GDI engine conﬁgurations (Chincholkar and Suryawanshi 2016)

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

115

6.2 Overview of GDI Engine Technology

GDI technology allows the engine performance to vary according to the driving
requirements. Its capability to operate in different modes according to user demand
makes it efﬁcient powertrain among SI engines. Broadly, there are two operating
modes of GDI engines with three combustion system conﬁgurations.

6.2.1 GDI Operating Modes

The engine management system chooses the operating modes which are categorized
by air-fuel ratio. Comparing the air-fuel ratio with the stoichiometric mixture of
14.7:1 for gasoline, the leaner mode can take the air-fuel ratio up to 65:1. Running the
engine on the leaner composition of mixture helps in reduction of fuel consumption
to a greater extent. There are two operating modes in the GDI engine.

(1) Stratiﬁed mode—It operates with overall leaner mixture and utilized during low
load and low speed requirements. In this, fuel injection takes place late during the
compression stroke, thus stratiﬁed layers of charge of different equivalence ratio
are formed within the combustion chamber with the rich combustible mixture
near the vicinity of spark plug and leaner mixture away from the spark plug.
The toroidal or ovoidal cavity on the piston is used where combustion takes
place as shown in Fig. 6.2. The location of the cavity on piston is according
to the injector position and is used to create the swirl during the injection of
fuel so that mixture having optimal air-fuel ratio gets located near spark plug
when ﬁring occurs. As a result, it can generate the ﬂame and burn the overall
lean mixture, hence gives better fuel economy (Nakashima et al. 2003). To a
large extent, air and residual gases surround the stratiﬁed layers of charge, thus

Fig. 6.2 Piston showing
swirl cavity (https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/
Gasoline_direct_injection)

116

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

Fig. 6.3 Injection timing under homogeneous (left) and stratiﬁed (right) mode (Chincholkar and
Suryawanshi 2016)

minimizes the heat loss during combustion by keeping the ﬂames away from
the walls and lower emissions due to less combustion temperature.

(2) Homogenous mode—This mode operates on stoichiometric composition at all
loads and speeds. It involves the injection of fuel during suction stroke, thus
gets sufﬁcient time to form a homogeneous mixture and results in complete
combustion and lesser emissions. Early injection cools the charge as the droplet
absorbs heat of vaporisation from the air present inside the cylinder, thereby
increasing the volumetric efﬁciency of the engine. Cooling of the charge allows
for operating under higher compression ratio with greater knock tolerances.

Figure 6.3 shows the fuel injection timing for achieving homogeneous and strati-
ﬁed composition of air-fuel mixture. GDI engine with mixed operating mode has the
best fuel economy. But mode switching in GDI is a very complex mechanism and a
massive hurdle in the pathway of GDI development.

6.2.2 GDI Combustion Systems

GDI combustion systems are classiﬁed into three types as air-guided, wall-guided
and spray-guided. These conﬁgurations are used for operating in the homogeneous
and stratiﬁed mode as shown in Fig. 6.4. These are differentiated on the basis of
injector position and piston cavity for in-cylinder motion. In air guided and wall
guided systems, injector position is away from the spark plug and mixture formation
is created by well-deﬁned in-cylinder motion or by spray interaction with the cavity.
In spray-guided, the injector is placed near the spark plug so that rich combustible
mixture can be formed in the proximity of the spark plug. Spray-guided system is of

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

117

Fig. 6.4 Combustion systems of GDI (Chincholkar and Suryawanshi 2016)

second-generation type and has advantages of greater combustion efﬁciency which
leads to improvement of the fuel economy. Wall-guided and spray-guided conﬁgura-
tions are used for a stratiﬁed mode of mixture formation. Wall-guided system makes
the use of piston bowl to guide the injected fuel to locate around the spark plug at the
time of ignition while spray-guided make the use of its location to locate the spray
near the spark plug.

6.3 Recent Progress in GDI Engine Technology

GDI technology has been evolved to a signiﬁcant extent for the past two decades.
Automotive engineers and researchers have been continuously improving the areas
such as injection system optimization, mixture preparation, combustion system etc.,
in order to achieve good performance and lower emissions. Various areas of improve-
ment are discussed below, along with the recent progress and work done in the area.

6.3.1 Injector Location

The wall guided conﬁguration has limitations of fuel impingement and emissions of
particulate and THC, thus is at least priority in recent engine production (Park et al.
2012). However, with a combination of air-guided system, the wall-guided system is
still used to cut down cost in some systems (Yu et al. 2009). GDI combustion system
employing a combination of air-guided and spray-guided have shown satisfactorily
outcome in recent studies (Tang et al. 2018; Eichhorn et al. 2012). Spray-guided
motion is used for stratiﬁed mode operation by incorporating late injections to reduce
fuel impingement and also turbulence caused by in-cylinder air motion is considered
to be signiﬁcant while designing combustion system (Itabashi et al. 2017). In a spray-
guided combustion system, the engine can be operated at a higher range of load and
speed than that of wall-mounted combustion system as shown in Fig. 6.5.

118

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

Fig. 6.5 Comparison of
performance between
wall-guided (WGDI) and
spray-guided direct injection
(SGDI) system (Zhao 2010)

In wall-guided and air-guided conﬁgurations, injectors are located on the side wall
while, in spray-guided conﬁguration, the injector is located centrally. Side-mounted
injector results in enhanced tumble factor, reduction in thermal load, greater thermal
efﬁciency and preignition suppression in comparison to central-mounted injector
(Sevik et al. 2016). However, there are more chances of impingement which has its
own drawbacks. Central injector offers greater ﬂexibility and simpliﬁes the design of
the combustion chamber, while attempting to avoid wall-wetting in order to reduce
emissions of PM/PN. It is situated centrally near the spark plug so as the spray easily
reaches the vicinity of the spark plug in order to operate the engine in stratiﬁed mode.
Also, piezoelectric injectors (Skogsberg et al. 2007) are centrally mounted for multi-
injection operation in short intervals for obtaining a desired air-fuel composition for
improved performance.

6.3.2 Dual Fuel Injection

Using gasoline blended with ethanol as a single fuel in ﬁxed proportion limits the
potential of ethanol to improve the engine performance under varying operating con-
dition. For making ﬂexible and efﬁcient use of ethanol, a system having dual injection
was introduced which covers the advantages of both port and direct injection. The
dual fuel injection system is becoming an important trend in GDI combustion system
by making the use of port fuel injection and direct injection as shown in Fig. 6.6.

Ikoma et al. (2006) initially proposed the use of dual injector which provides the
advantages of achieving highest power output among similar displacement engines,
better fuel economy and lowest emissions. They used dual fan-shaped spray DI
injector to eliminate the limitation of a heterogeneous mixture in the absence of any
devices for creating in-cylinder motion. Port fuel injector improved the homogeneity
of the mixture during high load and low speed conditions.

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

119

Fig. 6.6 Dual-injection
system (PFI and DI) (Liu
et al. 2015)

Many studies have employed the use of dual fuel combinations (mainly alcohol
and gasoline) for port and direct injection application. Feng et al. (2018) evaluated the
combustion performance using n-butanol as direct injection fuel and gasoline as port-
fuel injection fuel. Different injection ratio of these two fuels was used by varying
the mass fraction of gasoline in PFI from 100 to 0%. Dual fuel injection strategy
using n-butanol with optimum spark timing beneﬁtted in extending the engine load
and higher IMEP with early rise in combustion pressure as compared to gasoline
PFI and GDI. However, indicated speciﬁc energy consumption decrement showed
better fuel energy conversion efﬁciency when fuelling with n-butanol dual injection.
In contrast, despite cooling effects, knock propensity for smaller ratios of DI of n-
butanol are increased as compared to butanol direct injection and GDI relatively due
to low RON and increasing engine load. In an experimental study (Zhuang et al.
2017), the author found that ethanol direct injection with gasoline port injection is
more effective than gasoline port injection and GDI in eliminating engine knock with
more spark advance and thereby enhancing the thermal efﬁciency of small engines.
Authors have also experimented with port injection of alcohol and direct injection
of gasoline. He et al. (2016) studied the combustion performance taking ethanol and
n-butanol as the port injected fuel and gasoline as direct injected fuel. He found
better efﬁciency and lesser emissions for the dual fuel strategy of port injection of
n-butanol and direct injection of gasoline than gasoline direct injection only. Also,
the highest thermal efﬁciency was observed for ethanol and gasoline combination as
a port and direct injected fuel respectively.

These results were justiﬁed by the work of many researchers in a direct or indirect
way. Qian et al. (2019) found the similar indicated thermal efﬁciency in the dual
fuel system when 35% of ethanol is port injected and gasoline surrogates (TRF) of
RON of 75 is direct injected, compared with direct injection of TRF of RON 95 under
knock limited spark timing. Thus, the same combustion characteristics and efﬁciency
can be obtained with fuel having less RON if operated with an optimal amount of
ethanol in port injection, to that of operating solely on fuel having high RON. The
results also accounted for longer ﬂame development duration (about 2°CA) and rapid
combustion duration (about 3°CA) and lesser emissions on increasing the ethanol

120

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

injection ratio with direct injection of fuel of RON 90. Increasing the proportion
of ethanol for the dual-fuel injection strategy (DI of gasoline and port injection of
ethanol) could increase the compression ratio of the engine leading to rise in engine
efﬁciency and could help in extending the knock-limit effectively (Liu et al. 2014)
while reducing the particulate matter emissions (Liu et al. 2015).

Gasoline/alcohol blended fuels have also been tested for their combustion, per-
formance and emissions characteristics and the results were positive in terms of efﬁ-
ciency and emissions (Turner et al. 2011). However, Storch et al. (2015) found the
presence of diffusion ﬂames during combustion in the gaseous phase and improper
evaporation of droplets for gasoline blended with 20% ethanol by volume as com-
pared to iso-octane. Also, there is more susceptibility of higher unregulated emis-
sions for ethanol-gasoline blended fuels, especially carbonyls (Clairotte et al. 2013).
Qian et al. (2019) investigated the combustion and emissions in a GDI engine for
C3-C5 alcohol blended with TRF, resulting in the mixture of ﬁxed RON of 95.
He found the advancing of knock-limiting spark timing on blending with alcohols
where ethanol/TRF and n-propanol/TRF showed more advancing than remaining
one. Blend of n-butanol/TRF showed the highest ITE among other blends at the
same blending ratio while n-propanol/TRF mixture showed the highest indicated
thermal efﬁciency for the same oxygen content. Considering the combustion and
emissions results, n-propanol and n-butanol are reported to be more suitable alter-
native fuels than ethanol and n-pentanol. Increasing the ethanol percentage lead to
a signiﬁcant rise in HC and NOx emissions while the reduction in PM emissions
(Costagliola et al. 2013).

From the previous studies and all the results discussed above, it can be justiﬁed
that addition of ethanol as fuel can improve combustion efﬁciency of SI engine (Balki
et al. 2014). Presence of inherent oxygen molecules can widen ﬂammability limit
which helps in lean burn combustion (Koç et al. 2009) and higher-octane rating
of ethanol can improve the compression ratio. On the other hand, limitations like
lower heating value of ethanol, higher latent heat of vaporization and lower saturated
vapour pressure may result in cold-start issues.

6.3.3 Split Injection Strategy

In split injection strategy, primary injection is done during the intake stroke to give
sufﬁcient time for forming a lean homogeneous mixture; then the secondary injection
is done while compression happens such that stratiﬁed mixture is formed. Thus, it is
used for obtaining overall lean homogeneous stratiﬁed charge at the start of ignition
(Song et al. 2015; Costa et al. 2016).

Many investigations have been done on split injection of GDI engine. In the
researches carried out by Song et al. (2015), Kim et al. (2015), improvement in mix-
ture quality and combustion characteristics were observed due to split injections, one

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

121

is done at the middle of induction and other at the starting of compression. Retard-
ing the injection timing for the second injection of gasoline results in the greater
turbulence intensity inside the cylinder. This results in shorter combustion duration
with higher in-cylinder pressure since turbulence created due to faster movement of
spray increases the ﬂame propagation speed. However, the local regions of rich-fuel
mixture cause an increase in higher emissions. Clark et al. (2016, 2017) analyzed the
combustion performance under the effect of different split injection timings using the
optical engine. An increase in indicated mean effective pressure (imep) was observed
on retarding the second gasoline injection or advancing ﬁrst gasoline injection. The
highest imep was obtained for the primary injection at 300 CAD BTDC (suction
stroke) and secondary injection at 110 CAD BTDC (compression stroke), consider-
ing the starting of power stroke at 0 CAD at TDC. The eccentricity of ﬂame bound-
ary tends to increase on retarding second injection timing because of the decrease in
homogeneity with regions having variable laminar burning speed. On the other hand,
greater particle emissions, fuel ﬁlm formation due to spray impact and incomplete
evaporation were still to be the areas of study for GDI engines (2016).

Ji et al. (2018) performed the investigation for varying second gasoline direct
injection timings in hydrogen-blended gasoline direct injection engine. Hydrogen is
blended by hydrogen port injection system during intake. The blending of hydrogen
results in minimizing the variations in the performance of engine caused by param-
eters affected by different second injection timing, when compared to operate with
pure gasoline. Hydrogen blended mode leads to higher brake thermal efﬁciency and
maximum pressure rise due to rapid combustion. Hydrogen addition had resulted in
a signiﬁcant reduction in HC, CO2 emissions and particulate number while greater
NOx percentage was observed.

6.3.4 Fuel Injection Parameters

Fuel injection pressure and fuel injection timing are considered to be among the most
inﬂuential parameters affecting the combustion performance of the engine. Huang
et al. (2016) analyzed the impact of injection timing on the mixture formation and
combustion results for a dual fuelled engine having direct injection of ethanol and
port injection of gasoline. They justiﬁed the results with the help of CFD simulation
studies. Retarding direct injection timing of ethanol proved effective in producing
a greater cooling effect and mitigating knock tendency, however, combustion and
emissions results of late injection were very degenerated. The results found that late
direct injection of ethanol leads to form richer composition opposite spark plug and
leaner mixture near spark plug which retards the combustion speed. Severe problem
of fuel impingement on piston occurs due to reduced volume of the combustion
chamber at the time of compression stroke and this causes slower in-cylinder motion
and incomplete evaporation. Thus, higher HC and CO emissions resulting from
incomplete combustion are major concerns though NOx was in less percentage due
to reduced volume of the combustion chamber.

122

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

Song et al. (2018) investigated the effect of injection pressure and coolant tem-
perature for two fuel injection timings on THC and particle emissions. As higher
injection pressure gives better atomization and reduces particulate emissions, while
the increasing temperature of coolant during cold-start could effectively improve
engine efﬁciency and reduce emissions. His results stated that for wall wetting con-
dition (injection at 330° CAD bTDC), increasing injection pressure up to 50 MPa
from 10 MPa can lead to the reduction of particulate emissions by 90% due to the
formation of a thinner ﬁlm. For non-wall wetting condition (injection at BTDC 270),
an increase in injection pressure didn’t have much effect on particulate emission.
Also, minute reduction in THC was observed on increasing fuel injection pressure.
However, the increment in coolant temperature from 40 to 80 °C during cold start
reduced the soot and THC substantially along with better thermal efﬁciency.

6.3.5 Injector Design

Typical designs of different kind of injectors, namely, swirl, outward opening and
multi-hole injectors are shown in Fig. 6.7. Multi-hole nozzle is more popular because
jet orientation control can be easily achieved with this. Toyota made use of the slit

Fig. 6.7 a Swirl injector b outward opening injector c multi-hole injectors (Zhao 2010)

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

123

nozzle due to its fan-shaped spray which results in wider dispersion and proper
atomization (Matsumura et al. 2013). Features like fast response time with better
accuracy and control put the piezo-driven injector on the upper side as compared
to solenoid-driven injectors (Dahlander et al. 2015), however, their applications are
restricted due to high cost.

Recently, the utilization of outward-opening piezo driven injectors in stratiﬁed
mode has been increased as it produces a spray of relatively shorter penetration
length which eliminates the trouble of wall-wetting (Dahlander and Hemdal 2015;
Stiehl et al. 2013). Additionally, it results in more ignition stability because of slower
ﬂow velocity in vortex than mainstream spray.

6.3.6 Application of Turbo-Boost, VCR and EGR in GDI

Engine

For achieving higher thermal efﬁciency while developing GDI combustion system,
larger compression ratio (CR) and minimal heat losses play a vital role in fulﬁlling
the requirements. For natural aspirated GDI engine, the value of CR can lie in the
range of 11–13 (Lee et al. 2017; Hwang et al. 2016) while for turbo boost engine,
CR reduces to 9.5–11 (Wada et al. 2016; Yamazaki et al. 2018) as it is limited by
knocking phenomenon. The highest CR of 15 is achieved in the development stage
(Lee et al. 2017). Thus, naturally aspirated engines enjoy the advantage of better
thermal efﬁciencies. But boosting helps in attaining higher mean effective pressure
and higher power output with downsized engines.

Incorporating variable compression ratio (VCR) (Kojima et al. 2018) or variable
valve timing (VVT) (Lee et al. 2017; Yamazaki et al. 2018) resulted in attaining CR
above 13. Asthana et al. (2016) designed seven different conﬁgurations for VCR,
but mostly lacking the adaptability for high speed, robustness and cost. The Nissan
developed the world’s ﬁrst production-ready VCR turbo engine in 2017 (Kojima
et al. 2018). It covers the range of CR 8.0 to 14.0 with the help of multi-link rod
crank and servo motor for continuous variation. Different design models have been
adopted for VCR adaptability by AVL and FEV, where the variation of rod length
was done (Wolfgang et al. 2017; Kleeberg et al. 2013). Honda utilizes dual piston
system (Kadota et al. 2009). Studies suggested that the VCR system resulted in a
rise in fuel economy by 8% (Wolfgang et al. 2017).

Applying exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) helps in minimizing combustion tem-
perature by increasing the speciﬁc heat of gaseous mixture, thus reduces NOx and
also improves fuel economy. EGR contribution in improving thermal efﬁciency can
be understood by the effect of two factors. Firstly, EGR minimizes the pumping loss
due to availability of less oxygen in the cylinder; throttle needs to be opened more and
second, it reduces the heat loss from the engine because of less combustion tempera-
ture. Thus, at higher loads, knock suppression and less heat loss due to EGR improves
the thermal efﬁciency (Cairns et al. 2006; Potteau et al. 2007). As shown in Fig. 6.8,

124

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

Fig. 6.8 Different operating
modes with EGR (Sharma
et al. 2018)

stratiﬁed mode and lean homogeneous mode are applied for low load-rpm and part
load-rpm conditions respectively, but the lean mixture combustion leads to high NOx
emissions. Thus, EGR addition is done to limit NOx levels in the exhaust. In high load
and low rpm conditions, stratiﬁcation results in high soot formation due to availabil-
ity of highly rich-mixture. And in high load and high rpm conditions, stratiﬁcation of
the charge cannot be maintained due to high turbulence. Thus, it is limited to low load
and low rpm conditions, while homogeneous mode with the stoichiometric mixture
is used for high load and rpm conditions. The double injection is used during accel-
erating conditions while taking the transition from stratiﬁed to homogeneous mode
at low rpm conditions. It results in forming stratiﬁed with the overall lean homoge-
neous mixture. In high load and low rpm conditions, large combustion duration and
high in-cylinder temperature increase the chances of knocking. It can be inhibited
by the application of double injection strategy. However, applying high EGR rates
worsen the combustion stability of the engine (Yu and Shahed 1981). Hydrogen can
be used as an additive for gasoline fuel as it improves the combustion stability due to
faster ﬂame speed, brings homogeneity in mixture due to larger diffusion coefﬁcient
and reduces the chances of knocking due to higher ignition temperature (Kim et al.
2015). Hence, hydrogen can be used to enhance combustion stability at high EGR
rates. In the study done by Kim et al. (2017), it was found that hydrogen exhibited
an important role in improving the combustion and emission characteristics of turbo
GDI engine with EGR. They found that the addition of hydrogen results in faster
combustion with less cycle-to-cycle variations and provides stability in combustion
performance. Thus, the engine can be operated under high EGR rates with improved
thermal efﬁciency. Reduction in HC and CO emissions were observed, but NOx was
higher due to higher adiabatic ﬂame temperature.

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

125

But these desired requirements can only be fulﬁlled by cooled EGR which not
only reduces NOx but also help in knock suppression, especially at higher loads.
On the other hand, hot EGR reduces the volumetric efﬁciency of the engine but
decreases HC emissions during cold-start and low load. The study suggested that
hot EGR can greatly affect the combustion duration and efﬁciency of the engine as
compared to cooled EGR (Toulson et al. 2007). It is reported (Wei et al. 2012) that,
with cooled EGR there was a reduction up to 90% in NOx and 50% in CO, and also
lowers the brake speciﬁc fuel consumption by 11%. But the THC emissions shoot
up signiﬁcantly. Hot EGR can result in four times NOx emissions than cooled EGR,
while cooled EGR can produce 1.5 times THC emissions than hot EGR.

6.3.7 Lean-Burn Strategy

Several pieces of research have been done for lean combustion in GDI engine oper-
ating under stratiﬁed mode. Though the results proved effective in increasing fuel
economy, high engine NOx emissions and low exhaust temperature have always been
an obstacle in emission control and after-treatment devices. Earlier, Toyota, Nissan
and Volkswagen have proposed for ﬁrst-generation lean-burn engines which were
based on wall-guided combustion type having side mounted injector. Spray utilizes
the shape of the piston cavity to deﬂect its movement such that spark plug get sur-
rounded by the rich mixture. The mixture development is easier but depends on the
in-cylinder ﬂow which gets inﬂuenced by various operating conditions (Kim et al.
2009; Lee and Lee 2006). Thus, combustion of the stratiﬁed mixture is limited by
a particular range of operating conditions, and also wall-wetting conditions lead to
emissions of higher unburnt hydrocarbons. BMW and Daimler-Benz have manu-
factured commercial lean-burn GDI engine with spray-guided combustion system.
Although, the high cost of injection system and after treatment devices has demol-
ished the wider utilization of these engines. However, with an increase in cost of fuel
and burden of CO2 emission regulation, the lean-burn engine may ﬁnd applications
to a greater extent.

Park et al. (2014) evaluated the combustion and emissions characteristics along
with visualization studies of ultra-lean gasoline DI engine operating under stratiﬁed
mode. With spray-guided conﬁguration, they were able to improve fuel economy
up to 23% for excess air-ratio of 4. They optimized the event timing for injection
delay and ignition advance taking the stoichiometric conditions as reference. Flame
visualization was also carried out along with in-cylinder measurements. Under lean
operating conditions, combustion phasing occurred earlier till BTDC 41 CAD with
maximum pressure in the cylinder was attained at ATDC 2 CAD as shown in Figs. 6.9
and 6.10. Despite stable combustion at an excess ratio of 4, there were an increased
amount of NOx and HC emissions due to the presence of over-rich mixture near the
spark plug and more fuel impingement on piston respectively. As shown in Figs. 6.9
and 6.10, the blue ﬂame can be realized as a result of premixed combustion and are

126

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

Fig. 6.9 Pressure and heat release curves with ﬂame images for stoichiometric conditions having
injection at BTDC 330 CAD and spark advance timing at BTDC 50 CAD (Park et al. 2014)

of less intensity. On the other hand, diffusion combustion near spark plug can result
in higher luminosity due to residual fuel on electrodes while operating in stratiﬁed
mode.

In many studies (Park et al. 2014; Matthias et al. 2014), it is reported that lean
burn combustion can minimize BSFC to a great extent along with minimizing the
coefﬁcient of variance and knocking. Iida (2017) achieved the burning of the super
lean mixture (λ = 1.92) by utilizing highly energized ignition system and comply-
ing large tumble ratio of 2.5, thereby getting an indicated thermal efﬁciency up-to
46% in single cylinder engine. However, large PM/PN emissions are the disadvan-
tages of the stratiﬁed mode operation. It has been found that particle concentration
from lean stratiﬁed combustion is much higher than the conventional stoichiometric
and lean homogeneous combustion, whereas lean homogeneous condition produced
minimum particulate number and soot (Bock et al. 2018). Figure 6.11 reports the
similar results of higher PM emissions for the lean-burn case.

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

127

Fig. 6.10 Pressure and heat release curves with ﬂame images for lean combustion conditions having
injection at BTDC 31 CAD and spark advance timing at BTDC 35 CAD. (Park et al. 2014)

Fig. 6.11 Effects of engine load and combustion strategy on particulate matter (PM) mass con-
centration having excess air ratio of 3.6 and 2.1 for 0.2 MPa and 0.4 MPa respectively (Park et al.
2016)

128

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

6.4 Challenges in GDI Engine Technology

Despite having several best-in technology features, GDI engines are facing major
challenges of high particulates emissions, injector fouling due to deposits and deto-
knock. Injector deposits ultimately hinder the proper mixture formation, as a result,
large PM emissions can be observed in the exhaust. Deto-knock occurs due to pre-
ignition of charge and causes large pressure oscillation during combustion. It has a
very damaging effect on engine components and performance. The factors respon-
sible for these limitations of GDI engines along with the preventive measures are
explained elaborately in the subsequent sections.

6.4.1 Particulates and Soot Formation in GDI Engine

6.4.1.1 Causes and Sources

Although GDI engines are very popular due to various advantages such as high
thermal efﬁciency and lower BSFC, however large soot and particulate emissions is
one of their major limitations. The process of soot formation is initiated by the soot
precursors like C2H2 (ethylene) and PAH (polyaromatics hydrocarbons), then the
growth of nucleates takes place by agglomerating particles and their coalescence,
and ﬁnally followed by their oxidation (Tree and Svensson 2007). The gaseous
and semi-volatile hydrocarbons from engine exhaust get adsorbed on these solid
particles and coagulate into larger particles. Formation of soot in GDI engines can
be attributed to mainly three sources, namely, pool ﬁre due to fuel impingement
(Velji et al. 2010), improper mixing in stratiﬁed combustion of the charge (Lucchini
et al. 2014) and the diffusion combustion of fuel jet near injector (Berndorfer et al.
2013). In homogeneous mode, pool ﬁre and diffusion combustion are dominant, while
the presence of rich-mixture locally and pool ﬁre are the major factors in stratiﬁed
mode. The exhaust particles are classiﬁed based on their sizes and also divided into
nucleation and accumulation mode as shown in Fig. 6.12 (Kittelson 1998).

In a report published in June 2014, the World Health Organisation (WHO) ofﬁ-
cially classiﬁed engine soot particles as carcinogenic. Research has established that
material found in PM 2.5 is water soluble and can form droplets under certain con-
ditions. PM 2.5 can penetrate the cardiovascular system of the human body which
results in pulmonary diseases and can affect DNA (Short et al. 2015). Thus, institu-
tional bodies across the world have set stringent emissions norms to curb the ill-effects
of emissions on the environment. As per application of Euro 6 standards in Europe,
particulate mass emission is restricted to 4.5 mg/km and particulate number emis-
sions are limited to 6.0 × 1011 particles/km from 2017 (Euro 6c). The limiting values
for particulate mass and number are shown in Fig. 6.13 for PFI and GDI engines
with their current emission levels.

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

129

Fig. 6.12 Size distribution of engine exhaust particles on mass and number basis (Kittelson 1998)

Fig. 6.13 Euro 6 standard for PM and PN emissions (Qian et al. 2019)

6.4.1.2 Responsible Operating Parameters and Controlling Measures

Researchers have been studying particle emissions under different combustion modes
of an IC engine. Their formation, size and number distribution are largely dependent
on the fuel composition, mixture preparation, ignition mechanisms and operating

130

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

conditions of the engine. Many studies have been conducted to improve the atom-
ization of fuel spray for proper mixing by increasing the injection pressure, which
can greatly inhibit the formation of soot. Injection pressures up to 35 MPa have been
used for reﬁning the spray. Hoffmann et al. (2014) reported a decrease in Sauter
mean diameter (SMD) i.e., D32 of spray droplets with increase in injection pressure.
However, atomization can be largely inﬂuenced by injector design parameters; thus
in-depth research is needed in this aspect.

It is stated that the New European Driving Cycle results in approximately ten
times higher concentration of particle number for GDI engine than that of PFI, while
particle mass emissions lie between that for PFI and diesel engines. Hence, it is
very crucial for the GDI engine to limit their particulates emissions to meet the pre-
scribed emissions standard. It can be done in two ways, either by using after-treatment
systems like gasoline particulate ﬁlter (GPF) and three-way catalyst (TWC) or by
reducing in-cylinder particle emission. Aftertreatment devices generate exhaust back
pressure. Hence, optimizing the different factors responsible for in-cylinder parti-
cle generation will certainly limit the emission. For this, multiple injection strategy,
injection parameters, fuel type and combustion mode are some of the factors to
be optimized. Also, understanding soot particles characteristics, structure and mor-
phology will help to get better insight for its controlling actions. Particles from GDI
engine mostly contain soot as compared to organic particles than PFI engines as
shown in Fig. 6.14. Figure 6.15 shows the TEM images of soot and organic particle
from gasoline engine illustrates the chain and agglomerates structures of soot with
darker regions of organic particles which are lighter and inhomogeneous (Xing et al.
2017).

Fig. 6.14 Number size distribution of different particles types in PFI and GDI engines (Xing et al.
2017)

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

131

Fig. 6.15 Soot particles images from TEM a Cluster-like soot, b chain-like soot c high-resolution
TEM image of soot (Xing et al. 2017)

It is reported that the injection timing of fuel has a signiﬁcant effect on par-
ticulate emissions characteristics. Ketterer and Cheng (2014) found that more fuel
impingement occurs when fuel is injected either at the early induction or at the late
compression, which certainly leads to more PM emissions. If injection happens early
in the compression stroke, droplets get more time to evaporate and ﬁlm formation
occurs in much less quantity. Hence, particle number and size reduce than at late
injections. Moreover, fuel impingement characteristics are found to be directly inﬂu-
enced by injection timing (Beavis et al. 2017). The ﬁlm formation location has also
been noticed to be different for different fuels by many studies which can be stated
as a probable reason for higher particulates for heavier fuels.

Based on the endoscopy studies done on a single cylinder engine, Berndorfer
et al. (2013) concluded that diffusion combustion of fuel jet near injector is a major
cause of particulate formation. As early injection was done during suction stroke, the
blue ﬂame radiation above piston indicates the well-mixed homogeneous mixture.
However, the diffusion ﬂame resulting from the injector tip can be observed as highly
luminous, indicating rich mixture condition. The results showed a clear correlation
of injector diffusive ﬂame and PN with soot mass emissions.

In a report given by the Japan Petroleum Energy Centre with other agencies,
particulate emissions from different engines with the varying after-treatment system
were collected and analyzed. It can be inferred that particle number size distribution
from DISI engine is unimodal having peak concentration of particle size of around
85 nm. Local availability of rich-fuel mixture in lean-burn DISI engine resulted in
10 times higher emissions compared to stoichiometric DISI engines. Overall the PN
distribution for both cases of DISI engine lies much higher than that of MPFI gasoline
and diesel particulate ﬁlter (DPF) vehicles.

Location of injector also plays a vital role in mixture preparation as there are
fewer chances of spray impingement on the wall for spray-guided arrangement than
wall-guided arrangement. Consequently, diffuse combustion seldom occurs during
combustion. Thus, particulate matter is emitted in less quantity in spray-guided DI
engine than that of wall-guided (Price et al. 2006).

132

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

As port fuel injection systems are believed to emit fewer particulates, thus several
automobile companies turned for dual injection systems (port and direct injection)
(Trimbake and Malkhede 2016). Toyota bought PFI and GDI dual injection system
in 2005, to improve mixture quality and reduce emissions, and similar strategies later
followed by Nissan, Suzuki and Honda. Audi bought the similar strategy recently,
reducing particulate emissions and meeting the standards of Euro 6 without using
gasoline particulate ﬁlter. Daniel et al. (2013) investigated the PM emissions using
dual injection strategy. And found to have higher in-cylinder temperature due to dual
injection which enhances the burning of fuel droplets and eliminates soot formation
to a good scale. The PFI also provides more time for mixture preparation than solely
DI, thereby reducing the problem of wall-wetting. In dual injection mode, the average
size of PM is comparably smaller than DI mode and the accumulation mode particles
are negligible.

Additionally, two fuels can be used in a dual injection system for better control
of engine performance and emissions by varying the mixture properties. In the study
done by Liu et al. (2015), it was reported that as compared to alcohol-gasoline duel
fuel SI mode, gasoline-alcohol duel fuel SI mode was more efﬁcient in fuel economy
due to the utilization of the higher latent heat of vaporization of alcohol. With the
increase in alcohol percentage, a signiﬁcant reduction in PN was observed under all
combustion strategies.

Various physical and chemical properties of the fuel like viscosity, boiling point,
surface tension, distillation curve, vapour pressure, molecular structure (length of
carbon chain, branching, unsaturated bonds, rings, etc.) largely affect the particulate
emissions (Chapman et al. 2016). Jiang et al. (2018) discovered that three surrogates
fuels of the same RON have lower particulates number than gasoline due to the
presence of heavier molecules in gasoline.

The engine operating conditions like load, equivalence ratio, injection parame-
ters, charge boosting, EGR, ignition timing etc. certainly inﬂuence the particulate
emissions as justiﬁed by several studies. Bonatesta et al. (2014) observed higher
soot mass emissions under high load-low speed and medium load-medium speed
condition as a result of high nucleation rates, in the homogeneous stoichiometric
mode of combustion. According to a study (Pei et al. 2014), the air-fuel ratio is
likely to affect the particle number concentration and causes decrement in particle
number on increasing the air-fuel ratio for a rich mixture. It is also believed that
lean burn gasoline DI engines emit a larger amount of ultra-ﬁne particulates than
a conventional engine. Further increase in air ratio beyond 2 leads to increment in
particulate number and PM emissions, which could be likely due to increased air
pressure and a decrease in combustion temperature. High ambient pressure results
in lower penetration of spray, forming local rich-mixture in the cylinder.

High fuel injection pressure leads to ﬁner droplets, high spray velocity i.e., more
penetration length, and shorter duration of injection. All these parameters enhance
proper combustion by restricting the formation of locally rich mixture composition
and wall-wetting trouble (Chung et al. 2016).

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

133

De Boer et al. (2013) varied fuel temperature and studied its effects on mixture
formation and particulate emissions. They operated the engine with injection pres-
sure in the range of 150–300 bar and fuel temperature of 320 °C which is above
the supercritical condition of gasoline (45 bar and 280 °C). The results showed a
signiﬁcant reduction in particulate number, ranging from 47 to 98%. It dictates the
potential of fuels in the supercritical state for PN reduction than liquid fuels.

Few studies have been done which quantify the EGR on PM emissions from SI
engines. It is believed that EGR can affect the engine combustion and emissions by
(a) heating intake charge (b) increasing heat capacity (c) diluting the charge and (d)
changing chemical aspects (Zhao et al. 2001). Hedge et al. (2011) concluded from
their study on light-duty GDI engine that cooled EGR can bring down the particle
mass by 65% and particle number by 40% in most of the conditions. Wide EGR
range can result in a decrease in combustion temperature and can lead to a higher
number of accumulation mode particles, while nucleation mode particles showed a
decreasing trend (Lattimore et al. 2016).

Turbocharging results in improved performance of the vehicle, higher thermal
efﬁciency, reduced fuel consumption and exhaust emissions, thus are widely used in
GDI engines. Although Cucchi and Samuel (2015) observed that there was a clear
difference in particle concentration before and after the turbocharger. The centrifugal
motion of the exhaust gas particles enhanced the nucleation of particles and agglom-
eration, which are fragmented into micro-scale particles. Thus, the particles size
was seemed to be larger after the passing through the turbine. Whelan et al. (2013)
studied the particulate emissions from wall-guided turbo-charged DI engine running
in transient conditions of cold-start and warm-up. Total particle count was found to
decrease during cold start transient and was tend to increase with higher coolant and
oil temperature of the engine.

Jiang et al. (2017) studied the variation in spray and emission due to injector
deposits. Deposits on the injector tip increased the penetration length and mean
droplet size of spray, which was mainly responsible for a larger amount of PM emis-
sions. The deposits accumulation on injector can deteriorate the particulate emissions
by these possible sources (a) fuel impingement due to larger penetration length (b)
incomplete combustion due to large size droplets (c) leaking of fuel due to imper-
fect closing and (d) adsorption of fuel on the deposits tends to increase diffusion
combustion.

Pirjola et al. (2015) studied the effect of using different lubricating oil with low
sulphur gasoline on the particulates emissions and found that the results were affected
during cold-start and warm-up phase. The emissions were increased during accel-
eration and steady-state than deceleration condition. Lubricating oil having metal
content are found to emit more PM emissions.

The blended fuel may have different physical and chemical properties, depending
on the amount of blending done. These properties affect the injection characteristics,
mixture composition and overall combustion process, thus cause variation in soot
formation and particulate emissions. Hence, it cannot be directly concluded that
alcohol blended gasoline fuels result in the increase or decrease in PM emissions as

134

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

the parameters for injection strategy of ethanol/gasoline blends are not optimized for
the overall operating range of engine (Storch et al. 2015).

PM emissions are also very sensitive to driving cycle on which vehicle is running.
As tested under the NEDC cycle, particle concentration during cold start was very
high and decreased during warm-up conditions (up to 300 s) for PFI engine. However,
particulate concentration for GDI engine was high in warm-up conditions too and
during the transition from one operating condition to other (Chen et al. 2017).

Hence, the gasoline particulate ﬁlter optimization is of uttermost need due to large
particulate emissions from GDI and strict emission limit of WLTC cycle. Considering
after-treatment technologies for PM reduction in GDI engines for meeting the limit
of exhaust particles in Euro 6, gasoline particulate ﬁlter (GPF) and three-way catalyst
(TWC) are unavoidable. Figure 6.16 shows various arrangements for location of GPF
coupled with TWC or GPF in the underﬂoor position (AECC Technical Summary
2017). For underﬂoor position, bare GPFs are used while coated GPFs are usually
placed in close-coupled position after TWC. GPF with the underﬂoor position was
found to have 15% more ﬁltration efﬁciency than that when placed in close-coupled
position, due to reduced exhaust gas temperature resulting in the decrease in the
volumetric ﬂow rate of gas.

GPF with coating positioned at the under-ﬂoor location is capable of converting
the exhaust gases by catalytic activity along with increased ﬁltration efﬁciency of
particulate number (Inoda et al. 2017). A system of coated GPF (CGPF) with TWC
was demonstrated using two GDI vehicles and found to have improved tailpipe
emissions, particularly the NOx emissions (Richter et al. 2012). However, CGPF
cannot replace the application of TWC as CGPF requires comparatively more time
to light-off in cold starting than conventional TWC (Opitz et al. 2014).

Fig. 6.16 Possible layouts
of a GPF and TWC (AECC
Technical Summary 2017)

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

135

6.4.2 Injector Deposits

6.4.2.1 Causes of Formation

The deposits on injector were considered to be majorly dependent upon the tempera-
ture of the nozzle tip and the rate of deposits build-up increased when the temperature
of the tip goes beyond 150 °C (Kinoshita et al. 1999). In the study, the mechanism
behind the rapid accumulation of deposits after reaching 150 °C was described as ther-
mal condensation and cracking reaction kinetics of gasoline. Although this growth
was only limited to a range of temperature, as on exceeding a speciﬁc higher temper-
ature (dependent on fuel and deposit composition), the self-cleaning phenomenon
started (St˛epie´n 2015). Kinoshita et al. (1999) formulated the relation between the
temperature of the injector tip and T90 temperature of the fuel (temperature at 90%
volume distillation) for GDI injector deposition. And concluded that when injec-
tor tip temperature is less than T90 temperature of the fuel, fuel present on the tip
remains in the liquid state and washes away the deposit’s precursors by next injec-
tion. On the other hand, if the tip temperature is more than T90 temperature, liquid
fuel will be in the vapour state, which makes the deposits precursor adhere and will
form agglomeration near the nozzle wall. EGR and intake-air cooling have a certain
inﬂuence on injector deposits as they determine the in-cylinder charge tempera-
ture (Zhao et al. 1999). Carbon deposition can be routed from two factors, namely,
high-temperature decomposition of hydrocarbons and generation of poly-aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs), which latter nucleate and grow to form carbonaceous deposits.

6.4.2.2 Examining Techniques and Consequences of Deposits

Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) (Imoehl et al. 2012; Jiang et al. 2017) has
been used as an effective tool by many researchers for investigating the deposits
around GDI injector, as shown in Fig. 6.17. Song et al. (2016) examined the deposits
at the oriﬁce of the choked injector with the help of photographs of SEM. There
were loose deposits at the outer surfaces which were easy to remove, while deposits
formed inside the holes were thick and distributed axially at the aperture with more
density along a particular side of the hole. However, the depositions were radially
distributed at an external aperture. Dearn et al. (2014) conducted the investigation
of deposits distribution and composition at injector tip by mechanically cracking
the injector. The deposits were formed at different levels over the injector with the
proportion of its constituents varying with location. Their elemental study revealed
that C, O, S and Ca were the elements with the largest proportion in the deposit.
Moreover, there was a reduction in the amount of S and Ca, while increment in C in
the deposits as location approaches towards the combustion chamber.

Deposits are most likely to form near the regions of metering of the fuel and where
atomization takes place due to the constricted passage of the nozzle. It can distort
the fuel injection spray by altering its shape and penetration length. It also results in

136

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

Fig. 6.17 SEM image of
injector deposits (Jiang et al.
2017)

the reduction of fuel to be injected per pulse width. These modiﬁcations can affect
the mixture formation and combustion characteristics adversely. Anbari et al. (2015)
analyzed the spray structure of choked multi-hole injector using high-speed camera
imaging and concluded that spray penetration length of spray plume increased and
cone angle decreased due to choking effect. Also, the effect of choking was not
same on all the plumes emerging from the injector. Similar results were derived from
the work of Yiqiang et al. (2015), due to poor atomization of fuel by the choked
injector. In contrast to this, Song et al. (2016) conducted the study on GDI injec-
tor and stated that penetration length and droplet size decreased while cone angle
of spray increased. Thus, it can be inferred that spray characteristics would behave
differently from different injectors due to deposits. Wang et al. (2014) compared the
performance of fouled injector against that of clean injector in spray-guided DISI
engine and came with results of higher emissions produced by fouled injector con-
tinuously, reaching the peak at maximum engine load condition of 8.5 bar IMEP.
The PM emissions were 200% higher and PN emissions were 58% higher in the
case of fouled injector. Badawy et al. (2018) investigated the effect of choking GDI
injector on spray structures and engine performance of multi-cylinder engine. The
choking process of injector was achieved in a consistent way by undergoing the
fouling cycle. The spray characteristics like penetration length, cone angle, droplet
diameters and velocity distribution were obtained using high-speed imaging and
Phase Doppler Particle Analyser (PDPA). With higher penetration length of spray
from choked injector as compared to the clean injector, the rear plume accounted
for higher penetration as compared to ignition and side plume, and greater pene-
tration observed with higher injection pressure among all plumes. Similarly, among
smaller plume angles of choked injector, rear and side jets reported for maximum
reduction in plume angle. Deposition distribution was studied using SEM and X-ray
3D microtomography as shown in Fig. 6.18. For visual scanning and composition
analysis, Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) was employed. Flame prop-
agation characteristics revealed the occurrence of diffusion ﬂame near the injector

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

137

Fig. 6.18 X-ray
microtomography of a clean
and b choked injector
(Badawy et al. 2018)

Fig. 6.19 Flame development with increasing crank angles, a early ﬂame development of both
clean and coked injectors, b clean injector and c coked injector, using gasoline (Badawy et al. 2018)

tip as shown in Fig. 6.19. In addition, with lower in-cylinder pressure and poorer
combustion stability, choking in injector proved to be a crucial factor in affecting the
engine performance. Inhomogeneity of charge and poor-repeatability of the mixture,
lower load observation, higher unburnt HC emissions and particulates concentration
are the major consequences of injector choking in GDI engine (Badawy et al. 2018).

6.4.2.3 Preventive Measures

The studies involving the methods for minimizing the formation of deposits include:
(1) fuel detergents (Aradi et al. 2000), (2) coating of the injector with lower thermal
conductivity material to reduce the injector tip temperature (Green et al. 2001) and (3)
injection of fuel with high pressure (Von Bacho et al. 2009). These practices reduced
the deposits formation in an efﬁcient manner. Outward opening piezo-driven injector
having a smooth surface, sharp inlet of the nozzle and counterbore design was proved
signiﬁcant in controlling deposit formation (Xu et al. 2015).

138

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

6.4.3 Pre-ignition and Deto-Knock

6.4.3.1 Causes

Several approaches like downsizing, high intake-boosting and direct injection have
resulted in enhancing the fuel economy and power output of the engine. Although,
higher boosting results in the engine knock condition which leads to an increment
of developed pressure by one order magnitude as compared to the conventional
knocking (Shuai et al. 2018). It is also termed as a super knock, mega knock or low-
speed pre-ignition (LSPI) and is usually triggered at low-speed high-load conditions
with the occurrence of pre-ignition prior to spark in the combustion chamber. The
turbo-boosting in GDI engines is mainly restricted by deto-knock. As pressure and
temperature of the charge attain the values of the deto-curve regime, the pre-ignition
takes place at any hot spot inside the charge. The combustion ﬂame front and wave
propagated due to pre-ignition induce the ignition of the unburnt charge, resulting
in high-pressure pulse with oscillating magnitude. It can cause severe damage to the
liner and piston ring, and lead to the melting of exhaust valves.

Although pre-ignition induces the deto-knock, it is rare that pre-ignition will
always lead to deto-knock as it occurs randomly with natural combustion and extinct
naturally (Dahnz and Spicher 2010). It is measured by the number of its occurrences
during certain completion of cycles, with a typical frequency of less than one in a
thousand (Wang et al. 2017). Thus, investigation for the mechanism becomes difﬁcult.
In the study, Wang et al. (2015) analysed the process involving the phenomenon
of pre-ignition due to local hot-spot. This causes the rise in pressure and temperature
of the charge, subsequently leading to deﬂagration of charge. This further induces
the secondary hot spot at near-wall end-charge, causing a substantial increase in
pressure trace with oscillating magnitude as shown in Fig. 6.20. This whole process
is examined by synchronizing with high speed camera along with rapid compression
machine (RCM) for pressure traces. It was concluded that the second hot spot situated
in unburned charge was responsible for the detonation, which was induced by the
deﬂagration (pre-ignition) due to primary hot spot.

Lubricating oil is considered to be a major source for pre-ignition that can lead
to deto-knock condition due to higher tendency of auto-ignition (Amann and Alger
2012). The Dahnz and Spicher (2010) stated that wall-wetting due to spray and
dilution of charge with oil present on the liner wall cause the oil droplets deposition
in piston crevices. During deceleration of piston while moving towards TDC (top
dead centre), less viscous diluted oil droplets enters the combustion chamber by
virtue of inertia forces. In the optical study done by Lauer et al. (2014), oil droplets
were found to be the initiator of pre-ignition. The pressure oscillations during auto-
ignition release the deposits from the combustion chamber wall into the charge
which act as ignition sources and subsequently leading to deto-knock. The diluted
oil droplets and deposits require considerable time to accumulate, thus causing the
event of deto-knock occasionally.

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

139

Fig. 6.20 Process showing the detonation induced by pre-ignition (Wang et al. 2015) a luminosity
image showing pre-ignition, deﬂagration and detonation b synchronous pressure traces

6.4.3.2 Preventive Measures

The main approach for eliminating the trouble of deto-knock is to suppress pre-
ignition. Various factors can be considered to diminish the chances of pre-ignition
like oil and fuel properties, design and operational parameters of engines.

It has been established that oils with base stock having less reactivity and longer
ignition delay, have less tendency towards auto-ignition (Welling et al. 2014). The
metal elements used as additives in engine oil also inﬂuence the pre-ignition tendency
of the charge. Calcium (Ca) based oil additives are found to enhance the phenomenon
of pre-ignition (Kassai et al. 2016), whereas Zinc (Zn) and Molybdenum (Mo) based
additives are reported to decrease the chances of pre-ignition. Similarly, fuel prop-
erties like lower aromatic content (Amann et al. 2011) and high volatility (Chapman
et al. 2014) have led to decrease the frequency of pre-ignition. Designing and oper-
ating the engine with parameters such that it inhibits the wall-wetting and oil-diluted
fuel deposition in crevices, can limit the chances of pre-ignition. As liner wetting

140

A. Kalwar and A. K. Agarwal

is more prone to pre-ignition than piston wetting (Zahdeh et al. 2011), in-cylinder
motion of mixture can help to reduce the liner wetting issues by limiting the pene-
tration length of spray and washing deposited droplets off the liner (Palaveev et al.
2013). Moreover, split-injection strategy by optimizing the timing has shown an
effective reduction in pre-ignition frequency (Wang et al. 2014). Avoiding the con-
dition of auto-ignition of the mixture by controlling the pressure, temperature and
composition of the charge is a good approach for reducing the reactivity of mixture.
With the aid of EGR, a signiﬁcant reduction in pre-ignition can be observed because
of lower in-cylinder temperature (Zaccardi and Escudié 2015) without compromising
the BMEP.

Thus, many factors are helpful in reducing the phenomenon of pre-ignition. How-
ever, the phenomenon is speciﬁc to the particular engine conﬁguration, and so are
the parameters for controlling it. Thus, these factors should be considered on the
engine-to-engine basis.

6.5 Conclusions

A thorough analysis of the work done in the area of gasoline direct injection tech-
nology reveals that the technology has evolved in large proportions. The automotive
engineers are trying to make it more reliable and efﬁcient, along with solving critical
issues related to DISI engines. We have discussed various works in the direction
of improving the performance and fulﬁlling the required objectives of this notable
technology.

The fuel injection system is the heart of the GDI technology which prepares the
required mixture according to load and rpm conditions. From the research conducted,
it can be concluded that spray-guided combustion system is best suited for running
the engine on ultra-lean charge as well as stoichiometric charge. For this, injection
timing, parameters and in-cylinder motion need to be optimized for avoiding the
spray-impingement problem and obtaining proper mixture preparation and charge
cooling beneﬁts. Utilizing alcohol in port injection and gasoline in direct injection
(dual fuel injection) has resulted in achieving better thermal efﬁciency and reducing
emissions. Also, it decreases the tendency of knocking with the provision of greater
spark advance timing. This strategy is helpful in utilizing alcohol as alternate fuel
along with performance beneﬁts. The characteristics of different injector designs are
also discussed; out of which piezo-driven outward opening injectors are best suited
for stratiﬁed operating mode due to lower spray penetration length. By optimizing
the fuel injection timing for split-injection, successful operation of the overall lean
homogeneous mixture has been observed in GDI engine. Further, higher injection
pressure for better atomization, with lower coolant temperature during cold-start
conditions have efﬁciently reduced the HC and PM emissions from the GDI engine.
All these strategies are to be considered for optimizing the injection system of the
GDI engine.

6 Overview, Advancements and Challenges in Gasoline …

141

Additionally, with the advantages of downsizing the engine, boosting help in
improving the power output of the engine, though it limits the operating compression
ratio of the engine. Thus, the provision of variable compression ratio accommodates
the engine operation according to the required load and rpm condition. Further,
addition of EGR helps to reduce the NOx emissions, minimize the heat loss and
improve thermal efﬁciency of the engine.

We also discussed the particulate matter characteristics of GDI engine and its
dependence on various operational factors. Improving atomization and eliminat-
ing fuel-ﬁlm formation issues by running the engine with optimized fuel injection
parameter helps to reduce high PM emissions. Likewise, supplying cooled EGR has
reported a signiﬁcant reduction in PM emissions. The issue of injector deposits is
also seen as major concerns in GDI engine operation. Avoiding injector deposits by
adopting the aforementioned measures and using suitable additives with engine oil
can bring down the levels of particulate emission. Furthermore, the role of after-
treatment devices such as TWC and GPF are discussed for limiting the tail-pipe
emissions.

Finally, the occurrence of deto-knock due to pre-ignition of charge is discussed.
The causes of pre-ignition like presence of oil-diluted fuel droplets and operating con-
ditions like temperature, pressure and mixture composition leading to auto-ignition
of charge, should be avoided in order to eliminate the chances of deto-knock. Here
also, inhibiting wall-wetting conditions, utilizing split-injection strategy, enabling
EGR and controlling operational parameters has proved beneﬁcial for reducing the
menace of deto-knock in engines.

Although GDI engines operating on homogeneous mode are available in the mar-
ket, the stratiﬁed mode is still in the development phase. Studies of optical diagnostics
and CFD simulation have literally helped to optimize the operating parameters for
achieving stratiﬁed mode operation to some extents, but not completely. Hence, a
full-ﬂedged GDI system with mode-switching technology remains a promising ﬁeld
for the research community.
Study on Alternate Fuels and Their
Effect on Particulate Emissions
from GDI Engines
Abstract With strict environmental legislations and to reduce related health haz-
ards, there is immense focus on reducing particulates from gasoline direct injection
engines. With increasing use of biofuels in the market, their blends with hydrocar-
bon fuels are also being considered as cleaner alternatives to gasoline. This chapter
confers the addition of oxygenates to gasoline and their capacity to reduce soot-
ing tendency compared to gasoline. Challenges related to optimizing combustion
by appropriately choosing engine parameters such as start of ignition, duration of
injection, etc. have been addressed. Optimizing combustion can reduce the particu-
late emissions, by sometimes increasing efﬁciency. Oxygenated fuels always have
the advantage of higher oxidation of soot formed inside the cylinder, which further
reduces particulate emissions. Towards the end of this chapter, disadvantages of using
oxygenated fuel blends or alternate fuels are discussed.
Keywords Particulate matter · Legislation · Gasoline blends · Renewable fuels

7.1 Introduction

Almost a quarter of particulate emissions into the environment are caused by trans-
portation in the world (Indicator Assessment 2015). Conventionally, world’s demand
for energy is mostly met from combusting fossil fuels. Fossil fuel combustion gen-
erates global warming pollutants such as CO, CO2 and NOx along with soot and
hydrocarbons including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) that affect human
health (Liu et al. 2015). Particulate matter, formed due to incomplete combustion,
is a carbonaceous material. Upon inhalation, being carcinogenic, particulate matter
may lead to pulmonary and respiratory diseases (Claxton 2015). Soot is also one
on the contributors to global warming due to its role in regional warming and the
faster melting of polar icecaps (Maione et al. 2016). It is essential to regulate soot
formation in engines to abide by emission regulations and also towards controlling
health effects (Überall et al. 2015).

Compared to diesel engines, gasoline engines emit higher number of particulates,
sometimes even more than the prescribed limit (Myung et al. 2012). Moreover, this
problem of soot has intensiﬁed with gasoline direct injection (GDI) engines taking
over the market with their beneﬁts compared to port fuel injection (PFI) engines (Zim-
merman et al. 2016). GDI engines prevailed in the automotive industry as it offers
relatively higher BSFC, volumetric efﬁciency and for their superior knock resistance
compared to PFI. GDI engines also plays a major role in reducing CO2 emissions
from gasoline-powered engines. However, the particulate mass and the number of
large particulates emitted by GDI is higher than PFI (Saliba et al. 2017). Thus, dur-
ing gasoline combustion there is still a greater need to address the higher particulate
emissions by reducing soot formation. Detailed discussion on health effects related
to soot emissions from GDI can be found in Sharma and Agarwal (2018).

Some of the existing techniques to reduce particulate emissions include fuel refor-
mulation, addition of metal catalysts to fuels, and methods for after-treatment of
exhaust. For instance, one of the widely implemented after-treatment system, gaso-
line particulate ﬁlters (GPF) are used to ﬁlter out soot from entering into atmosphere
from engine exhaust (Chan et al. 2014). Especially in Europe due to the upcoming
stringent regulations on the number of particulates that can be emitted from gasoline
engines (Johnson and Joshi 2017). GDI engines with GPF produce more ultraﬁne
particulates compared to diesel engines ﬁtted with diesel particulate ﬁlter (DPF) (He
et al. 2012). These ultraﬁne particulates with sizes less than 100 nm, are found to
cause adverse impacts on human health and environment (Bernstein 2004). This
chapter focusses on particle number (PN) rather than particulate mass (PM) emitted
from an engine as health impact of PN emissions can be strongly correlated to PN.
Especially, particles as ﬁne as ultraﬁne particles contribute little to the PM while
being a signiﬁcant part of the total PN. Finer the particulates get, deeper becomes
their penetration into the lungs and therefore increased are the chances of passage
into the human bloodstream (Eastwood 2008).

Moreover, these metal catalysts that are added to fuels which reduce soot, end up
being more harmful to the environment and human health (Cassee et al. 2011). There
are promising results from fuel blends that could lower soot emissions without the
need for modifying the engine technologies (Guerrero Peña et al. 2018).

Fuel reformulation facilitates increase in the amount of oxidizer inside the com-
bustion chamber by blending oxygenated and conventional fuels that leads to reduc-
tion in soot formation. Quite a lot of oxygenated compounds such as methanol (Wang
et al. 2015), ethanol (Masum et al. 2013), butanol (Gu et al. 2012), furans (Tanaka
et al. 2015), dimethyl carbonate (Schifter et al. 2016), ethers (Cataluña et al. 2008)
and ketones (Elfasakhany 2016) have been found to decrease soot emission when
blended with gasoline (Guerrero Peña et al. 2018). The reduction in sooting tendency
of such blended fuels comes from the fact that the oxygen atoms present in these fuels
present favorable chemical or dilution effects (Lemaire et al. 2010, 2015), or makes
soot particles more susceptible towards oxidation (Gogoi et al. 2015). Such high soot
oxidation can also help with the rapid regeneration of GPFs at low temperatures.

7 Study on Alternate Fuels and Their Effect on Particulate …

151

This chapter describes the characteristics of PN emitted from GDI engines from
the view point of impact of fuel composition, in terms of oxygenates blended with
gasoline making it an alternative to the existing engine technology. Many studies
have tested individually on the application and possible beneﬁts of such alternate
fuels. This study provides a comprehensive report on recent progress in reducing PN
from GDI research using alternate fuels including gasoline blended with renewable
fuels.

7.2 PN from GDI Engines and Alternate Fuels

Particulates are usually formed from GDI engines during fuel combustion in the
combustion chamber. The ones that exit the engine can also originate from nucle-
ation of supersaturated vapors in the exhaust gas after-treatment systems (Heywood
1988). Formation of fuel ﬁlms on the combustion chamber walls contribute signiﬁ-
cantly to the PN formation since fuel deposited this way form fuel-rich areas. From
these locally rich areas, soot can easily be formed and subsequently emitted. Many
studies recently looked at improving mixture quality that promote soot reduction.
For available engine technology fuel reformulation and alternate fuels provide an
easily adaptable alternative.

A variety of fuel properties affect PN formation in an engine including aromatic
content and oxygenate content, enthalpy of vaporization and boiling points of indi-
vidual components. Soot formation is highly affected by the existence of aromatic
fuel rings as combustion researchers believe that gaseous polycyclic aromatic hydro-
carbons (PAHs) act as precursors for soot. As expected, it was found in research that
higher amount of aromatics in the fuel would lead to a higher level of PN (Raza et al.
2018).

The impact of fuel volatility on PN emissions comes from the fact that slower
evaporation of a fuel due to its lower vapor pressure produce a relatively poorer mix-
ture formation leading to higher PN. Pool ﬁres that occur due to higher impingement
on walls and piston that cause signiﬁcantly higher PN making their occurrence a
case of extremity. However, higher volatility in a fuel can also cause higher PN with
ﬂash evaporation leading to a mixture with locally rich zones causing incomplete
combustion.

Of all the available fuel blends, E5 (5% of ethanol and 95% of gasoline by volume)
is now common in Europe (European Committee for Standardization 2008); blends
of E10 are ubiquitous, and E15 is on its way to the market for newer vehicles in
the USA (U.S.C. §7546). Introducing ethanol into gasoline fuel blends tends to
increase the enthalpy of vaporization for the fuel. Higher enthalpies of vaporization
in a way, increase the charge cooling effect for the fuel and improve volumetric
efﬁciency. However, charge cooling and lower boiling point of ethanol that promote
less production of soot can sometimes play the opposite role and have competing
effect which could lead to the formation of soot (Leach et al. 2018).

152

S. Etikyala and V. K. Gunda

In general, addition of ethanol helps with soot reduction. However, some studies
have found that under certain conditions, ethanol blended with gasoline can increase
particulate emissions, while other studies have shown a reduction in PN emissions
with increasing levels of ethanol. Thus, there is still a need for clear distinction of
points where presence of oxygen in fuel can help reduce soot formation. After several
attempts made to link the fuel composition and particulate emissions, the Honda
Particle Matter Index (PMI) has shown a very good correlation with emissions for
gasoline engines (Wittmann and Menger 2017). Researchers are still searching for
such an index to provide a robust prediction to PN emission from a gasoline fuel
blend. However, PMI is still used for comparative purposes (Bock et al. 2019).

7.3 Impact on PN

Alternate fuels are oxygenated fuel blends, having a great potential to reduce well-to-
wheel CO2 emissions from vehicles. Ethanol is the most commonly added oxygenate
component to gasoline; other oxygenates include alcohols such as methanol, butanol
and ethers such as methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE), ethyl tert-butyl ether (ETBE)
formed out of etheriﬁcation of respective alcohols. E5 with 5% (v/v) ethanol blended
in gasoline is everywhere in Europe, with E10 and E15 prevailing in the USA; E85
and E100 are also available, although requires vehicles to acquire special adaptation.
Compared to pure gasoline, oxygenated fuels are found to have higher vapour
pressures, signiﬁcantly higher heat of vaporization, and signiﬁcantly lower LHVs.
These characteristics most likely affect the amounts of fuel injected into the cylinder.
Thus, also affecting the spray evaporation once after the fuel has been injected.
These affected phenomena in turn result in higher or lower PN depending on engine
operating conditions. Due to the presence of the –OH bond in almost all oxygenates,
it increases the reactivity towards oxidation of soot precursors, which reduce PN
emissions.

What makes alcohols such great oxygenates that are commonly available these

days? Some factors include:

they can be produced from renewable feedstocks (Bae and Kim 2017),

(a)
(b) have low water solubility, posing less impact to our water supply,
(c) can be blended with gasoline and burned directly as a neat fuel, and
(d)

reduces carbon monoxide emissions forcing leaner combustion than pure gaso-
line (Fig. 7.1).

7.3.1 Effect of Ethanol on PN

Since, ethanol is produced from renewable sources, most of the times recycled,
ethanol utilization doesn’t contribute to possible global warming and pollution

7 Study on Alternate Fuels and Their Effect on Particulate …

153

Fig. 7.1 PN emissions from
a single cylinder optical
engine for fuel blends with
pure components having
varying levels of oxygenates
(Leach et al. 2013)

(Wyman and Hinman 1990). Hence, making ethanol a sustainable drop-in fuel for
spark ignition engines.

Using ethanol to reduce PN has already been established in PFI engines reduces
PN. However, studies show mixed behavior in GDI engines, i.e., adding ethanol
can both increase and decrease. As in the case of GDI, quality of combustion and
engine operating conditions are deemed important for PN. Liquid fuel impingement
on cylinder walls, valves and piston is one of the major causes of particulate for-
mation, and it is rather prevalent at cold start and transients. With ethanol blends,
spray formation is relatively challenging which may lead to higher PN compared
to gasoline. However, in case where impingement can be compensated by time and
energy for relatively better mixture formation, PN reduces.

Once, the level of blended ethanol increases there is a decrease in PN emissions
reported. The presence and dominance of the chemically bonded oxygen and much
diluted aromatics, there is a reduction in formation of PAHs, soot precursors which
in turn reduces soot. However, recently Burke et al. (2017) found that high levels of
ethanol can stratify the aromatics within the evaporated mixture and lead to higher
PN although certain amount of dilution of aromatics in the fuel with blended ethanol.
Some investigations with ethanol blended with gasoline include Storey et al.
(2010) who used E10 and E20 and measured reduced PN from GDI engine over
FTP75 and US06 cycle. Zhang et al. (2014) studied the impact E10 and E20 on
PN and found that the PN before the catalyst (TWCs) decreased from a GDI engine,
while some others reported contrary results. In general, ethanol reduces PN emissions
at low and part load conditions. However, in some cases, liquid fuel impingement
arises, then ethanol generates more PN emissions as compared to gasoline. This
increase in PN may be attributed to the higher heat of vaporization of ethanol.

7.3.2 Effect of Methanol on PN

Sometimes, methanol can be used instead of ethanol as a blend-in fuel with its
lower costs of production compared to ethanol. Using methanol is not as common as

154

S. Etikyala and V. K. Gunda

ethanol, however in China one can ﬁnd M100 (100% methanol) and is widely used
in their transportation. Like ethanol, methanol has a lower volumetric energy density
and higher RON compared to gasoline.

Following its predecessor, methanol, like ethanol, when blended with gasoline
has similar effect on PN. One of such effect from methanol is that it promotes fuel
evaporation by reducing the ﬁnal boiling point of the fuel that helps in reducing PN.
Also, there is increased heat of vaporization and high volatility which may cause
poorer mixtures leading to higher PN. In a study, Qin et al (2014) investigated the
impact of gasoline, 100% methanol, and other combinations of methanol-gasoline
blends and found that with increase of methanol concentration in gasoline, PN emis-
sions decreased signiﬁcantly. As expected, neat methanol produced even fewer PN
compared to gasoline. Also supported by another study that reported compared to
gasoline, methanol blends (M15, M25, and M40) reduced PN (Turner et al. 2013).
However, studies like Mohd Murad et al. (2016) reported that M15 does not consis-
tently lower PN from gasoline engines. There is a recent interest in mixed blends of
gasoline, ethanol and methanol.

7.3.3 Effect of Butanol on PN

Compared to ethanol and methanol, butanol is a higher alcohol containing four-
carbon (C4) molecules (Jin et al. 2011). Butanol has higher energy density among
the mentioned alcohols, smaller latent heat of vaporization and is comparatively less
corrosive. Both n-butanol and isobutanol isomers are commonly used as blend-ins
for gasoline. Butanol, having higher energy density among other beneﬁts compared
to other alcohol blend-ins is now being considered as the next major oxygenate
to blend-in with gasoline. Having higher energy density shows promise towards
minimal increase in fuel consumption as opposed to its competitors. N-butanol is
also produced from a fermentation process. From the recent research on the effect
of butanol on PN, the trend reported is similar to ethanol which showed a modest
increase in PN with butanol levels (Jin et al. 2011; Tao et al. 2014).

7.4 Conclusions

Particulate matter emissions from GDI engines comprise of complex mix of volatile
and solid components containing soot, organic carbon and hydrocarbons. Nucleation
mode (<50 nm) particles have often been considered as volatiles, but recently stud-
ies have reported to ﬁnd solid particles in nucleation mode as well. Accumulation
mode (50–200 nm) particles include black carbon, carbonaceous soot particles with
a rudimentary carbon structure and adsorbed volatiles.

In general, homogeneous operation in GDI engines have fully vaporized fuel-
air mixture and give low levels of PN compared to other charge compositions. Any

7 Study on Alternate Fuels and Their Effect on Particulate …

155

diffusion ﬂames caused by liquid fuel remains at ignition, particularly on combustion
chamber surfaces, leads to PN, also known as pool ﬁre. Many injection strategies
have been developed and investigated addressing such liquid fuel impingement. This
phenomenon is also prevalent at cold starts with cold conditions inside the cylinder.
Type of fuel is very essential to engine-out PN emissions. In general, effect of
fuel is often masked by other dominating engine operating parameters. It has been
made possible to compare the effect of fuel while running at stoichiometric opera-
tion. Aromatics, the most commonly PN attributed fuel property typically promote
formations of PAHs, soot precursors which in turn increases PN. Some other fuel
properties do inﬂuence PN but are dependent on engine design and load point.

Adding oxygenated to a fuel dilutes the aromatic content of the fuel, theoretically
leading to lower PN compared to the fuel in its pure form. Since aromatics is not
the only inﬂuencing property of a fuel towards PN, there is a mixed trend that is
reported for oxygenated blends. Although, lower levels of oxygenates in the blends
show promise for reducing PN at lower loads, they fail to reduce PN at higher loads.
Coming to higher levels of oxygenates, overall the PN emitted from the GDI engines
have reduced almost to 0 (i.e., not detectable by measurement instrument) in some
cases.

PN from GDI engines still stands as one of the complex physiochemical phe-
nomena with many parameters and variables affecting the engine out performance.
However, with increased levels of understanding now available of PN formation in
GDI engines from research it is possible to take measures to reduce PN and its for-
mation. Certainly, this chapter has only focused on engine-out PN emissions, many
aftertreatment devices, such as gasoline particulate ﬁlters are available, and are only
delivering better performance with time.
Ozone Added Spark Assisted
Compression Ignition
Abstract The mixed-mode engine combustion strategy where some combination
of spark-assisted compression ignition (SACI) and pure advanced compression igni-
tion (ACI) are used at part-load operation with exclusive spark-ignited (SI) combus-
tion used for high power-density conditions has the potential to increase efﬁciency
and decrease pollutant emissions. However, controlling combustion and switch-
ing between different modes of mixed-mode operation is inherently challenging.
This chapter proposes to use ozone (O3)—a powerful oxidizing chemical agent—to
maintain stable and knock-free combustion across the load-speed map. The impact
of 0–50 ppm intake seeded O3 on performance, and emissions characteristics was
explored in a single-cylinder, optically accessible, research engine operated under
lean SACI conditions with two different in-cylinder conditions, (1) partially strati-
ﬁed (double injection—early and late injection) and (2) homogeneous (single early
injection). O3 addition promotes end gas auto-ignition by enhancing the gasoline
reactivity, which thereby enabled stable auto-ignition with less initial charge heating.
Hence O3 addition could stabilize engine combustion relative to similar conditions
without O3. The addition of ozone has been found to reduce speciﬁc fuel consumption
by up to 9%, with an overall improvement in the combustion stability compared to
similar conditions without O3. For the lowest loads, the effect of adding O3 was most
substantial. Speciﬁc NOx emissions also dropped by up to 30% because a higher
fraction of the fuel burned was due to auto-ignition of the end gas. Measurement
of in-cylinder O3 concentrations using UV light absorption technique showed that
rapid decomposition of O3 into molecular (O2) and atomic oxygen (O) concurred
with the onset of low-temperature heat release (LTHR). The newly formed O from
O3 decomposition initiated fuel hydrogen abstraction reactions responsible for early
onset of LTHR. At the beginning of high-temperature heat release (HTHR), end gas
temperatures ranged from 840 to 900 K, which is about 200 K cooler than those
found in previous studies where intake charge heating or extensive retained residu-
als were used to preheat the charge. An included analysis indicates that in order to
achieve optimal auto-ignition in our engine, the spark deﬂagration was needed to add
10–40 J of additional thermal energy to the end gas. We have leveraged these results
to broaden our understanding of O3 addition to different load-speed conditions that
we believe can facilitate multiple modes (SI, ACI, SACI, etc.) of combustion.
Keywords O3 addition · Spark assisted compression ignition (SACI) ·
Low-temperature heat release (LTHR) · Homogeneous versus stratiﬁed
combustion · Advanced plasma ignition
8.1 Introduction

Conventional compression-ignition (CI) engines provide a plausible solution to light-
duty vehicle manufacturers due to their improved efﬁciency operating at higher com-
pression ratio compared to spark-ignition (SI) gasoline engines (Dec 2009). However,
controlling the emissions of nitrogen oxide (NOx) and particulate matter (PM) are the
biggest challenges for CI engines (Stone 1999; Biswas 2018). As emission standards
continue to become stricter, future engine control strategies will be a combination
of combustion optimization, fuel reﬁnement, and aggressive exhaust after-treatment
technologies—all of which add signiﬁcant cost and complexity to the engine archi-
tecture (United States, Environmental Protection Agency, Ofﬁce of Transportation
and Air Quality 2012; Graham et al. 2009; United States Environmental Protection
Agency, Ofﬁce of Policy and Evaluation 2016; Biswas et al. 2016; Biswas and Qiao
2016). On the other hand, even though homogeneous charge compression ignition
(HCCI) combustion offers high thermal efﬁciency and ultra-low NOx and PM emis-
sions (Stanglmaier and Roberts 1999; Christensen et al. 1997; Weinrotter et al. 2005;
Srivastava et al. 2009), it is limited by a lack of a direct control mechanism for ignition
timing and combustion phasing (Zhao et al. 2003). One way to address this control
issue is to explore mixing controlled advanced compression ignition (ACI) strategies
such as gasoline compression injection (GCI), and spark-assisted compression igni-
tion (SACI) that use some amount of bulk-gas auto-ignition of gasoline-like fuels.
Within controlled laboratory environments, mixing controlled ACI strategies have
demonstrated the efﬁciency beneﬁts of CI and the low engine-out emissions of SI
(Saxena and Bedoya 2013).

The main challenge for ACI approaches is to keep stable and knock-free oper-
ation throughout the entire load-speed map. Poor combustion stability at low load
conditions can be improved by tailoring the charge reactivity through some com-
bination of injection strategy, intake heating, excessive usage of retained residual,
charge motion, and piston bowl design (Fitzgerald and Steeper 2010; Kolodziej et al.
2015; Wolk et al. 2016a, b). These solutions for improved stability come at the cost
of increased heat transfer losses (Ekoto et al. 2017) and more complex valve train
requirements. For high load conditions, heavy use of exhaust gas recirculation (EGR)
is required to slow heat release rates (Dec et al. 2015; Dernotte et al. 2015) and to
reduce engine knock propensity, which then requires heavy intake boosting to meet
load demands. Consequently, expansion efﬁciency is reduced, and mechanical losses

8 Ozone Added Spark Assisted Compression Ignition

163

are increased due to the higher peak cylinder pressure requirements. Each of these
alternatives contributes to the price and complexity that should have been avoided
by using ACI.

A practical near-term alternative to ACI engine combustion is the so-called dual-
or mixed-mode combustion strategy, where the idea is to run the engine in SI mode
for high power-density conditions (Lawler and Filipi 2013; Manofsky et al. 2011)
and in SACI mode at low and part load to keep up efﬁciency. The SACI strategy
differs from conventional SI engines in that elevated unburned gas temperatures
induced by compression heating from an expanding spark initiated ﬂame kernel
(Persson et al. 2007; Reuss et al. 2008; Lavoie et al. 2010; Benajes et al. 2013,
2014; Olesky et al. 2013, 2014, 2015; Ortiz-Soto et al. 2014; Middleton et al. 2015)
are utilized to promote end gas auto-ignition. Moderate to high EGR dilution is
used to limit adiabatic ﬂame temperatures and heat release rates. Turbo- and super-
charging can recover part of the power density losses due to EGR dilution at high load
results peak cylinder pressures very near to knocking conditions. Although SACI
beneﬁts from higher compression ratios, high-power-density SI conditions dictate
that compression ratios should be set to below 14 to avoid knock. This is signiﬁcantly
below 16+ compression ratios commonly employed for conventional ACI. Therefore,
some combination of mixture stratiﬁcation and charge heating becomes unavoidable
to ensure enhanced gasoline reactivity sufﬁcient for end gas auto-ignition.

However, charge reactivity can be increased by seeding a small amount (less than
50 ppm) of Ozone (O3)—a powerful oxidizing chemical agent to the intake charge.
Compared to other additives, O3 is a particularly promising candidate that can be
generated onboard via increasingly inexpensive and compact O3 generators or even
by low-temperature plasma discharges from advanced ignition systems (Uddi et al.
2009). Thus, O3 addition enables stable auto-ignition with lower intake heating or
complex valve train adjustments (Masurier et al. 2013, 2015a, b; Truedsson et al.
2017; Pinazzi and Foucher 2017; Ekoto and Foucher 2018). The idea of adding O3 to
improve fuel reactivity is not new (Ombrello et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 2016). Masurier
et al. (2015b) compared various oxidizing species such as nitric oxide, nitrogen oxide,
and O3 affecting engine performance and O3 found to be the most effective additive
among them. Truedsson et al. (2017) demonstrated that O3 addition could facilitate
ignition of high octane rating fuels blended with ethanol that are otherwise difﬁcult
to ignite in HCCI combustion.

Ozone-assisted oxidation—‘ozonolysis,’ has lately drawn considerable interest in
low-temperature combustion research due to the increase of plasma-assisted combus-
tion methods and chemically controlled engine designs. Rousso et al. (2018) studied
ethylene oxidation in a jet-stirred reactor and observed ozonolysis below 600 K.
However, the O3 decomposition rate increases rapidly above 600 K. Above 600 K
temperature, O3 rapidly decomposes into molecular and atomic oxygen (O) (Masurier
et al. 2013; Depcik et al. 2014). The O radical then initiates heat release through fuel
hydrogen (H) abstraction reaction to form alkyl (R) and hydroxyl (OH) radicals
(Ekoto and Foucher 2018; Smekhov et al. 2007). The OH radical further reacts with
fuel and continues the H abstraction reaction. This initiates low-temperature heat
release (LTHR) pathways that occurs at temperatures below ~800 K. Furthermore, R

164

S. Biswas and I. Ekoto

combining with molecular oxygen (O2) forms peroxy radicals (RO2). Then RO2 par-
ticipates in ongoing fuel H abstraction reaction through R O2 + R H → R O O H + R.
The breakdown of alkyl hydroperoxide (ROOH) into alkyloxy radical (RO) and OH
then becomes a sustainable source of LTHR radicals (Zádor et al. 2011). These early
LTHR reactions can progress combustion phasing by more than 20 crank angles (CA)
depending on the initial O3 concentrations.

In this chapter, the effect of intake seeded O3 was investigated as a way to replace
charge pre-heating for stable lean SACI operation with two different injection strate-
gies, (1) Partially stratiﬁed: double injection—early (75–90% fuel) and late DI
(10–25% fuel), and (2) Homogeneous: single early direct injection (DI). Experi-
ments have been carried out in an optically accessible single-cylinder spray-guided
research engine. For the partially stratiﬁed double injection strategy, O3 concentra-
tions required to achieve stable combustion were lower at between 30 and 34 ppm.
Low to moderate engine loads of between 1.5 and 5.5 bar IMEP and speeds of
between 800 and 1600 rpm were examined. For all single injection homogeneous
conditions, moderate engine loads of between 4 and 5 bar indicated mean effective
pressure (IMEP) and speeds of between 800 and 1400 revolution per minute (rpm)
were examined. O3 concentrations were set at 50 ppm—the peak attainable concen-
tration at the highest 1400 rpm engine speed assessed with the current O3 generator.
Note that the O3 concentration was reduced from 50 to 31 ppm for a single low speed
and high intake temperature due to excessive knocking with higher O3 concentration.
For both fueling strategies, a naturally aspired intake pressure was maintained, with
internal residual gas fractions (RGF) between 10 and 20% achieved by combining
positive valve overlap (PVO) with moderate exhaust backpressures. For the homo-
geneous strategy intake temperatures were swept between 42 and 80 °C, while for
partially stratiﬁed strategy a constant 42 °C intake temperature was maintained for all
conditions. Each load/speed operating condition was optimized to maximize engine
performance while maintaining NOx emissions and ringing intensity (RI) below
5 g/kg-fuel and 1 MW/m2 respectively. Performance and engine-out emissions mea-
surements were complemented by CA resolved O3 measurements performed via
ultraviolet (UV) light absorption and single-zone chemical kinetic modeling of end
gas LTHR.

8.2 Experimental Methods

8.2.1 Sandia Single-Cylinder Research Engine

All engine testing was conducted in a single-cylinder engine that featured a Bowditch
piston, four-valve pent-roof, spray-guided injection, and optical access as shown
schematically in Fig. 8.1. The optical access into the engine cylinder was provided via
diametrically opposed wall-mounted quartz windows (12.7 mm aperture). Research-
grade RD587 gasoline was directly injected into the cylinder via a centrally located

8 Ozone Added Spark Assisted Compression Ignition

165

Fig. 8.1 Schematic of the Sandia light-duty optical gasoline engine, gas supply system, O3 gener-
ator, and emissions measurement setup

Bosch HDEV1.2 injector with eight uniformly distributed 125 µm diameter nozzles
forming a 60° umbrella angle. The ignition system consisted of a long-reach resistor
type spark plug (NGK 12 mm nominal thread), and a Bosch 93 mJ ignition coil.
Intake and exhaust cams were set to create a positive valve overlap (PVO) of 34
crank angles at TDC. An engine dynamometer was used to vary engine speeds. An
optical encoder (BEI sensors) with 0.1 CA resolution was used to locate the crank
angle position. Intake port and runner designs are optimized to limit swirl and tumble
ﬂows to reduce heat transfer losses via in-cylinder turbulence. An Aquatherm heat
exchanger was used to maintain a constant cylinder wall temperature to 90 °C.

A Tescom ER5000 PID (Proportional, Integral, Derivative) pneumatic actuator
was used to precisely regulate the intake air supply. In both the intake and exhaust
runners, pressure and temperature were measured. The exhaust runner was heated
using wire-wrapped resistive heaters and ﬁberglass insulation to minimize the heat
transfer losses. A Chromalox circulation heater located between the intake plenum
and air supply was used to heat the intake charge up to 80 °C. A piezoelectric pressure
sensor (Kistler 6125A) was used to measure cylinder pressure history. Heat release
and load in every cycle were estimated from the in-cylinder pressure trace.

A two-zone pressure-based heat release assessment was conducted where the
cylinder volume was divided into burned and unburned regimes so that unburned
temperatures could be estimated at the onset of end gas LTHR and HTHR. The onset
of LTHR was estimated from apparent heat release rate (AHRR) proﬁle difference
with and without O3 addition operating at the identical conditions. In the burned gas
region, the two-zone model presumed complete combustion of the fuel. The burned
gas temperature was calculated from the heat of combustion of the consumed fuel.

166

S. Biswas and I. Ekoto

Since major portion of heat release was from the end gas auto-ignition, a modiﬁed
Woschni correlation for ACI combustion (Chang et al. 2004) served best to estimate
the heat loss.

Ozone generated by an external O3 generator (Ozone Solutions OZV-4) directly
seeded into the intake runner. The O3 concentration was varied by changing the
amount of dry air using a mass ﬂow controller (MKS GE50) passing through the O3
generator. An O3 meter (Teledyne API 452) was used to monitor the O3 concentration
out of the O3 generator. Table 8.1 summarizes signiﬁcant details on engine geometry,
valve timings, and operating conditions, and fueling strategies.

For all experiments, research-grade RD587 gasoline with a RON of 92.1 and
octane sensitivity of 7.3 was used. Table 8.2 summarizes the essential physical and
chemical properties of RD587.

Pollutant emissions from the exhaust plenum were sampled for ﬁred cycles using
heated sampling lines to minimize condensation of water and fuel. A CAI 600

Table 8.1 Engine speciﬁcations and operating conditions

Bore/stroke/connecting rod (mm)

86/95.1/166.7

Engine speciﬁcations

Displaced volume (L)

Geometric compression ratio
Intake valve open/close (CA)a
Exhaust valve open/close (CA)a
Valve lift (mm)

Fuel pressure (bar)

Injector hole number

Injector cone angle (°)
Injector oriﬁce diameter (µm)
Operating conditions

Intake temperature (°C)

Intake O3 concentration (ppm)
Engine speed (rpm)

Cycle fueling rates (mg/cycle)

Equivalence ratio

RGF (%)

Spark timing (CA)
Main start of injection (SOI) (CA)a
2nd injection SOI (CA)

2nd injection fueling fraction (%)

0.551

13:1
343/−145
160/−343
9.7

100

8

60

125

42

0–34

8.1–17.9

0.27–0.56

10–18
−70 to −28
−230
−64 to −36
10–25

a0 CA corresponds to TDC of the compression stroke

Intake/exhaust pressure (kPa)

100/105

Partially stratiﬁed

Homogeneous

800, 1000, 1200, 1400, 1600

800, 1000, 1200, 1400

100/110

42–80

0–50

13.4–16.9

0.37–0.45

12–20
−60 to −55
−330
–

0

8 Ozone Added Spark Assisted Compression Ignition

167

Table 8.2 Physical and chemical properties of RD587 gasoline

Liquid density @ 15 °C (g/L)

LHV (kJ/mg)

H/C ratio

O/C ratio

Research octane number

Octane sensitivity

T10/T50/T90 (°C)

748

41.9

1.972

0.033

92.1

7.3

57/98/156

NDIR/Oxygen Multi-Component analyzer was used to measure the dry engine out
emission of carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO2), and oxygen (O2). A CAI
600 HFID was employed to measure hydrocarbon (HC) emissions. Measurements of
CO and HC measurements were used in conjunction along with measured airﬂow and
fuel injection rates to estimate combustion efﬁciency. A CAI 600 HCLD NO/NOx
chemiluminescence analyzer was used to measure oxides of Nitrogen (NOx).

8.2.2 Partially Stratiﬁed Versus Homogeneous SACI

Figure 8.2 illustrates the injection strategies along with the in-cylinder combustion
processes for partially stratiﬁed and homogeneous conditions. For partially stratiﬁed
SACI, each cycle featured an early direct injection with a ﬁxed SOI at −230 CA
and a late second injection with the SOI timed just after ST. The second injection
SOI was varied between −64 and −36 CA. While a greater quantity of fuel 75–90%

Fig. 8.2 Schematic of in-cylinder combustion processes and cycle events for a partially stratiﬁed,
b homogeneous SACI

168

S. Biswas and I. Ekoto

was injected in the early cycle, a small quantity of late-cycle injection 10–25%
helped stabilize the combustion. Two of the fuel sprays straddle the spark plug gap
with virtually all of the fuel spray for injections later than −80 CA entering the
piston bowl. The initial deﬂagration is believed to be conﬁned to the piston bowl
where mixtures are fuel-rich. Compressive heating by the deﬂagration then leads the
leaner end gas mixtures to transition to auto-ignition. To ﬁnd the optimum operating
points for partially stratiﬁed SACI, ST and second injection timing/quantity were
adjusted for each operating point until MBT conditions were reached provided that
ringing intensity values and engine-out NOx emissions remained below 1 MW/m2
and 5 g/kg-fuel respectively.

For homogeneous SACI, an early DI with SOI set at −330 CA created a homo-
geneous charge in the cylinder. The initial deﬂagration created by the spark ignition
propagated into the cylinder and led to an end gas auto-ignition. The intake seeded
50 ppm O3 along with the moderate RGF of between 12 and 20% tailored the end
gas reactive enough to auto-ignite. However, slight intake heating 42–80 °C was nec-
essary to stabilize combustion. The engine speed was a key factor that affected the
O3 decomposition and end gas auto-ignition behavior. To locate the optimum oper-
ating conditions for homogeneous SACI, the fueling rate at maximum brake torque
(MBT) spark timing (ST) was adjusted until the minimum achievable load was met,
provided that the coefﬁcient of variation (CoV) of IMEP was below 3%, the ringing
intensity (RI) was below 1 MW/m2, and NOx emissions were below 1 g/kg-fuel.

The intake seeded O3 concentration (30–34 ppm) for partially stratiﬁed SACI was
lower than that was required for homogeneous SACI. Note that intake temperature
was ﬁxed at 42 °C in partially stratiﬁed SACI. Similar to the homogenous SACI, an
exhaust pressure of 1.05 bar in conjunction with the use of PVO produced moderate
RGF of between 10 and 18%. The engine was motored for approximately 30 s
for each experiment with the O3 generator switched on to accumulate uniform and
constant O3 levels in the intake runner. Using a predeﬁned spark timing, the engine
was then ﬁred for about 90 s. The injection quantity and ST were adjusted gradually
to the desired set point after the 90-s warm-up period. Once combustion and engine-
out emissions readings become steady, a 100-cycle dataset was collected for every
operating point. Before the engine was stopped to oil the rings, O3 generator was
switched off and the engine was motored to clear out residual emission in the exhaust
runner. This entire process was repeated for the next experimental condition.

8.2.3 In-Cylinder O3 Measurement

The in-cylinder-averaged O3 concentrations were estimated using UV light absorp-
tion on a CA basis, as shown in Fig. 8.3. This in-cylinder O3 measurement technique
has been discussed in detail in our earlier work (Biswas and Ekoto 2019a, b). Hence
a brief description is presented here for the readers’ convenience. Partly collimated
250-Watt continuous broadband light generated from a Xenon arc lamp (Spectra
physics 66924-250XV) was transmitted through the optical engine into an integrating

8 Ozone Added Spark Assisted Compression Ignition

169

Fig. 8.3 Schematic representation of the O3 absorption diagnostic

sphere followed by a photomultiplier tube (PMT, Paciﬁc Instruments 3150RF) using
several Nd: YAG 4th harmonic laser line mirrors that reﬂected only the 266 nm light.
The absorption cross-section of O3 (σO3) at 266 nm is 9.37 × 10−18 cm2/molecule
(Gorshelev et al. 2014). The optical setup is shown in Fig. 8.3 minimized beam steer-
ing effect attributed to the thermal gradients within the combustion chamber. Finally,
the Beer-Lambert law was used to calculate the CA resolved O3 mole fraction, XO3.

XO3

= k B Tbulk
p BσO3

Ir e f
I

ln

(8.1)

Here, I is the light intensity, B is the cylinder bore diameter, Tbulk is the in-
cylinder bulk-gas temperature, p is the cylinder pressure, and k B is the Boltzmann
(cid:3)
. Based on the recorded cylinder pressure, the bulk
constant
gas temperature was estimated assuming isentropic compression.

(cid:2)
1.381 × 10−23 J/K

Three different datasets, namely “background”, “reference”, and “target”, each
containing 100 cycles were acquired to estimate the in-cylinder O3. The “back-
ground” dataset accounted for the noise signal coming from the ambient light in
the absence of the lamplight. The “target” and “reference” datasets were acquired
with and without O3 addition. Note that only the closed part of the cycle was con-
sidered in the O3 measurement. During O3 measurement, the fuel was added but
the spark was kept inactive to avoid combustion in “reference” and “target” cycles.
Enhanced combustion stability with O3 addition in the “target” cycle would have led
to a high amount of residual CO2 that absorbs 266 nm light (Schulz et al. 2002). Also,
the presence of combustion intermediates that absorbs UV light like hydroperoxyl
(HO2) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) (Ekoto and Foucher 2018; Kijewski and Troe
1971; Molina and Molina 1981) during LTHR and HTHR can differ in “reference”
and “target” cycles. Thus, to have a correct O3 measurement—free from absorption

170

S. Biswas and I. Ekoto

error by other species, combustion was suppressed by keeping the spark inactive. To
compensate for the effect of combustion, the intake temperatures were increased to
match the intake valve closing (IVC) temperatures of the corresponding ﬁred cycles.

8.2.4 Single Zone Chemical Model

Chemkin-Pro 0D homogeneous reactor simulations were conducted to assess chem-
ical kinetic pathways responsible for the fuel oxidation with O3 addition (Ansys
2017). Several experimental parameters were matched or used during simulations to
capture the relevant processes related to O3 decomposition, radical formation, and
fuel oxidation. The experimentally measured pressure and unburned gas temperature
during the compression stroke were kept constrained throughout the simulation. IVC
temperature and species compositions obtained from the experiments were used to
initialize the simulation. O3 oxidation chemistry from Masurier et al. (2013) added
to the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory’s gasoline surrogate mechanism
(Mehl et al. 2011) that yielded a total of 2028 species and 8636 reactions was used
for simulations. A ﬁve-component gasoline surrogate (46.6% iso-octane, 17.8% n-
heptane, 9.9% ethanol, 6.0% 1-hexene, and 19.7% toluene by liquid volume) was
used to match the overall molecular composition and reactivity characteristics of
RD587 gasoline (Wolk et al. 2016a).

8.3 Results and Discussion

8.3.1 Effect of O3 on Combustion Performance

and Emissions

O3 addition enabled stable combustion relative to similar conditions without O3 by
promoting end gas reactivity. AHRR proﬁles are shown in Fig. 8.4 for a baseline
1000 rpm, 2.8 bar IMEP, partially stratiﬁed operating condition with and without
29 ppm of added O3 to showcase the impact of O3 addition on heat release character-
istics. The total fueling rate was 12 mg/cycle, with ~20% of the fuel injected during
the second injection. The spark timing was at −54 CA, and the second injection
occurred 7 CA later. To investigate the effect of O3 decomposition on end gas auto-
ignition behavior, a measured O3 proﬁle was plotted in Fig. 8.4 for similar non-ﬁred
operating conditions. However, to capture the correct O3 decomposition rate, the
IVC temperatures between ﬁred and non-ﬁred cycles were closely matched.

For both conditions, the ﬁrst noticeable heat release occurred around −42 CA
as the stratiﬁed mixture created from the second injection was ignited. The authors
speculate that this heat release is the result of a deﬂagration conﬁned to the piston
bowl where the second injection produced rich stratiﬁed mixtures. Until −25 CA,

8 Ozone Added Spark Assisted Compression Ignition

171

Fig. 8.4 AHRR proﬁles of
with and without O3 for a
1000 rpm, 2.8 bar IMEP,
partially stratiﬁed operating
condition

AHRR values remained closely matched for conditions with and without O3 addi-
tion. Beyond this point, the O3 added AHRR proﬁle increasingly separated from the
condition without O3. The sharp increase in AHRR is not consistent with the con-
sumption of lean end gas mixtures by deﬂagration alone, suggesting that additional
heat release occurred because of auto-ignition of the end gas.

To illustrate more clearly the occurrence of the end gas auto-ignition, the AHRR
proﬁle for the condition without O3 addition has been subtracted from the condition
with O3 addition and is plotted as the ‘Proﬁle Difference’ in Fig. 8.4. The addition
of O3 resulted in an increase of 31% in total heat release. The proﬁle resembles low-
temperature combustion (LTC) auto-ignition, with an LTHR period starting around
−25 CA and a larger high-temperature heat release (HTHR) period near TDC. The
thermal decomposition of O3 into O and O2 began around −60 CA and almost ended
with the initiation of LTHR. Secondary absorbance, which was started around −22
CA, was probably from the HO2 formed during LTHR reactions.

Figure 8.5 plots the indicated speciﬁc fuel consumption (ISFC) and NOx emission
index (EI) for a range of engine speeds (800–1600 rpm) as a function of engine load.
The O3 concentrations were ﬁxed at 50 ppm for homogeneous SACI and 30 ppm for
partially stratiﬁed SACI. For the partially stratiﬁed SACI results, the largest declines
in ISFC were observed for the lowest engine loads and speeds. Moreover, ISFC
data from the homogeneous SACI had a more limited range of achievable loads and
speeds similarly collapsed to the same curve. These ﬁndings show that there is no
obvious punishment with stratiﬁed operation due, for instance, to a change in the
features of total heat transfer.

In partially stratiﬁed SACI, NOx emissions had a weak positive correlation with
increased engine load and a much stronger positive correlation with an increased
engine speed for engine speeds of 1400 rpm and lower. These trends reversed for the
load sweep of the highest speed (1600 rpm) condition, which had a much stronger
dependence on increased engine load. Homogeneous SACI NOx emissions were

172

S. Biswas and I. Ekoto

Fig. 8.5 ISFC and NOx
emissions as a function of
load at engine speeds of
800–1600 rpm for O3 seeded
homogeneous versus
partially stratiﬁed SACI
(Biswas and Ekoto 2019b)

about an order of magnitude lower than comparable partially stratiﬁed SACI condi-
tions, probably due to the signiﬁcant reduction of high-temperature deﬂagration in
fuel-rich stratiﬁed regions existed in the piston bowl.

Contour maps of indicated thermal efﬁciency (ITE), combustion efﬁciency, coef-
ﬁcient of variation (COV) of IMEP, and 50% burn angle (CA50) are plotted in
Fig. 8.6 as a function of engine speed and load for partially stratiﬁed SACI. For
the range of operating conditions examined, ITE values ranged from 20 to 40%. As
anticipated, enhanced ITE was heavily associated with enhanced load for a speciﬁed
engine speed due to a combination of greater combustion efﬁciency and more opti-
mal phasing of combustion which reduced cycle-to-cycle variability. Increased ITE
for a given load was also observed for a decrease in engine speeds resulting solely
from higher combustion efﬁciency. Longer cycle durations permitted more time for
lean mixture combustion to occur for the slower engine speeds.

Similar contour maps of engine-out NOx, unburned hydrocarbon (UHC), and CO
emissions are plotted in Fig. 8.7. Although the NOx emission limit was 5 g/kg-fuel,
only the highest load and speed conditions (5+ bar IMEP and 1400+ rpm) approached
this limit. For higher loads and lower engine speeds, UHC and CO emissions were
typically low, which is unsurprising considering that these are the regions where

8 Ozone Added Spark Assisted Compression Ignition

173

Fig. 8.6 Contour maps of ITE, combustion efﬁciency, CoV of IMEP, and CA50 from partially
stratiﬁed SACI for a range of engine speeds (800–1600 rpm) and loads (1.5–5.5 bar IMEP)

combustion efﬁciency was high. As loads dropped and engine speeds increased,
UHC emissions increased steadily. While CO emissions likewise increased with
decreased engine load, peak values occurred at lower speeds due to a substantial
conversion of hydrocarbons to CO, but the ﬁnal oxidation step of CO to CO2 being
rate limited.

8.3.2 Intake Temperature and Engine Speed on O3

Decomposition

To examine the impact of intake temperature on O3 decomposition kinetics, measured
O3 proﬁles with IVC temperatures of 361 and 384 K are plotted in Fig. 8.8a alongside
AHRR proﬁles zoomed in on the LTHR period. O3 proﬁles are plotted on a semi-
log scale to more clearly highlight when rapid thermal decomposition into O and
O2 occurs. Note that there was increased absorbance starting around −25 °aTDC
that was not present in the reference datasets. As stated in the introduction, this
increased absorbance was likely from HO2 formed during LTHR reactions. Although
the spurious absorbance was not desired, it nonetheless is a convenient marker of

174

S. Biswas and I. Ekoto

Fig. 8.7 Contour maps of engine-out NOx, UHC, and CO emissions from partially stratiﬁed SACI
for a range of engine speeds (800–1600 rpm) and loads (1.5–5.5 bar IMEP)

LTHR onset. For both proﬁles, rapid O3 thermal decomposition started around −
40 °aTDC, and was nearly complete by −20 °aTDC. Thermal O3 decomposition for
the higher IVC temperature condition (384 K) concluded just before the appearance
of LTHR for the ﬁred conditions with the highest intake temperature (i.e., 70 and
80 °C).

Figure 8.8b shows the in-cylinder O3 concentration for the range of engine speeds
(800–1400 rpm) along with a close-up view of LTHR period heat release rates for
the ﬁred conditions. In-cylinder O3 concentrations gradually declined early in the
cycle before the start of rapid O3 decomposition, which occurred around −45 CA
irrespective of engine speeds. Note that the only major difference for the different
engine speeds was that O3 decomposition occurred earlier in the cycle with lower
engine speeds. This behavior can be attributed to the longer residence times at lower
speeds that enabled a greater amount of decomposition during the cooler early portion
of the cycle. Rapid thermal O3 decomposition of O3 ended by around −25 CA, which
is about the time of LTHR onset for all ﬁred conditions.

O3 addition reduces the intake heating requirement and hence enables wide CA50
control for LTC. Contour plot in Fig. 8.9 shows a non-linear dependence of CA50
on intake O3 concentration and engine temperature. The reduction in intake heating
requirement is highest for smaller concentrations of O3. The return of O3 addition
slowly diminishes with an increase in O3 concentrations. An addition of 25 ppm of O3

8 Ozone Added Spark Assisted Compression Ignition

175

Fig. 8.8 Effect of a intake
temperature and b engine
speed on in-cylinder O3
decomposition

Fig. 8.9 Contour maps of
CA50 as a function of intake
O3 concentration and
temperature for a ﬁxed
operating point (−230 CA
SOI, 1000 rpm, φ = 0.3)

176

S. Biswas and I. Ekoto

can considerably lower the intake temperature by 65 K. A lower intake temperature
also implies that achieving a stable point was possible without adding O3. Hence,
O3 provides an additional control knob to adjust the combustion phasing in ACI
operation.

8.3.3 Kinetic Study of LTHR Pathway

To recognize key reaction pathways for enhanced auto-ignition chemistry with O3
addition, 0D chemical kinetic simulations with detailed gasoline chemistry were
performed. At the beginning of the simulations, experimentally estimated IVC con-
ditions were imposed. The simulations were carried out through main compression
stroke to capture relevant physics of O3 decomposition, radical formation, and fuel
oxidation. Figure 8.10 illustrates a schematic of the dominant LTHR response paths
outlined in the introduction. It shows O3 decomposed O leads to various sustainable
production pathways for R and OH. Note that an additional pathway is included for
completeness in which RO2 undergoes inner isomerization to create hydroperox-
yalkyl radical (QOOH).

Simulations were carried out with and without 50 ppm O3 addition, with all other
boundary conditions ﬁxed to explore the most sensitive reactions to LTHR chemistry
as illustrated in Fig. 8.10. The following engine operating condition: 1400 rpm, Tintake
80 °C, IMEP 4.9 bar, ST −54 °aTDC, TI V C 383 K, RGF 12.5%, was chosen for this
purpose. Figure 8.11 plots AHRR proﬁles of this operating condition along with the
corresponding simulation results with and without the addition of O3. The onset of
LTHR with O3 addition from the simulations closely matches the respective outcomes
of the experiment. On the contrary, simulations without O3 addition did not show any
evidence of LTHR. Early in the cycle, O3 concentrations are stable; however, start

Fig. 8.10 Schematic of
LTHR reaction pathways
initialized by O formed from
thermal decomposition of
O3. Violet and red arrows
highlight the sustained
source of R and OH radicals,
respectively (Biswas and
Ekoto 2019a)

8 Ozone Added Spark Assisted Compression Ignition

177

Fig. 8.11 AHRR proﬁles
from the engine experiment
and 0D Chemkin simulations
with (solid) and without
(dotted) O3 (top). Cycle
evolution of O3 and
important fuel oxidation
radicals highlighted in
Fig. 8.10 (bottom) (Biswas
and Ekoto 2019a)

to decline rapidly at −40 °aTDC and ﬁnally reaches a negligible concentration by −
25 °aTDC. These ﬁndings are well in agreement with the experimental ﬁndings shown
in Fig. 8.8b. O concentrations did not exceed 0.01 ppm since it quickly consumed
by fuel molecules. However, rapid decomposition of O3 leads to the creation of O,
OH, and HO2 much sooner.

8.3.4 Energy Requirements for End Gas Auto-ignition

While end gas reactivity increased with O3 addition, it was not sufﬁcient on its own to
lead to auto-ignition for the fuel-lean conditions examined in this study. Additional
thermal energy supplied by the fuel-rich bowl deﬂagration was needed to accelerate
end gas auto-ignition reactions. However, results from the previous section demon-
strated that the second injection was the primary source of NOx emissions. Thus,
it is imperative to minimize the second injection fueling fraction while preserving
good combustion stability and efﬁciency for a given condition, which requires new
design tools. In this section, a simpliﬁed analysis is presented to evaluate the end gas
thermal energy deﬁcit needed to initiate sufﬁciently strong auto-ignition. Optimized
conditions used to generate performance and emissions maps in Figs. 8.6 and 8.7
were used as the reference points.

It was observed earlier that heat release rates from the initial bowl deﬂagra-
tion were well-matched, regardless of the amount of in-cylinder O3 concentration.
Accordingly, the increased thermal energy from the early deﬂagration can be esti-
mated from the integrated heat release up to the onset of LTHR. The beginning of
LTHR for each condition was identiﬁed from the ‘proﬁle difference’ between the

178

S. Biswas and I. Ekoto

Fig. 8.12 Schematic used to
illustrate the methods used to
estimate energy requirement
for end gas auto-ignition

same operating conditions with and without O3 addition as illustrated in Fig. 8.12.
The orange hatched area represents the integrated energy that is attributed exclusively
to the early deﬂagration heat release.

While the integrated heat release provides an estimate for thermal energy addition,
it is not very predictive. An alternate method that is potentially more predictive is
to evaluate the auto-ignition energy using cycle thermodynamic parameters. For this
method, a simple two-zone system was assumed, with deﬂagration in the piston bowl
growing outwardly and end gas mixture getting compressed by this deﬂagration, as
shown in Fig. 8.2. Deﬂagration and end gas zones were assumed to be quasi-steady
and homogenous, with each zone identiﬁed by a single burned or unburned tem-
perature. Thus, the energy required for auto-ignition was the difference in unburned
end gas enthalpies for an operating condition relative to a reference motored condi-
tion without deﬂagration. The estimated energy deﬁcit required to initiate end gas
auto-ignition can then be written as,

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

E = muC p,u

Tu,S AC I − Tu,r e f

(8.2)

where mu is the end gas mass of, C p,u is the end gas constant pressure speciﬁc heat,
Tu,S AC I is unburned end gas temperature for stratiﬁed SACI condition, i.e., with O3
seeding and the presence of deﬂagration providing additional energy, and Tu,r e f is
the reference temperature from a corresponding motored condition.

A map of the calculated thermal energy deﬁcit (integrated heat release up to LTHR
onset) required for end gas auto-ignition is plotted in Fig. 8.13a for the full range of
load and engine speed conditions evaluated in the present study. The energy deﬁcit
varied from 10 J for highest load and lowest speed conditions (4 bar IMEP, 800 rpm)
to 40 J for the lowest loads and highest engine speed conditions (1.5 bar IMEP,
1600 rpm). These results are unsurprising given the longer residence times and more
reactive mixtures for the highest load and lowest speed conditions. Indeed, it was
often observed that these conditions could sustain auto-ignition without a spark,

8 Ozone Added Spark Assisted Compression Ignition

179

(a)
Energy required for end gas auto-ignition

(b)
Difference in energies from two methods

Fig. 8.13 End gas auto-ignition energy a estimated from the integrated heat release up to LTHR
onset, b difference estimated from two methods, i.e. energy integrated heat release (method 1) and
Eq. (8.2) (method 2)

utilizing only energy addition from retained residual heating. The maps illustrate a
fairly linear transition between these two extreme regions.

A map illustrating the difference in thermal energies estimated by integrated heat
release (method 1) and from Eq. (8.2) (method 2) is plotted in Fig. 8.13b. It is imme-
diately apparent that energy trends for both methods are remarkably well matched.
The largest differences between the two methods were observed for the highest load
conditions. Relative to the end gas thermal energy deﬁcit calculation that used the
integrated heat release, the method that used the difference in end gas temperatures
at the onset of LTHR predicts modestly higher values for the lowest engine speeds
(0–4 J) and modestly lower values (0–6 J) for the highest speeds. Potential reasons for
the discrepancy include: (a) errors in the estimated temperature calculation at LTHR
onset, (b) end gas thermal stratiﬁcation that would have led to reduced thermal energy
requirements for local hot spots, and (c) potential fuel stratiﬁcation from the second
injection that likewise would have led locally rich regions that ignite earlier. Future
work will evaluate each of these sensitivity parameters in greater detail.

8.3.5 Development of Advanced Ignition System

O3 added homogeneous SACI failed to operate at lower loads compared to stratiﬁed
SACI which enabled stable combustion across the entire load speed map. However,
partially stratiﬁed SACI operation was responsible for a 3–5 folds increase in NOx
emissions. Thus, an optimum combustion strategy is crucial to enable stable combus-
tion with lesser emission. The advanced ignition system has the potential to bridge
these two requirements—stable combustion with lower emissions.

Transient Plasma Ignition (TPI) is a promising advanced ignition technology
that utilizes short pulse (~10 s of nanoseconds), high-voltage (15 kV+) electrical

180

S. Biswas and I. Ekoto

discharges to generate highly energized low-temperature plasma (LTP). Our prelim-
inary study (Biswas et al. 2018) shows that TPI extends the lean limit and increase the
dilution tolerance of propane/air mixture compared to conventional inductive spark.
TPI promotes faster ﬂame propagation rates through a combination of larger vol-
ume ignition kernels and the generation of active radicals that enhance ﬂame speeds.
Visualization of ignition event and early ﬂame propagation by transient plasma was
performed within a custom-built optically accessible spark calorimeter for near-
atmospheric, 1.3 bar, φ = 0.41–1.0 propane/air mixtures. A barrier discharge igniter
(BDI) with an anode tip covered by high-temperature, high-dielectric strength epoxy
was used for TPI.

Figure 8.14 compares the pressure and heat release rate of TPI with an inductive
spark. Figure 8.14a shows that for φ = 0.6 the ignition delay was shorter for TPI.
Also, a steeper slope in TPI pressure proﬁle indicates that combustion by transient
plasma happens faster than an inductive spark. To compare the performance of lean
TPI, pressure history of stoichiometric spark ignition is also plotted in Fig. 8.14a.
The pressure rise rate is nearly identical for TPI φ = 0.6 to stoichiometric spark
ignition. This indicates that plasma ignition produces stronger ignition kernels and
faster ﬂame propagation even at the leaner operating condition. This is also evident
from the heat release rate (HRR) proﬁles shown in Fig. 8.14b. At φ = 0.6, the
peak heat release rate doubled for TPI compared to inductive spark. TPI had a burn
duration of 10 ms, compared to a burn duration of 23 ms for inductive spark. This
shows that the ﬂame growth rate in TPI is much faster compared to spark ignition
for φ = 0.6. The HRR at φ = 0.6 for TPI matched closely with stoichiometric HRR
from spark ignition.

Transient plasma discharges lead to increased ionization and dissociation. Previ-
ous studies (Wolk et al. 2013; Cathey et al. 2008) have shown that TPI generates rad-
icals and other electronically excited species over a relatively large volume. Plasma
discharges dissociate O2 to create O which again combines with O2 to produce O3.
We measured LTP generated O3 in desiccated air at different pressure and voltage

Fig. 8.14 a Pressure history and b heat release rate from low-temperature plasma and inductive
spark ignition in stoichiometric and φ = 0.6 propane/air

8 Ozone Added Spark Assisted Compression Ignition

181

Fig. 8.15 The contour plot
of O3 generated by
low-temperature plasma
discharges (10 pulses) in
desiccated air at engine
condition. The cyan line
represents an O3
concentration of 10 ppm

conditions in a 29 cc optically accessible spark calorimeter. Then the estimated O3
concentrations were converted to engine conditions of 0.55 L volume and 1 bar
intake pressure. The contour map of generated O3 at the engine condition is shown
in Fig. 8.15. The cyan line represents 10 ppm of O3. Note that these 10 ppm O3
was generated by a discharge of 10 pulses with the time difference between each
pulse was 100 microseconds. Thus, to reach an O3 concentration of 50 ppm, 5 such
discharges will be necessary. However, the rate of O3 generation decreases at higher
pressure. Sine in-cylinder pressure changes in non-linear fashion during the com-
pression stroke, an optimum pulsing strategy need to be utilized to achieve the target
amount of O3 necessary for end gas auto-ignition.

8.4 Summary

In the present study, performance and emissions characteristics were investigated
for 0–50 ppm O3 added lean SACI operation with two different injection strategies,
(1) partially stratiﬁed: double injection—early (75–90% fuel) and late DI (10–25%
fuel) and (2) homogeneous: single early direct injection (DI) in an optically accessible
single-cylinder research engine. Signiﬁcant ﬁndings are as follows:
• O3 addition stabilized engine combustion relative to comparable conditions with-
out O3 by increasing end gas reactivity. Increased intake O3 addition—and hence
late-cycle O—led to a corresponding increase in end gas LTHR that accelerated
the onset of HTHR.

• The addition of O3 was most useful for the lowest engine speeds due to the longer
cycle residence times for kinetically controlled heat release to occur. The impact
of O3 addition decreased with increased engine speed due to shorter residence
times available for auto-ignition.

182

S. Biswas and I. Ekoto

• Increased fueling fractions in the late second injection likewise increased the
strength of the early deﬂagration, which generally increased combustion stability
but led to rapid increases in NOx emissions.

• Lower loads were more challenging to achieve in O3 enhanced homogeneous
SACI relative to partially stratiﬁed SACI. However, homogeneous SACI approach
generated higher efﬁciencies and lesser emissions.

• A simpliﬁed thermodynamic analysis method was developed to calculate the
energy deﬁcit that used either the integrated heat release up to the onset of LTHR or
the difference in the end gas temperatures for cycles with and without combustion.
Both methods exhibited excellent agreement with each other. For the conditions
examined here, roughly 10–40 J of thermal energy was needed from the early
deﬂagration to lead to optimized end gas autoignition. Higher speed and lower
load conditions required the most energy due to the shorter residence times and
leaner end gas mixtures.

The present study demonstrates that the best way to dramatically reduce NOx
emissions is to eliminate the late second injection altogether. O3 addition helps with
this by increasing the strength of end gas LTHR reactions and thus requiring a weaker
bowl deﬂagration. While further reductions of second injection fueling fraction are
likely possible with even higher O3 concentrations, this is like not sufﬁcient to entirely
eliminate the second injection. It would be desirable to have a strong deﬂagration
without the second injection, which highlights how the current strategy could be
augmented by some form of the advanced ignition system (e.g., pre-chamber, low-
temperature plasma).
Emissions of PM2.5-Bound Trace Metals
from On-Road Vehicles: An Assessment
of Potential Health Risk
Abstract The present study elucidates on PM2.5 (particle aerodynamic diameter
≤ 2.5 μm) bound trace metals characterization from on-road light-duty vehicles dur-
ing on-road operation and their health risk assessment for adults and children. The
vehicles assessed in present work included 4-wheelers passenger cars with a different
age group of Bharat Stage (BS) II, III, and IV and different fuel type [diesel, gaso-
line and compressed natural gas (CNG)]. To understand the particle losses, particle
formation, and homogenous mixing, ﬁrstly, a new portable dilution system (PDS)
was designed for diluting the exhaust with adequate aerosol formation and growth,
and evaluated beforehand under controlled condition in laboratory for diesel vehicles
over a wide range of dilution ratio (30:1, 60:1, and 90:1). For on-road experiments,
a PDS, a heated duct, a gas analyzer, an exhaust velocity probe, a temperature, and
relative humidity probe were mounted on Aerosol Emissions Measurement System
(AEMS) and it was towed behind the vehicle. Total 46 experiments were performed
on a mixed trafﬁc route in Delhi city, and PM2.5 mass was collected on Teﬂon and
quartz ﬁlter using multi-stream PM2.5 sampler. Total 17 trace metals (Al, Ag, As, Ba,
Co, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Se, Sr, Ti, V, and Zn) were characterized on Teﬂon
ﬁlters using Induced Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS). Out of these
metals, the non-carcinogenic and carcinogenic risks for adults and children were
calculated for 5 metals namely Cr, Mn, Ni, Zn, and Pb. Trace metals concentration
was highest in exhaust emitted from 4W-diesel followed by 4W-gasoline, 3W-CNG,
and 2W-gasoline. Trace metals such as Cr, Mn, Ni, Zn, and Pb were present in high
amount (25.2 ± 8.6 μg m−3). The carcinogenic risk from Cr was considerably higher
than tolerable risk (10−4), while the risk from other metals such as Ni, As, Cd, and
Pb was within the range of safe (10−6) and tolerable (10−4) level. Overall, the human
health risks associated with the exposure to PM2.5 emitted from gasoline and CNG
vehicles were higher than that from diesel vehicle. This estimated risk in this work
can help in reﬁning the burden of disease and crafting policy to help reduce the
exposures. This study is limited only for PM2.5 bound trace metals and associated
health risk from on-road vehicle emissions. However, poly-aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs), perﬂuorinated compounds (PFCs), and semi-volatile compounds in vehicu-
lar exhaust can also impose a severe risk to human health which needs to be assessed
to evaluate combined risk.
Keywords On-road vehicle · PM2.5 · Particle-bound metals · Non-carcinogenic
risk · Delhi

9.1 Introduction

On-road vehicle emissions are the signiﬁcant source of air pollution especially in
urban cities of India and expected rapid growth due to economic growth in India
(Reynolds et al. 2011; Grieshop et al. 2012). Several toxicological studies have
discussed public-health associated problems such as cardiovascular, cellular inﬂam-
mation, and lung cancer risk on exposure to exhaust particle emission from on-road
vehicles (Xu et al. 2013; Schwarze et al. 2013; Vreeland et al. 2016; Geller et al.
2006; Grahame et al. 2010). Recent studies have been also found that the inhalation
of ﬁne particles (PM2.5) emitted from vehicles initiate several biochemical reactions
within the body (Verma et al. 2015; Lovett 2018) leading to oxidative stress. Vehicle
emission contains polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHS), metals, carbonaceous
constituents [black carbon (BC), organic carbon (OC)], inorganic acidic species
(chloride, and nitrate), and complex organic compounds. However, these chemical
species, especially particle-bound transition metals, have associated with oxidative
stress in the human respiratory tract by reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Zhou et al.
2018; Kelly 2003; Betha and Balasubramanian 2011, 2013). Some studies have inves-
tigated particle-bound PAHs and trace metal emissions of diesel, gasoline, biodiesel
vehicles using engine dynamometer in controlled laboratory conditions and during
on-road operation (Betha and Balasubramanian 2011, 2013; Betha et al. 2012; Shukla
et al. 2017a, b; Alves et al. 2015a). Some other studies have described the chemical
composition of exhaust emission from diesel and gasoline vehicles in the European
and USA ﬂeets (Alves et al. 2015a, b). However, the particle-bound composition of
European and USA ﬂeets could be different as compared to Indian ﬂeets, possibly
due to driving conditions, road characteristics, vehicle age and category, fuel, lubri-
cant, after-treatment technology, etc. (Jaiprakash and Habib 2017, 2018). Vehicle
emission characteristics of particle-bound metals via chassis dynamometer and in
tunnel experiment do not reﬂect the real on-road driving conditions. Therefore, in
recent years, the on-road measurement directly from the tail pipe has been greatly
emphasized by researchers (Wu et al. 2015, 2016). In this regard, the challenge
involves in simulating the atmospheric process of gas-to-particle partitioning before
collection of particle mass. Earlier studies have used a portable dilution system (PDS)
and portable emission measurement system (PEMS) to carry out vehicle emission
measurement under real driving conditions (Wu et al. 2015, 2016; Wang et al. 2014).
However, the studies using a PDS to measure the emissions from vehicles during

9 Emissions of PM2.5-Bound Trace Metals from On-Road Vehicles …

191

on-road operation are limited (Hao et al. 2018), in addition, the characterization of
particle-bound trace metals and their associated risk have not been reported in the
Indian context. Therefore, this study focuses on emissions of particle-bound metals
from diesel, gasoline, and CNG powered vehicles during on-road operation of mixed
trafﬁc route in Delhi city. In present work, a new Aerosol Emission Measurement
System (AEMS) was used as detailed in Jaiprakash and Habib (2017). The non-
carcinogenic and excess cancer risk (ECR) of particle-bound metals were estimated
and presented here.

9.2 Materials and Methods

Portable dilution system (PDS) simulates the rapid cooling and dilution of exhaust a
happens in the atmosphere to achieve complete gas-to-particle partitioning. The par-
tial exhaust sample withdraws from a combustion source sampling probe and entrains
into dilution tunnel, where it dilutes rapidly and homogenous with the particle and
VOC free dry air (described as zero air). The dilution allows to lessen the particle
number concentration inside the dilution tunnel and therefore, it avoids unwanted
condensation and nucleation (Betha and Balasubramanian 2011; Betha et al. 2012;
Lipsky and Robinson 2005, 2006) of the particles. In the present work, a PDS was
designed following Lipsky and Robinson (2005). For on-ﬁled measurement of any
combustion sources, new PDS was subjected to reduce their compactness, incessant
zero air and power supply.

9.2.1 Design of Portable Dilution System (PDS)

Figure 9.1 shows a schematic diagram of PDS, which contains 0.4 m length, and
0.1 m-diameter stainless steel dilution tunnel, 0.06 m diameter and 1.0 m length
stainless duct, a heated stainless sampling probe, zero air assembly, and power supply
with inverter (3 kW) and four 12 V batteries for continuous power supply for an
hour. The heated sampling probe and the duct is maintained at a temperature above
(~10 °C) the sample exhaust temperature (~150 °C) to avoid the thermophoresis and
condensation losses (Zhang and McMurry 1992; Baron and Willeke 1993). The zero-
air generation system comprised of a ﬁlter holder, an activated carbon cartridge, and
molecular sieves to remove particles, volatile organic compounds, and the moisture,
respectively, and the atmospheric air is stored in a reservoir (volume of 40 L) to
produce continuous zero air. A dual-stage tower automatically regenerates zero air
by the principle of Pressure Swing Adsorption (PSA), where the total pressure of
assembly “swings” between high pressure in feed and low pressure in regeneration
(Ruthven et al. 1994; Rezaei and Webley 2009). The particle sampling probe extracts
a portion of the exhaust sample directly from the exhaust tailpipe by the principle of
eductor technique. In eductor technique, the pressurized zero air ﬂows at high speed

192

J. Prakash and G. Habib

Fig. 9.1 Set-up of portable dilution sampling (PDS) system containing duct, dilution tunnel, particle
sampling probe, zero air assembly, multi-stream particle sampler, and power supply unit

around the tip of the sampling probe and creates a negative pressure zone which draws
the sample exhaust inside the probe without applying any control device (Harsha et al.
2019). The exhaust sample ﬂow (~0.2–1 LPM) was induced in the sampling probe
by maintaining zero air. In order to achieve the maximum dilution ratio of 100:1 (i.e.
volume of zero air ÷ volume of sample exhaust) and complete aerosol formation and
growth to stabilize in 3 s, the dilution tunnel of 3 L capacity was designed. The total
six sampling ports were used to measuring a particle, number particle, diluted CO2,
moisture, temperature, at the downstream of dilution tunnel. One port was ﬁxed to
measure the PM2.5 particles using a multi-stream PM2.5 sampler.

9.2.2 Multi-stream Aerosol Sampler

A multi-stream PM2.5 sampler, which consists of an AIHL aluminium cyclone and
two dual stage and two single stage ﬁlter holders (Habib et al. 2008; Venkataraman
et al. 2005). The conﬁguration details of multi-stream PM2.5 sampler is shown in
Fig. 9.1b. This sampler provides the collection of particles with cut off aerodynamic
diameter smaller than 2.5 μm at 20.2 LPM. The two ﬁlter holders were used to
collect PM2.5 mass on a quartz ﬁlter (Pall ﬂex 2500 QAT-UP; 47 mm, Tissue quartz)
and another 2 ﬁlter holders were used to collect PM2.5 on Teﬂon membrane ﬁlters
(47 mm, 2-mm pore size, Whatmann Corp., PA, USA). The ﬂow rates of these ﬁlter
holders are maintained by critical oriﬁces (6.3, 4.5, 5.0, and 4.4 LPM) (Fig. 9.1b). In
dual-stage of ﬁlter, the backup quartz ﬁlter was used to collect the artifacts, which

9 Emissions of PM2.5-Bound Trace Metals from On-Road Vehicles …

193

were determined by OC-EC analysis using Thermal optical transmittance (TOT)
analyzer.

9.2.3 Evaluation of Dilution Tunnel

9.2.3.1 Gas-to-Particle Conversion

The new particle formation from gas to particle partitioning during the dilution favors
the absorption of volatile organic compounds and adsorption on pre-existing inert
components such as elemental carbon and minerals (sorptive material). The residence
time is the time the aerosol remains in the dilution tunnel before collection, it is
calculated as the ratio of the volume of dilution tunnel to total ﬂow rate (Eq. 9.1).
For dilution tunnel experiments the residence time of 2–3 s (Lipsky and Robinson
2005) and the ratio of residence time to phase equilibrium time greater than 4 are
recommended to accomplish complete gas-to-particle partitioning for particles of
size few 0.03–1.0 μm. The phase equilibrium time is deﬁned as the time required
by supersaturated cool vapour phase species to form new particles or to condense on
existing organic particles. The residence time and phase equilibrium time scale (τ)
were estimated using the following equations (Eqs. 9.1–9.4):

τ =

2π D

fn(Kn) =

t =

Vdt
Qex + Qair
1
d p N

(cid:4)

(cid:2)

fn(Kn)

(cid:3)
d p
1 + Kn
1 + 1.71Kn + 1.33Kn2
Kn = 2λ
d p

(9.1)

(9.2)

(9.3)

(9.4)

where, Vdt is the volume of dilution tunnel in (m3), Qex and Qair are the ﬂow rate
(m3 s−1) of exhaust sample and zero air. d p is the count median diameter of particle,
N is the total number of concentration, D is the diffusion coefﬁcient for the organic
vapor in air (assumed 5 × 10−6 m2 s−1), fn(Kn) is the correction factor accounting
for non-continuous effects, Kn is the Knudsen number, and λ is mean free path
(assumed 0.065 × 10−6 m).

The phase equilibrium time for 99% condensation of volatiles was estimated by
assuming heterogeneous condensation of vapor phase species in a typical particle
number distribution in the dilution tunnel reported for diesel vehicles (Venkatara-
man et al. 2005; Matti Maricq and Maricq 2007). The size distribution was used
in Eqs. (9.1)–(9.4) to determine the phase equilibrium time (τ) at different dilution
ratios 40–70. The residence and phase equilibrium time at different dilution ratios

194

J. Prakash and G. Habib

were estimated in the range of 4.3–7.5 and 0.32–0.56 s, respectively. Thus, the ratio
of t/τ was calculated in the range of 8–23, which indicates that complete gas to
particle partitioning can be achieved at dilution ratios between 40 and 70.

9.2.3.2 Particle Losses and Homogenous Mixing

The determination of the particle loss of PDS was evaluated using sodium chloride
NaCl (NaCl; 5 mg L−1), which has polydisperse particle size range (20–600 nm). The
schematic experimental set-up is shown in Fig. 9.2. The aerosol is generated from a
20 mL solution of NaCl using an aerosol generator (Model 3076, TSI Particle Instru-
mentation Inc., St. Paul, MN, USA) to generate 20–600 nm particle at 0.3 mL min−1
ﬂow rate. NaCl generated particles withdraws in the dilution tunnel using sampling
probe with 0.6 LPM by maintaining zero air ﬂow at 18, 36, and 54 LPM, to achieve
dilution ratios 30:1, 60:1, and 90:1, respectively. Afterward, a scanning mobility
particle sizer (SMPS, Model 3936, TSI Inc., USA) containing differential mobility
analyser (DMA, Model 3081, TSI Inc., USA), and a condensation particle counter
(CPC, Model 3775, TSI Inc., USA) is used to measure the particle size distribution
at upstream and downstream of dilution tunnel. The DMA gives a particle size in
the range of 14–600 nm and it is scanned over the 135 s. Before the experiment,
the system was operated with zero air and observed particle concentration in SMPS.
Initially, the experiments were conducted with NaCl solution which is deliberated as
without dilution tunnel (WODT), and then with dilution tunnel (WDT) (Fig. 9.2).

The number size distributions were recorded for WODT and WDT with three sets
of experiments at the dilution ratios 30:1, 60:1, and 90:1, respectively. These particle

Fig. 9.2 Schematic diagram of the experimental setup used for measuring number-based particle
loss in portable dilution system

9 Emissions of PM2.5-Bound Trace Metals from On-Road Vehicles …

195

size experiments are subjected to determine particle losses in the dilution tunnel.
The percentage in difference between number concentration in WDT at dilution
ratios and WODT were observed 6, 14, and 19%, respectively. The geometric mean
diameters (GMD) were consistent 107 ± 4, 106 ± 4, and 104 ± 4 nm irrespective to
dilution ratios implied that dilution did not affect the nucleation process. Similarly,
the percentage difference between volume concentration in WDT at different dilution
ratios with respect to WODT was found to be 17, 16, and 20% which shown few
particle losses inside the dilution tunnel. Theoretically, thermophoresis losses were
also calculated using the following equations [Eqs. (9.5)–(9.7)] (Hinds 1982):

T her mophor etic velocit y (Vth) =

for d p > λ

(9.5)

−3ηCc H ∇T
2ρgT

where

(cid:5)

H =

1
(cid:3)
1 + 6λ/d p

(cid:4)

(cid:6)⎛
⎝

Ka/K p
(cid:3)

+ 4.4
(cid:4)

Ka/K p

1 + 2
(cid:13)
1 − ex p ∗

(cid:9)

(cid:10)

⎞

(cid:10)

⎠

λ
d p
(cid:9)
λ
+ 8.8
d p
(cid:14)
−π Dt L Vth

Q

(cid:15)(cid:16)

(9.6)

(9.7)

Thermophoresis losses (%) = 100 ∗

where η = viscosity (PaS); Cc = slip correction factor, H = Thermophoretic coefﬁ-
(cid:4)
; T = Exhaust
cient; ∇T = Temperature gradient (K/m); ρ
temperature; λ = mean free path (m); d p = particle diameter (μm); K a = air thermal
conductivity (W/m*K), assumed 0.026 (W/m*K); K p = particle thermal conduc-
tivity (W/m*K), assumed 0.26 (W/m*K); Dt = dilution tunnel diameter (m; given
0.1 m); L = tube length (m, given = 0.4 m); Q = gas ﬂow rate (m3/s).

= gas density

(cid:3)
kg/m3

g

For particle mean diameter of 20, 50, and 130 nm, thermophoresis losses were
estimated as <0.5% for diesel and gasoline engine. The particle and number size
distribution was reported in previous studies (Gupta et al. 2010; Agarwal et al. 2015a),
and adopted for calculating the thermophoresis losses.

The homogenous mixing reduces the possibility of wall losses in the dilution
tunnel. To conﬁrm homogenous mixing in dilution tunnel, PDS was performed con-
trolled laboratory experiments using a medium duty diesel vehicle (INNOVA, BS-
III, 2400 cc) on chassis dynamometer facility at Manesar Gurgaon. Only 4 exper-
iments were planned due to high utilization rent and limited availability of chassis
dynamometer. A small portion of the exhaust sample was carried from the tail-pipe
using heated stainless steel (SS) sampling probe. The zero air (dilution air) ﬂows at
high pressure around the tip of sampling probe, which mixed rapidly and co-axially
with exhaust sample in the dilution tunnel to attain adequate aerosol formation which
occurs in the atmosphere.

For mixing, CO2 concentrations were monitored at four ports such as 100, 200,
300 and 400 cm from the upstream of the dilution tunnel and also monitored at radial
distances across the dilution tunnel. The CO2 concentration showed insigniﬁcantly at

196

J. Prakash and G. Habib

four ports along the distance of the dilution tunnel. The low coefﬁcient of variances
(4–10%) were observed around mean CO2 concentration (1100 ± 60, 800 ± 40, 700
± 30, and 400 ± 40 ppm at dilution ratios 30:1, 60:1, 90:1, and 120:1, respectively)
indicate rapid and homogeneous mixing inside the dilution tunnel.

To conﬁrm particle loss, PM2.5 particle mass were collected on quartz ﬁlters using a
multi-stream aerosol sampler and examined for elemental carbon (EC) using thermal
optical transmittance (TOT model DRI 2001) analyzer. The EC mass emission factors
(g kg−1) were consistent at different dilution ratios (30, 60, 90, and 120), which
indicated insigniﬁcant particle losses in the dilution with the increase in dilution ratio.
These results are discussed earlier and detailed in Jaiprakash et al. (2016). However,
a declining trend in PM2.5 emission factor was observed with increasing dilution
ratio, possibly due to decreasing particulate phase OC emission and increasing gas
phase OC concentration, this implied that at high dilution ratios (>70:1) the reduction
in residence time (less than 2 s) limit the gas-to-particle partitioning. Therefore, the
dilution ratios between 30 and 70 were found appropriate for complete gas-to-particle
partitioning, and further, these dilution ratios were used for on-road experiments.

9.2.4 Aerosol Emission Measurement System

For on-road experiments, a heated duct, a portable dilution system (PDS), multi-
stream PM2.5 sampler, a gas analyzer, an exhaust velocity probe, a temperature,
and relative humidity probe is mounted on Aerosol Emissions Measurement System
(AEMS) behind passenger cars (Fig. 9.3). The duct was tightly ﬁxed to the vehi-
cle tailpipe using a stainless steel coupler with silicon gasket to avoid intrusion of

Fig. 9.3 Schematic experimental set up of aerosol emission measurement system

9 Emissions of PM2.5-Bound Trace Metals from On-Road Vehicles …

197

background air inside the duct. It should be noted that AEMS was dragged by 4-
wheelers, therefore the on-road experiments were considered as under full engine
load condition. In order to assess the effect of drag, three separate experiments were
conducted with 4W-diesel vehicle [Bharat stage (BS)-IV 1.3 L, vehicle model post-
2010] by removing the AEMS and PDS and other parts mounted in the backside of
the vehicle and operate with same trafﬁc route. The differences in PM2.5 emissions
between without AEMS and with AEMS were 20% for the same vehicle on the same
route during the same trafﬁc hours. This difference can be attributed to the drag on
emissions due to towing the AEMS behind the vehicle.

For on-road experiment, 4W-passenger (4Ws) were chosen of the different fuel
type such as diesel, gasoline, and CNG and various vintage age groups (post-2000,
post-2005, and post-2010) considering to Bharat Stage (BS-II, III, and IV) norms and
different fuel category such as compressed natural gas (CNG) for aerosol emission
measurements. All vehicles speciﬁcation of tested vehicles is tabulated in Table 9.1
and discussed in the next section.

In BS-II and BS-III of diesel vehicles, the after-treatment devices were equipped
with exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) which does not have any special system for
conversion of NOX and particulate matter (PM). In BS-IV, diesel vehicles engine was
improved with turbocharger and after treatment device as diesel oxidation catalyst
(DOC). A turbocharger is used for better air to fuel mixing for complete internal
combustion and beneﬁts to the oxidation process of DOC which oxidize CO, HC,
and some of the soluble organic fraction (SOF) of diesel particulate matter but it is
vain for soot particles (Dutkiewicz et al. 2009). In present study, tested Innova (post-
2000, 2.4 L, BS-II), Swift Dzire (post-2012, 1.2 L, BS-IV) and Ertiga (post-2010, 1.3
L, BS-IV) diesel vehicles were equipped with common rail direct ignition (CRDI)
engine, whereas Indica (post-2005, 1.4 L, BS-III) diesel vehicle equipped with direct
ignition or compressed ignition (CI) (Table 9.1). For gasoline, old engines of Zen
vehicle (post-2000, 1.0 L, BS-II) was equipped with spark ignition (SI) and new
vehicles Swift Dzire (post-2005, 1.2 L, BS-III) and i10 (post-2005, 1.2 L, BS-IV)
were found with multi-point fuel ignition (MPFI) (Table 9.1). In SI engines, the spark
plug is used to adapt the combustion whereas CRDI engines are the direct injection of
the fuel into the cylinders of a diesel engine from a single, common line. In gasoline-
powered vehicles, the after-treatment device comprises three-way catalytic (TWC)
and EGR. The function of TWC to reduce the Nitrogen Oxides (NOX) to N2 and O2,
and to react CO and HC, and converted into CO2 and water (H2O). In 3Ws-CNG,
an old and new vehicle was found with SI and MPFI engines, which were equipped
with carburetor and TWC as after-treatment devices. This catalyst converts all three
harmful pollutants to harmless species (Haywood and Ramaswamy 1998).

Overall, nine 4W-passenger cars [4 diesel + 3 gasoline + 2 CNG, every 3 sets of
the experiment] were performed for on-road experiments. Before each experiment,
the vehicle engine is at rest for half an hour prior to being started [i.e. no vehicle
soak time], therefore, in the present work, the emissions were considered as hot start
condition only. The qualiﬁed drivers and a ﬁxed trafﬁc route of 10 km for ~45 min
were used for on-road experiments in Delhi city. The trafﬁc route was containing low
and mixed trafﬁc regions including 6 trafﬁc signals. The vehicle speed was monitored

198

J. Prakash and G. Habib

Table 9.1 Speciﬁcation of tested vehicles for on-road experiments using AEMS

Vehicle
model

Bharat
stage norms

Year

Engine
technology

Engine
capacity (L)

BS-II

2004 CRDI

BS-III

2007 CI

EGR

BS-IV

2012 CRDI

BS-IV

2014 CRDI

BS-II

2001

SI

BS-III

2008 MPFI

BS-IV

2010 MPFI

BS-III

2006

SI

BS-IV

2010 MPFI

BS-II

2008

SI

BS-III

2015 MPFI

Innova (N
= 3)
Indica (N =
4)

Swift Dzire
(N = 3)
Ertiga (N =
6)

4W-gasoline
Zen (N =
3)

Swift Dzire
(N = 3)
i10 (N = 3)

4W-CNG
Optra (N =
3)
i10 (N = 3)

3W-CNG
Bajaj (N =
3)
Bajaj (N =
3)

2W-gasoline

Caliber (N
= 3)
Activa (N
= 3)
Activa (N
= 3)

After-
treatment
devices
EGRa

EGR +
DOC
EGR +
DOC

TWC +
EGR
TWC +
EGRb
TWC +
EGRc

TWC +
EGR
TWC +
EGRc

Carburetor
+ TWC
Carburetor
+ TWC

2.4

1.4

1.2

1.3

1.0

1.2

1.2

1.2

1.2

0.8

0.8

Odometer
reading
(km)

185,032

86,384

128,454

33,127

127,294

85,454

46,550

114,944

46,956

48,543

14,817

28,543

2973

BS-I

2001

SI

Carburetor

0.12

47,709

BS-II

2009

SI

BS-III

2014

SI

Carburetor
+ TWC
Carburetor
+ TWC

0.12

0.12

Note N no. of the experiment; CNG compressed natural gas; BS Bharat stage; EGR exhaust gas
recirculation; TC turbocharger; DOC diesel oxidation catalyst; TWC three-way catalytic converter
aEGR with cooler for diesel vehicle
bTWC + EGR with oxygen sensor heating capabilities for cold-start operation
cTWC + EGR with coupler catalyst

9 Emissions of PM2.5-Bound Trace Metals from On-Road Vehicles …

199

with pocket global positioning monitor (GPS, GarminModel 60 CSx). The vehicle
speed ranged between 09 and 55 km h−1 with a mean speed of 25 km h−1 in Delhi
city.

For 2Ws-gasoline and 3Ws-CNG, experiments were carried out on a stationary
position by suspending the wheels with the help of jack. With the limitations of
road friction and drag, 2Ws-gasoline and 3Ws-CNG vehicles were considered to be
performed under no-load condition. In the present work, the driving cycle (108 s =
one cycle) was followed Modiﬁed Indian Driving Cycle (MIDC) reported in ARAI
(2008) it was repeated 20 times (total 10 cycles; 1080 s = 36 min) for the collection
of adequate PM2.5 mon the ﬁlter for chemical speciation analysis. Hence, the con-
centrations of 2Ws-gasoline and 3Ws-CNG were compared with earlier work and
performed on engine dynamometer or stationary condition (Agarwal et al. 2015b;
Aslam et al. 2006; Machacon et al. 2000).

Appropriate dilution of exhaust should be maintained during the measurement to
accomplish complete gas-to-particle partitioning. In this work, the dilution ratio was
calculated as the ratio of CO2 concentration in the undiluted exhaust inside the duct
and the diluted exhaust inside the dilution tunnel. The dilution ratio around 39–69 was
found appropriate for complete gas-to-particle partitioning in separate experiments
conducted with diesel vehicle operated on a chassis dynamometer under controlled
laboratory conditions as discussed in Sect. 9.2.3.2. Signiﬁcant particle losses were
observed at the DRs lower than 39 and higher than 69. Therefore, during on-road
experiments, the dilution ratio was maintained around DR 55 ± 11 by regulating the
zero air. Out of 49 experiments 46 were ﬁnally selected based on appropriate dilution
ratio, and rest three experiments were rejected due to high dilution ratio.

9.2.5 Gravimetric and Trace Metal Analysis

For gravimetric analysis, the Teﬂon ﬁlters were conditioned under controlled tem-
perature (25 °C) and relative humidity (RH; 50%) for 24 h before and after the
sampling. The before and after sampling, the ﬁlters were weighed using a microbal-
ance (Sartorious, CPA2P-F). Gravimetrically PM2.5 concentrations were calculated
by the difference between post and pre-weight of the ﬁlters and dividing by sampled
exhaust volume. Six Teﬂon ﬁlters (3 ﬁeld + 3 dynamic) were considered as blank
and subjected to same pre-and post-conditioning protocol.

For trace metal analysis, half of the Teﬂon ﬁlter was cut into several pieces and
kept in a beaker. Twenty millilitre (ml) nitric acid (70% Supra Pure, Merck GR
Grade) was added into a beaker and was heated for ~2 h at 180 °C until the nitric
acid gets evaporate. The remaining amount was ﬁltered with 0.22 μm MilliPore
PTFE ﬁlter and mixed Milli-Q water to make up to 100 ml and then it is subjected
to further metals analysis (Gupta et al. 2011; Herlekar et al. 2012). Seventeen trace
metals (Al, Ag, As, Ba, Co, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Se, Sr, Ti, V, and Zn) were
analyzed using Inductively Coupled Plasma–Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS, Agilent,
7900). The trace metals mass on dynamic and ﬁeld blank ﬁlters were found in the

200

J. Prakash and G. Habib

range of 0.2–22% of the mass is determined on samples. The blank ﬁlter mass was
used to correct the trace element concentration.

9.2.6 Human Health Risk Estimation

The human health risk was assessed based on average mass concentrations of trace
metals from on-road experiments, which is especially useful in understanding the
health hazard associated with inhalation exposure to PM2.5 emitted from diesel, gaso-
line, and CNG vehicles. During on-road emissions, the exhaust gets rapid dilution
and dispersion after exiting the tail pipe. Therefore, human exposure should be cal-
culated for ambient concentration after dilution. Similarly, in the present work, on an
average 55 ± 11 times diluted particle collected on ﬁlter papers and detected metals
concentrations and used for health risk estimates. Since inhalation is typically the
main path to direct exposure to PM2.5-bound metals. Therefore, this work examined
the health risks associated with particle-bound trace metals over inhalation only.

9.2.6.1 Average Daily Dose

In the present work, the average daily dose (ADD) was estimated for particle-bound
metals for inhalation route only, and following Singh and Gupta (2016). The PM2.5
exposure was estimated in terms of lifetime average daily dose (ADDinh in mg kg−1
day−1). This can be expressed as follows:

AD Dinh = C × I R × C F × E F × E D

BW × ATn

(9.8)

where C is the concentration of the particle-bound metals (reported in μg m−3), IR
is the inhalation rate, CF is a correction factor as 0.001, EF is the exposure frequency
(days year−1), ED is the exposure duration during lifetime (in years), BW is the body
weight and ATn is the average time (in days). All values were assumed according
to the Human Health Evaluation Manual (Part A and F) (USEPA 2004, 2009), and
given in Table 9.2.

9.2.6.2 Non-carcinogenic Risk

Hazard quotient (HQ) and Hazard index (HI) are used to quantitatively represent the
non-carcinogenic risk from species or pollutants. The hazard quotient (HQ) can be
determined by Eq. (9.9) using average daily dose (ADDinh in mg kg−1 day−1) and
reference exposure level (R f Dinh) for the inhabitants taken from USEPA (2016a).

9 Emissions of PM2.5-Bound Trace Metals from On-Road Vehicles …

201

Table 9.2 Parameters and reference value used for determining non-carcinogenic and carcinogenic
risk due to inhalation

Parameter

Deﬁnition

Units

Value

Children

Adult

m3 day−1
days year−1
years

kg

days
h day−1

10

350

6

15

10

20

350

24

70

10

365*ED

365*ED

inh (mg kg−1 day−1)

dIUR (μg m−3)−1

Trace metals
Cr(VI)$
Cu

IRa
EFb
EDa
BWb
ATa
n
ET*

Mn

Ni

Pb

Zn

As

Cd

V

Inhalation rate

Exposure frequency

Exposure duration

Body weight

Average time

Exposure time
RfDc
2.86E−05
4.02E−02
1.43E−05
3.52E−03
3.52E−03
3.01E−01
3.0E−04
1.0E−03
7.0E−03

aUSEPA (2011)
bUSEPA (2013)
cUSEPA (2016b)
dUSEPA (2016b)
*Exposure time is used in the present study 2 h day−1
$Cr(VI) concentration is 1/7 of total Cr

0.012

–

–

–

–

0.00024

0.000012

0.0043

0.0018

H Q = AD Dinh
R f Dinh

(9.9)

The HQ ≤ 1 indicates no adverse health effects and HQ > 1 which describes likely
to non-carcinogenic effects (USEPA 2016a). Hazard Index (HI) is the summation
of all (HQ) estimated for different species calculated using Eq. (9.10) following
Zheng et al. (2010). If the value of HI ≤ 1, it is ideally believed that there is no
non-carcinogenic risk, while HI > 1, it means there is a signiﬁcant chance of non-
carcinogenic risk.

H I =

H Q1 + H Q2 + H Q3 · · · H Qi ;

i = 1st to nth element

(9.10)

i=n(cid:17)

i=1

202

J. Prakash and G. Habib

9.2.6.3 Carcinogenic Risk

The carcinogenic risk (in terms of Excess cancer risk; ECR) can be assessed and it
is deﬁned as the incremental probability of emerging cancer cell due to exposure of
carcinogen over a lifetime. The ECR can be articulated as the following equation:

EC R = C × E F × E T × E D × I U R

AT

(11)

where C is the average concentration of particle-bound metals (in μg m−3), EF is
the exposure frequency (days year−1), ET is the exposure time (2 h day−1), ED is
the exposure duration (assumed to be 24 and 6 years for adults and children), ATn
is average time [(ATn = years × 365 days × 24 h day−1); assumed 70 and 15 years
for adults and children]. Inhalation Unit Risk [IUR in (μg/m3)−1] of particle-bound
metals (Table 9.2) were obtained from USEPA with the Integrated Information Risk
System (https://www.epa.gov/iris) of USEPA.

The range of ECR has been reported by the USEPA (2009) for public health, and
suggested The ECR value < 10−6; it is ideally recommended as safe and ECR ~ 10−4
is considered as a tolerable risk, while ECR value > 10−4, it means there is signiﬁcant
high risk. In present work, the ECR was calculated only for Pb, Cr, and Ni which are
well known inhaling carcinogens.

9.3 Results and Discussion

9.3.1 Trace Metals Concentration

Total 17 trace metals (Al, Ag, As, Ba, Co, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Se, Sr,
Ti, V, and Zn) were detected, whereas selenium (Se) was found in NAs or below
detection limit (BDL) in on-road vehicles experiments, while 28 samples out of 46,
Aluminium (Al) was detected as BDL. Interestingly, trace metal concentrations were
highest from 4W-CNG (76 ± 4 μg m−3) followed by 3W-CNG (62.5 ± 15.4 μg m−3),
2W-gasoline (60 ± 21 μg m−3), 4W gasoline (57 ± 16 μg m−3), and were lowest
from 4W-diesel (56 ± 8 μg m−3) (Fig. 9.4). It is noteworthy that the concentrations
of all trace metals except Fe, Zn, Al, and Pb in present work were close to previous
values (3–10 μg m−3) reported in the previous work (Geller et al. 2006; Alves et al.
2015a; ARAI 2008; Schauer et al. 2002).

The major trace metals (Fe, Zn, Al, and Pb) were higher compared to previously
reported values (40–200 μg m−3) from diesel and biodiesel (Betha and Balasub-
ramanian 2011, 2013). The diesel fuel and lubricant oil composition are examined
by Agarwal et al. (2011) which shows diesel and lubricant oil contain high Ca, Zn,
Mg, Ni and Fe in Indian fuel and it could be the possible reason which possibly due
to in high concentration of these particle-bound metals in the 4Ws-diesel vehicle.

9 Emissions of PM2.5-Bound Trace Metals from On-Road Vehicles …

203

BS II
BS III
BS IV
BS IV

BS II
BS III
BS III

BS II
BS III
BS IV

(a) 4-wheelers-Diesel

(b) 4-Wheelers-Gasoline

(c) 2-Wheelers-Gasoline

)

3

 

m-
g
µ
(
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
C

)

3
-

 

m
g
µ
(
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
C

)

3

 

m-
g
µ
(
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
C

)
3
-

 

m
g
µ
(
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
C

100.0
80.0

60.0

40.0

20.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
100.0

80.0

60.0

40.0

20.0
5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0
100.0
80.0
60.0
40.0
20.0
5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0
100.0
80.0
60.0
40.0
20.0
5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

(d) 4-Wheelers-CNG & 3-Wheelers-CNG

BS III (4W)
BS IV (4W)
BS III (3W)
BS IV (3W)

Al

Ti

V

Cr Mn

Fe

Co

Ni

Cu

Zn

As

Sr

Ag

Cd

Ba

Pb

Trace Metals

Fig. 9.4 Trace metals concentration of a 4-wheelers diesel; b 4-wheelers gasoline; c 2-wheelers;
and d 4-wheelers-CNG and 3-wheelers-CNG in tail pipe exhaust

204

J. Prakash and G. Habib

The high amount of Fe and Al can also be originated from abrasion of vehicle parts
such as piston rings, valve, and cylinder liner (Agarwal et al. 2015b; Ulrich et al.
2012) and the aging of catalytic converter (Shukla et al. 2017b; Dallmann et al. 2014;
Kam et al. 2012; Liati et al. 2013). The high load of zinc is mixed in lubricant oil,
and antioxidant and anti-wear additive agent like Zinc-di-alkyl-di-thio phosphate
(ZDDP) is used in lube oil (Alves et al. 2015a; Spikes 2004; Spencer et al. 2006).
Lead (Pb) is originated in the wear of metal alloys and previous studies have been
shown as contamination in diesel fuel (Dallmann et al. 2014; Chakraborty and Gupta
2010; Fabretti et al. 2009; Shukla et al. 2016). In 4Ws-diesel vehicles, the percent-
age of the relative contribution of trace metals were ranged 1.7–9.1%, which was
higher than the range (2–5%) reported in the previous studies (Geller et al. 2006;
ARAI 2009; Kam et al. 2012; Chiang et al. 2012; Kim Oanh et al. 2009; Schauer
et al. 1999). Among 4Ws-gasoline vehicles, the trace metals concentrations were
consistent with the age group of the vehicle (Fig. 9.4b). For 4Ws-gasoline, the con-
centration of trace metals was 2–4 times higher than previous studies (Geller et al.
2006; ARAI 2008; Chiang et al. 2012; Kim Oanh et al. 2009; Schauer et al. 1999)
and they were contributed in the range 2.6–8.3% of PM2.5, whereas the remaining
trace metal contributions ranged between 0.5 and 2.0% of PM2.5 and these ranges
was close to percentage contribution of PM2.5 reported in the literature. The 2Ws-
gasoline showed a decrease in trend with age group of vehicles (see Fig. 9.4c). For
2Ws-gasoline, the percentage contribution of trace metals to PM2.5 emissions was
ranged between 10 and 12% and it was close to values (8–15%) examined by ARAI
(2008, 2009). The percentage contribution of trace metals to PM2.5 emissions from
3W-CNG and 4W-CNG vehicles was observed in the range of 11–13%. Again 4Ws-
CNG the trace metals concentrations were consistent with age, while for 3Ws-CNG,
major metals Fe, Zn, and Ba (Fig. 9.4d) varied with age.

Among trace elements, Fe and Zn have observed the highest percentage contri-
bution to PM2.5 in the range between 0.3 and 0.4%. Fe is mainly originated from
motorised scrape of the engine and its parts (Agarwal et al. 2015a; Liati et al. 2013).
The abundance of Zn is found in fuel as well as lubricant oil (Geller et al. 2006; Alves
et al. 2015a; Agarwal et al. 2015a; Spencer et al. 2006). Other metals such as Cr,
Cu, Fe, and Ni is also released from fuel combustion. Barium [Ba], and their oxides
(barium carbonate) were also used as additives in nozzle and valves of the vehicles
(Vouitsis et al. 2005). Further, Cr and Cd are also produced from engine parts (Alves
et al. 2015a; Shukla et al. 2016; Gangwar et al. 2011; Gangwar et al. 2012) due to a
lack of automated maintenance.

9.3.2 Human Health Risk Assessment

In the present work, 9 trace metals were considered as non-carcinogenic (As, Cd, Cr,
Cu, Mn, Ni, Pb, V, and Zn) and 5 metals (As, Cd, Cr, Ni, and Pb) were considered
as carcinogenic.

9 Emissions of PM2.5-Bound Trace Metals from On-Road Vehicles …

205

9.3.2.1 Average Daily Dose (ADDinh)

The ADDinh of trace metals for adults and children is illustrated in Fig. 9.5a–e. The
mean value of ADDinh for adults and children showed a decreasing trend in the
following order: Zn > Pb > Mn > Cr > Ni > Cu > Cd > As > V for gasoline and CNG

(a) 4-Wheelers-Diesel

Adults

Children

1.0e+0
1.0e-1
1.0e-2
1.0e-3
1.0e-4
1.0e-5
1.0e-6
1.0e-7
1.0e+0
1.0e-1
1.0e-2
1.0e-3
1.0e-4
1.0e-5
1.0e-6
1.0e-7
1.0e+0
1.0e-1
1.0e-2
1.0e-3
1.0e-4
1.0e-5
1.0e-6
1.0e-7
1.0e+0

1.0e-1

1.0e-2

1.0e-3

1.0e-4

1.0e-5

1.0e-6

1.0e-7

1.0e+0

1.0e-1

1.0e-2

1.0e-3

1.0e-4

1.0e-5

1.0e-6

1.0e-7

)

1
-

 

y
a
d
g
k
g
m

 

i

(
 
h
n
D
D
A

)

1
-

 

y
a
d
g
k
 
g
m

i

(
 
h
n
D
D
A

(b) 4-Wheelers-Gasoline

(c) 4-Wheelers-CNG

(d) 3-Wheelers-CNG

(e) 2-Wheelers-Gasoline

V Cr Mn Ni Cu Zn As Cd Pb

V Cr Mn Ni Cu Zn As Cd Pb

Fig. 9.5 Average daily dose (ADDinh) of metals (mg kg−1 day−1) on PM2.5 for adults (left panel)
and children (right panel) from a 4-wheelers diesel; b 4-wheelers gasoline; c 4-wheelers-CNG
2-wheelers; d 3-wheelers-CNG; e 2-wheelers gasoline

206

J. Prakash and G. Habib

vehicles, while the order was found as Zn > Pb > Cr > Ni > Mn > Cu > Cd > V>As for
diesel vehicle. The (ADDinh) of Ni from 4W diesel vehicle was found to be high (~1.8
folds) as compared to (ADDinh) of Ni of gasoline and CNG powered vehicles. The
ADDinh of Cr from gasoline and CNG vehicles were observed high (~1.6 times) as
compared to diesel-powered vehicles. ADDinh of Pb from 4W-CNG was observed to
be 3.4 and 2.0 times higher than 3W-CNG and 2W-Gasoline vehicles. It is important
to note that mean ADDinh for children of metals including Cr, Mn, Ni, Cu, Zn and Pb
in PM2.5 were observed 2 times greater than mean ADDinh for Adults. There was no
signiﬁcant difference (p > 0.05) observed between ADDinh value of 4W Diesel and
4W-Gasoline for V, Cr, Mn, Cu, while signiﬁcant difference (p < 0.05) in ADDinh
was observed for Zn and Pb emitted from 4W Diesel and 4W-CNG.

9.3.2.2 Non-carcinogenic Risk

Non-carcinogenic risk (in terms of HQs and HIs) for children and adults from on-road
diesel, gasoline, and CNG vehicles were shown in Fig. 9.6a–e. The cumulative HIs
from all vehicle were two times higher for children than for adults. Amongst non-
carcinogenic metals, the mean level of HQ for both inhabitants (adults and children)
showed in declining trend: Mn > Cr > Ni > Pb > Cd > Zn > As > Cu > V. For 4W-diesel
vehicles, the HQ of Ni was 2 times higher than 4W-gasoline, 4W-CNG, 3W-CNG,
and 2W-gasoline (p < 0.05) vehicles, however, other particle-bound metals such as
Mn, Cr were found to be 1.6 times lower than 4W-gasoline, 4W-CNG, 3W-CNG,
and 2W-gasoline vehicles. Interestingly, for adults and children, non-carcinogenic
risk (HQ) was close to 1 for As, Cd, Cu, Ni, Pb, and Zn, while the HQs for Cr and Mn
surpassed HQ > 1 (Fig. 9.6a–e) for all type of vehicles. For children, the average HI
values were found in the following order: 3W-CNG > 2W-gasoline > 4W-gasoline
> 4W-CNG > 4W-diesel. This indicates that possible non-carcinogenic risk due to
exposure from vehicle tail pipe, abrasion of vehicle parts, which is a potential threat
to inhabitants working near roads (Fig. 9.6).

This study also compared well with recent studies (Betha and Balasubramanian
2011, 2013) reported the non-carcinogenic risk of particle-bound trace metals of
PM2.5 for stationary diesel engine, biodiesel and ultra-low sulfur diesel (ULSD).
Previous studies estimated HQs, and HIs using chronic daily intake (CDI), therefore
present work also calculated CDI, HQs, and HIs for better comparison with previous
studies. In this study, we also estimated chronic daily intake (CDI), HQs and HIs
and compared with previous studies (Fig. 9.7). The present mean
HQ was close to
previously reported for ULSD engine and 36% (69 and 161 for adults and children)
lower than Bio-diesel (114 and 270 for adults and children) engine for both adults and
children. This shows the severity of risk from toxic metals from tail-pipe emissions
in diesel, gasoline, and CNG vehicles. The composition of fuel and engine type
are resulting in different level of metals emissions and their risk. It should also be
noted that on-road emission and their particle bound metals could be diverse from
stationary and idle tail pipe emission possibly due to the road, trafﬁc, and driver
characteristic.

(cid:2)

9 Emissions of PM2.5-Bound Trace Metals from On-Road Vehicles …

207

(a) 4-Wheelers-Diesel

Adults

Children

1.0e+3
1.0e+2
1.0e+1
1.0e+0
1.0e-1
1.0e-2
1.0e-3
1.0e-4
1.0e+3
1.0e+2
1.0e+1
1.0e+0
1.0e-1
1.0e-2
1.0e-3
1.0e-4
1.0e+3
1.0e+2
1.0e+1
1.0e+0
1.0e-1
1.0e-2
1.0e-3
1.0e-4
1.0e+3
1.0e+2
1.0e+1
1.0e+0
1.0e-1
1.0e-2
1.0e-3
1.0e-4
1.0e+3
1.0e+2
1.0e+1
1.0e+0
1.0e-1
1.0e-2
1.0e-3
1.0e-4

)

Q
H

(
 
t
n
e
i
t
o
u
Q
d
r
a
z
a
H

 

)

Q
H

(
 
t
n
e
i
t
o
u
Q
d
r
a
z
a
H

 

(b) 4-Wheelers-Gasoline

(c) 4-Wheelers-CNG

(e) 2-Wheelers-Gasoline

(d) 3-Wheelers-CNG

Adults

Children

V Cr Mn Ni Cu Zn As Cd Pb HI

V Cr Mn Ni Cu Zn As Cd Pb HI

Trace Metals

Trace Metals

Fig. 9.6 Non-carcinogenic risks of particle-bound metals in PM2.5 for adults (left panel) and
children (right panel) from a 4-wheelers diesel; b 4-wheelers gasoline; c 4-wheelers-CNG; d 3-
wheelers-CNG; e 2-wheelers gasoline

208

1e-2

1e-3

1e-4

)

1
-

g
k
 
g
m

(
 

h
n

i

I

D
C

1e-5

Cr (IV) 

Mn 

HQ-Cr(IV)

HQ-Mn

Σ HQ

Cr (IV) 

Mn 

HQ-Cr(IV)

HQ-Mn

Σ HQ

(a) Adult

(b) Children

1000

1e-2

100

1e-3

10

1e-4

1

1e-5

J. Prakash and G. Habib

1000

100

10

1

 
t
n
e
i
t
o
u
Q
d
r
a
z
a
H

 

4 W -Diesel
4 W -C N G
4 W -G asoline

3 W -C N G
2 W -G asoline

U L S D

Bio-Diesel

4 W -Diesel
4 W -G asoline

4 W -C N G

2 W -G asoline
3 W -C N G

U L S D

Bio-Diesel

Present Study

(2011 and 2013)

Betha and Balasubramanian 

Present Study

Betha and Balasubramanian 
(2011 and 2013)

Fig. 9.7 The non-carcinogenic risk for adults (a) and children (b) in the present study and compared
with previous studies (Betha and Balasubramanian 2011, 2013). Primary y-axis: bar line designates
HQs for
as chronic daily intake (CDI). Secondary y-axis: triangle and square represent HQs and
of present study and previous studies. The red dotted line and arrow split the present study and
previous studies

(cid:2)

9.3.2.3 Carcinogenic Risk

In the present work, carcinogenic risk (in terms of ECR) of trace metals were esti-
mated for the diesel, gasoline, and CNG vehicles and presented in Fig. 9.8a–e. The
sum of ECR for adults was estimated as 738 × 10−6, 794 × 10−6, 832 × 10−6, 696
× 10−6, and 1239 × 10−6 for 4W-diesel, 4W-gasoline, 2W-gasoline, 4W-CNG, and
3W-CNG powered vehicles, respectively. The value of ECR for adults was showed
four times higher than the value of ECR for children. The average value of ECR for
Cr was showed 7–12 times higher than the acceptable limit for adults, and also 2–3
times larger than the acceptable limit for children. Signiﬁcantly, the ECR value of Cr
in 3Ws-CNG vehicles was estimated at 1186 × 10−6, which was 1.5–1.8 times higher
than the 4Ws-diesel and 4Ws-gasoline vehicle for both inhabitants. In 4Ws-CNG,
the ECR value of Pb was marginally higher than the other vehicles. However, the
mean value of ECR from Ni, As, Cd, and Pb were showed in the range of 10−6–10−4
for all type of vehicles (Fig. 9.8).

In the present work, the ECR from Cr for adults for diesel, gasoline, CNG vehi-
cles are 12–24 times lower than previous work reported by Betha and Balasubrama-
nian (2011, 2013) for ULSD and Bio-diesel engine exhaust at stationary conditions
(Fig. 9.9a, b). Overall, the observed ECR values of vehicles exceed the acceptable
level and suggesting that it is an alarming condition to the inhabitants of India, which
works near the road. It is anticipated that the increased lung cancer mortality can
arise amongst inhabitant close to road or trafﬁc tail pipe emissions in urban cities
due to inhalation of particulate-bound trace metals.

1.0e-2

1.0e-3

1.0e-4

1.0e-5

1.0e-6

1.0e-7
1.0e-2

1.0e-3

1.0e-4

1.0e-5

1.0e-6

1.0e-7
1.0e-2

1.0e-3

1.0e-4

1.0e-5

1.0e-6

1.0e-7
1.0e-2

1.0e-3

1.0e-4

1.0e-5

1.0e-6

1.0e-7
1.0e-2

1.0e-3

1.0e-4

1.0e-5

1.0e-6

1.0e-7

i

k
s
R
 
c
i
n
e
g
o
n
i
c
r
a
C

k
s
i
R
 
c
i
n
e
g
o
n
i
c
r
a
C

9 Emissions of PM2.5-Bound Trace Metals from On-Road Vehicles …

209

 (a) 4-Wheelers-Diesel

Adults

Children

Tolerable risk

Tolerable risk

Safe level

Safe level

(b) 4-Wheelers-Gasoline

Safe level

Safe level

(c) 4-Wheelers-CNG

Tolerable risk

Tolerable risk

Tolerable risk

Tolerable risk

Safe level

Safe level

(d) 3-Wheelers-CNG

Adults

Children

Tolerable risk

Tolerable risk

Safe level

Safe level

(e) 2-Wheelers-Gasoline

Tolerable risk

Tolerable risk

Safe level

Safe level

Cr
Trace metals

Cr

Ni

As

Cd

Pb ECR

Ni

As

Cd

Pb ECR

Fig. 9.8 Carcinogenic risk (as in ECR) of particle-bound metals in PM2.5 for adults (left panel)
and children (right panel) from a 4-wheelers diesel; b 4-wheelers gasoline; c 4-wheelers-CNG
2-wheelers; d 3-wheelers-CNG; e 2-wheelers gasoline

1e+0

1e-2

1e-3

1e-4

1e-5

1e-6

210

k
s
i
R
 
c
i
n
e
g
o
n
c
r
a
C
n
o
N

 

i

1e+0

1e-2

1e-3

1e-4

1e-5

1e-6

Cr (IV)

Ni 

As 

Cd 

ECR 

Cr (IV)

Ni 

As 

Cd 

ECR 

1e-1

(a) Adults

1e-1

(b) Children

J. Prakash and G. Habib

Tolerable limit

Tolerable limit

4 W -Diesel
4 W -G asoline

4 W -C N G

3 W -C N G
2 W -G asoline

U L S D

Bio-Diesel

4 W -G asoline
4 W -Diesel

4 W -C N G

3 W -C N G
2 W -G asoline

U L S D

Bio-Diesel

Present study

Betha and Balasubramanian 
(2011 and 2013)

Present study

Betha and Balasubramanian 
(2011 and 2013)

Fig. 9.9 The carcinogenic risk for adults (a) and children (b) in the present study and compared
with previous studies (Betha and Balasubramanian 2011, 2013). The blue dotted line and arrow
split the present study and previous studies

9.4 Conclusion

This study presents the concentration of PM2.5 bound trace metals emitted from the
diesel, gasoline, and CNG vehicles during on-road experiments. The total trace metal
emission was highest from 4W-diesel. The emissions of toxic metals such as Zn, Cr,
Pb were higher from 4W-CNG and 3W-CNG vehicles compared to 4W-diesel, and
4Ws/2Ws-gasoline. The concentration of Al, Fe, Mn, Ni, As, and Cd were highest
from 4W-diesel and gasoline vehicles. Health risk assessment of the PM2.5 bound
trace metals showed that non-carcinogenic risks by Cr, and Mn, which exceeded the
safe limit. The ECR of Cr was higher than the tolerance limit (10−4), while ECRs
from Ni, As, Cd, and Pb was higher than the safe limits (10−6) for all types of
vehicles. Additionally, it was found that the risk associated with PM emitted from
4Ws/3Ws-CNG vehicles were signiﬁcantly higher compared to the risk associated
with 4Ws-diesel/gasoline vehicles emissions. The present work suggests rationally
robust benchmarking on emissions of PM2.5 bound trace metals their health risk from
on-road vehicles in the Indian context. Nevertheless, the present study assessed the
carcinogenic risk of particle-bound metals, but other carcinogenic compounds such
as poly-aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and Per-ﬂuorinated compounds (PFCs) were
not included in the risk assessment.
Emissions of PM2.5-Bound Trace Metals from On-Road Vehicles …

211

Bhopal for their support in experiments and chemical characterization work. We also thanks to stu-
dents, staff and colleagues of Civil Engineering Department, IIT Delhi for their support in on-road
measurement study.
Role of Diesel Particulate Filter to Meet
Bharat Stage-VI Emission Norms
Abstract Majority of passenger vehicles run on diesel and sold in India, new mil-
lennium have become the preferred choice of the customers along with commer-
cial vehicles due to lower fuel cost, more mileage and comparable performance as
compared to petrol driven vehicle apart from having better thermal efﬁciency due
to its high compression ratio. However, the diesel-powered vehicle produces rela-
tively high particulate emissions along with other pollutants when compared to petrol
vehicles. Bharat Stage (BS) VI requires a 90% reduction of Diesel Particulate Matter
(DPM) from BS IV. This high level of reduction in the DPM can be achieved with
the help of diesel particulate ﬁlter (DPF). Incorporating DPF in the tail-pipe of a
diesel engine is challenging as it requires its appropriate size, accurate position in
the tailpipe and minimum pressure drop. Adding a DPF not only reduces the amount
of DPM released into the atmosphere, but also help to reduce the fuel consumption,
better transient response, and minimize operating costs. This chapter discusses the
comprehensive details of material and regeneration processes used in DPF, including
action plan for developing it BS-VI compatible.
Keywords BS-VI emission norms · DPF · Diesel particulate matter
Air pollution is the most severe environmental degradation problem, which affects
the entire civilization by human activities such as mining, transportation, industrial
work, construction, agriculture, and smelting, etc. Some other natural sources of air
pollution are volcanic eruptions and wildﬁres, but they cause negligible damage to
the environment. Inhalation of polluted air causes problems in human health such
as coughing and irritation in the entire respiratory system, which leads to asthma
and chronic lung diseases. Due to air pollution, approximately 3 million premature
deaths were globally encountered every year thereby, air pollution is becoming a big
issue for every country especially, developing countries like India. Among various
sources, the transportation sector is a signiﬁcant contributor to harmful pollutants,
i.e., carbon monoxide (CO), Hydrocarbon (HC), and nitrogen oxide (NOX ) which are
polluting the air quality. Indian automotive sector has four segments such as passenger
vehicles, commercial vehicles, 3-wheelers and 2-wheelers, where diesel is used as a
motive fuel to high duty vehicles. Its combustion produces additional DPM. However,
diesel engine powers vehicles also play a vital role in global transportation as its
global production is going to increase up to 21.2 million units by 2021 as compared
to 17.7 million units in 2015 (Diesel Progress International 2016). Diesel-fuelled
engines are also used in construction, farming, power generation, and industrial
activities. DPM is more brutal pollutants which have an adverse effect on human
health. However, diesel exhaust DPM is smaller than 1 µm in diameter (Seaton et al.
1995) and enters into the human body (Prasad and Bella 2010). Some particles are in
the range of 0.1–1.0 µm “accumulation” size and some particles are in the <0.1 µm
called nano-particles (Seinfeld 1975; Kittelson 1998). These nanoparticles easily
penetrate the lungs (Wichmann et al. 2000) and enter the bloodstream of the human

10 Role of Diesel Particulate Filter to Meet Bharat Stage-VI …

217

body (Zhu et al. 2007). Some particles are deposit from the air into the throat, nose,
and lungs. Deposited particles are generally injected via sneezing, coughing, and
nose.

DPM is composed of carbon, distinct accumulated compounds, a sulphur-
containing compound, inorganic oxides, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (Corro
2002). Hydrocarbon compound which results due to incomplete combustion of diesel
fuel. Its particle size varies from 5 to 20 nm, which generally depends on fuel com-
position, the intake air quality for combustion, speciﬁc engine design, engine wear,
and operating point. This kind of nanoparticles are rapidly agglomerate to make a
cluster of 50 mm −150 mm size. It is necessary to understand the in-cylinder com-
bustion behaviour for understanding the cluster formation. Entire engine cylinder
can be divided into three regions: (i) Central region of the cylinder (ii) Region closer
to the injector (iii) Most far away region in the cylinder. Generally, the second region
does not possess turbulence thereby, there is not enough oxygen in proximity of
the fuel drop, which facilitates the complete combustion. This incomplete combus-
tion forms the DPM, which generally happen during sudden acceleration and cold
starting conditions. In the ﬁrst region, no harmful pollutants are formed including
DPM because generally, this region has a stoichiometric air-fuel ratio which leads
to complete combustion. The third region generally has an excess of oxygen, which
increases the temperature thereby, NOX formation. Therefore, DPM forms into the
second region, which follows the ﬁrst four steps as shown in Table 10.1. This complex
mechanism of DPM formation not only affects the human health, but also adversely
affects the plants physiology (Saracco and Fino 2001), environment (Ramanathan
2007), building materials (Baedecker et al. 1992; Simão et al. 2006) and atmosphere
(Subramanian et al. 2009).

However, to harness such kind of harmful pollutants, stringent emission standards
were imposed by the Government of India on the motor vehicles. In India, standards
are set by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) which comes under the Min-
istry of Environment, Forests, and climate change. These standards are generally in
compliance with European regulations, ﬁrstly proposed in 2000. Historical evolution
of emission standards in India is shown in Table 10.2.

Table 10.1 Diesel particulate matter (DPM) formation method

S. no.

Step

Pyrolysis

1

2

3

4

Nucleation

Surface growing

Coalescence and agglomeration

Explanation

Thermochemical decomposition process
takes place at high temperatures and in the
absence of oxygen. C2H2, benzene, and
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) are
DPM precursors

Formation of germs and nuclei DPM

Mass addition process to the surface of a
nucleated soot particle

Fusion of primary particle leads to the
agglomeration

R. S. Bharj et al.

218

1

2

3

5

6

Table 10.2 Timeline of implementation of emission regulations

S. no. Year

Explanation

1991–1992

First times mass emission norms were implemented

1995

2000–01

2010

2017

First time catalytic converters were ﬁtted in vehicles of four metro cities:
Delhi, Kolkata Mumbai and Chennai

BS-II norms were imposed in four metro cities: Delhi, Mumbai,
Chennai, and Kolkata

Nationwide implementation of BS-III norms

Nationwide implementation of BS-IV

To reduce vehicular pollution, India signed the Paris Climate agreement in October
2016. As per the agreement, India is obligated to decrease the carbon footprint by
33–55% compared to the levels recorded in 2005 within the next 12 years.1 Therefore,
the Indian government has decided to enforce the most robust BS-VI emission norms
by April 2020 via leapfrogging BS-V emission standards and to join the league
of US, Japan, and European Union, which follow EU-VI norms. BS-VI emission
norms are going to tightening the DPM emission limit by 50% and 67% compared
to BS IV levels as measured on steady-state and transient dynamometer test cycle,
respectively. Further, the introduction of particle number (PN) emission standards of
6 × 1011/kW h and 8 × 1011/kW h for transient cycle testing and steady-state test
cycle testing is going to affect the entire automotive sector.2 Detailed BS-VI norms
for diesel-powered vehicles are shown in Table 10.3. Therefore, these steps will be
likely to force the automotive manufactures of diesel vehicle to utilize the DPF for
harnessing the DPM.

Several methods have been developed by engineers to reduce the production of
soot and NOx emissions in diesel engines. Among the most successful is the intro-
duction of conventional catalytic oxidizer, DPF, Homogeneous Charge Compression
Ignition (HCCI), Exhaust Gas Recirculation (EGR). Currently, DPF is the most suc-
cessful device to remove soot particles coming out from the tail-pipe, and it has
more than 90% ﬁltration efﬁciency (Suresh et al. 2009). Growth in sales of heavy
commercial vehicles in the transport and construction industry leads to a signiﬁcant
increase in demand for DPF’s. Environmental concern is top on the DPF market,
which is why the demand for more durable DPF is sparking the market. The global
market for DPF is expected to see signiﬁcant growth during the forecast period due
to the above-mentioned factors. Another factor driving the growth of the market for
DPF is the increasing demand for used vehicles, which requires relatively higher
maintenance. The most widely used approach to comply with emission legislation
is to trap DPM in a porous wall ﬂow DPF. DPF traps the soot particles coming in
the exhaust emissions of a diesel engine. Placement of DPF is shown in Fig. 10.1.
CDPF (Coated Diesel Particulate Filter), which uses a catalyst to break down the

1Environment Updates 2014–2016. www.scribd.com.
2India Bharat Stage VI Emission Standards. https://www.theicct.org/sites/default/ﬁles/publications/
India%20BS%20VI%20Policy%20Update%20vF.pdf.

10 Role of Diesel Particulate Filter to Meet Bharat Stage-VI …

219

Table 10.3 BS-VI norms with technology options
BS-VI emission norms for vehicles having gross vehicle weight exceeding 3500 kga

Pollutants/cycle CO

(mg/kW h)

THC
(mg/kW h)

NOX
(mg/kW h)

NH3
(DPM)

DPM
mass
(mg/kW h)

WHSC

WHTC

1500

4000

130

160

400

460

10

10

10

10

DPM
numbers
(num-
bers/kW h)
8.0 ×
1011
6.0 ×
1011

where
WHSC: world heavy duty steady-state cycle, WHTC: world heavy duty transient cycle
Technology options for past and post emission normsb

BS-IV

BS-VI

BS-V (skipped)

1. Combustion improvement
2. EGR + DOC
3. EGR + DOC + PFF
4. SCR (or DOC + SCR)
1. Combustion improvement
2. EGR + DOC + PFF
3. SCR (or DOC + SCR)
1. Combustion improvements
2. DOC + DPF + SCR

aIndian Emission Booklet 01 Nov 2018.cdr—Arai. https://www.araiindia.com/pdf/Indian_
Emission_Regulation_Booklet.pdf
bStrategies for compliance of BS V/BS VI legislations on heavy duty commercial vehicles. http://
www.ecmaindia.in/Uploads/image/2imguf_Mr.KVRBabu(ContinentalEmitec)Panel-2.pdf

Fig. 10.1 Schematic ﬂow for DPF system

soot particles at low temperatures, has also improved the existing DPF technology.
With the above general discussion on stringent emission norms, the objective of this
chapter is to discuss the role of DPF in BS-VI emission norms.

10.2 DPF Material and Its Properties

In the last twenty-ﬁve years, several DPF system concepts are developed along with
exploration of different geometric conﬁgurations and different ﬁlter media. Inside a
DPF different ceramic materials are used such as cordierite, silicon carbide, mullite

220

R. S. Bharj et al.

aluminium titanate. Different metallic materials are also used such as sintered metal
powder, non-woven ﬁber felt and metal foam. However, substrate medium plays a
vital role in diesel ﬁlter system since it affects both its performance and durability.
Also, affects material properties such as pore size, ﬁltration area, cell density, melting
point, thermal heat capacity, thermal expansion coefﬁcient and resistant to a chemical
in the exhaust. High ﬁltration efﬁciency, high soot holding capacity, thermal shock
resistance, strength and mechanical integrity, low-pressure drop, chemical stability,
small size and low weight, long life, and high durability and low cost are the critical
construction objectives for DPF.

The various type of design and materials used for building a DPF are

Honeycomb Design The design of the monolithic wall-ﬂow honeycomb originally
came into being in 1981. It is still versatile conﬁguration as it shows a large ratio
between the surface of the ﬁlter and the volume. This helps to reduce pressure and,
more importantly, to increase the efﬁciency of soot ﬁltration. The wall ﬂow monoliths
of the honeycomb are formed in an extruded square cell structure in which the channel
is plugged at alternate ends to form a checkboard pattern on each face of the DPF
(Hawker et al. 1997).

Cordierite and Silicon Carbide These are used for the ﬁltration of Diesel Par-
ticulate Matter. Cordierite is MgAl silicate, which is extracted form of natural raw
material such as caolin and talc. This ceramic material has been accounted as a
strong contender for a DPF material, and already it was used in a substrate of cat-
alytic converter before the introduction of DPF. In 1978, the ﬁrst time an institution
was developed an extruded cordierite wall ﬂow ﬁlter to harness the DPM (Manson
2010). Moreover, SiC ﬁlter was popularized since 1990 however, ﬁrst time it was
commercialized, and it was used in Peugeot cars, which was launched in 2000. After
that, SiC material was widely used in European car, and then cordierite has claimed
a signiﬁcant market share in the league of material used.

Aluminum Titanate This material was introduced with the commercial name Dura
trap AT in Volkswagen made diesel car during 2005–2006. At that time, it was seen
as an alternative of silicon carbide in the material market. However, the entire system
was incorporated with advanced ceramic material. Generally, cordierite used with
special design (Allansson et al. 2000).

Ceramic Base Fiber Filter Various type of high-temperature ceramic ﬁber ﬁlters
was studied for different designs of DPF. In 1990 synthetic ﬁbre was used for diesel
exhaust soot particle where ﬁlter cartridges building block of the ﬁlter and working
area of the cartridge was ﬁlled with ﬁbres (Hawker et al. 1997). A different type of
cartridge is used in ﬁber ﬁlters such as electric cartridge and concentric tube pack.
The electric cartridge is incorporated with the electric heater where ﬁber supports the
tube as a heating element. However, concentric tube cartridge has expanded ﬁltration
range because it is impractical to coordinate an electric heater into it. However, ﬁber
ﬁlters are not popularized in wall ﬂow monolith ﬁlters.

10 Role of Diesel Particulate Filter to Meet Bharat Stage-VI …

221

Ceramic Foam-Based Filters These ﬁlters are made from polymer foams using the
so-called replication technique and prepared a rigid uniform cell network with more
than 90% cell density. Because of some forming process pore/cell size of such ﬁlters
is limited. Large ﬁlter volume and low soot handling capacity, however, put pressure
to select another type ﬁlter because their commercial introduction to the diesel vehicle
will never be accomplished. Foam based DPF was investigated under the STYFF-
DEXA European FP6 project. The project’s vision focused on better understanding
and improving the ﬁlter’s open-cell ceramic foam material for low-pressure drop and
high regeneration efﬁciency.

Sintered Metal-Based Filters These are made of high-temperature porous metal
resistance, which is why they are called sintered metal ﬁber. Wire mesh support with
a coating of sintered Fe–Cr–Ni metal particles was ﬁrst proposed in the 1990s. This
type of ﬁlter has good ﬁltration efﬁciency, low back pressure exhaust gas, and high
capacity for ash storage, providing excellent ﬂexibility in the design of the ﬁlter.
Sintered metal ﬁlter technology was introduced by Bosch in 2002 and is now used in
diesel passenger cars and light commercial vehicles after its worldwide acceptance.
After a year, a reshaped form of sintered sheet material was produced for heavy-duty
vehicles in which transparent material was produced in the form of dimpled sheets to
maintain a tight spacing between the ﬁlter pleats. This provides proper compactness
so that within the European COMET project light duty DPF of acceptable volume
could be built and tested. For ash and soot accumulation, three different types of metal
ﬁlters were evaluated. The overall results of the COMET project were the acquisition
of good coating ability on the sintered metal plate material and the provision of a
sound computational basis for understanding the distribution of ﬂow behaviour and
soot deposits in the plated structure. Due to the high sensitivity of soot oxidation con-
cerning metal, there is no need for catalytic coating with this type of ﬁlter (Allansson
et al. 2004). The sintered metal ﬁber has been equipped with several Daimler-made
production vehicles.

These all materials have to deal with high exhaust temperature as it gener-
ally increases during regeneration process. Comprehensive details are discussed in
upcoming section.

10.3 Regeneration Process in DPF Fitment

Regeneration is a burning process of deposited soot particle, generally deposits on
DPF substrate channel wall. It is an essential process which requires for the expedi-
tious ﬁltration due to important reasons: (i) DPM thermally oxidize at approximately
high 600 °C temperature or above. However, such a temperature cannot be achieved
in tail-pipe during normal operating conditions. Even at high engine load, i.e., during
high-speed driving or moving up an inclination, diesel exhaust temperature remains
below 500 °C. (ii) Generally, accumulation of DPM leads to an exhaust back pressure
problem, and it further leads to adverse impact on ﬁltration efﬁciency. Generally, it

222

R. S. Bharj et al.

Fig. 10.2 DPF regeneration system

decreases with increment in the exhaust back pressure are observed. Therefore, it is
essential to utilize the special intends to empower the regeneration; hence invariably
primary mechanism is employed for decreasing the soot particle. The regeneration
process can be divided into two types, as shown in Fig. 10.2.

10.3.1 Passive Regeneration

Passive regeneration process burns the coming out soot from the ﬁlter by continuous
catalytic reaction mechanism without using any additional fuel. Passive regenera-
tion occurs automatically during motorway-type runs where; exhaust temperature is
already high. Therefore, any additional system is not required for burning the accu-
mulated soot particle. The whole process is straightforward, inaudible and effective.

10.3.2 Active Regeneration

In the active regeneration process, DPM or soot is burned out periodically via heat.
Generally, during soot loading ﬁlter reaches a 45% pressure drop across the DPF as
monitored by the back-pressure sensor. In this type of heat generation an additional
source of heat such as electric heater or fuel injection in the tail pipe is used to
raise the temperature above 600 °C. Thus, accumulated soot particles burn easily
(Dang et al. 2008). However, efﬁcient regeneration can be achieved by just doing a
temporary change in engine operation or oxidation catalyst for increasing the exhaust
temperature (Huang et al. 2004). These temporary changes can be achieved by:

10 Role of Diesel Particulate Filter to Meet Bharat Stage-VI …

223

Table 10.4 Design parameters

Design parameters

Parameters to be affected

Thermal stress

Thermal strength

Material

• Soot loading
• O2 concentration
• Flow rates

• Substrate shape
• Substrate diameter
• Substrate cell density
• Wall thickness

• DPF thermal stability
• Thermal shock resistance
• Mechanical strength

Air Intake throttling: The suction of more air by facilitating the intake air system to
each cylinder leads to increase the exhaust temperature by improving the in-cylinder
combustion.

Post-injection of Diesel Fuel: Injection of a small amount of diesel fuel inside the
cylinder when the piston reaches the top dead centre (TDC). The introduction of
unburned fuel increases the exhaust temperature as it requires to oxidize the soot
particle (Vincent et al. 2003).

If sufﬁcient temperature does not reach in exhaust manifold using the above-
discussed techniques, some other means such as an electric heater or fuel burner are
used to raise the temperature required for oxidizing the soot particle. Regeneration
can be done during vehicle operating condition or by especially turning off the vehicle
for regeneration. However, later technique to achieve high temperatures may lead to
a penalty in fuel economy.

Both regeneration processes are temperature sensitive thus, important design
parameters have to be considered on base of exhaust temperature range as it affects
the performance of the DPF as mentioned in Table 10.4.

Several researchers have explored the DPF using different materials and different

design, including its ﬁltration efﬁciency and effects on the exhaust back pressure.

Neeft et al. (1996) worked on the oxidizer system. They have studied the effect
of desired characteristics such as trapping efﬁciency, lower backpressure, lower cost
durability, resistance to high temperature during regeneration, minimal effect on
diesel engine performance and fuel economy to ﬁnd out the effect on the ﬁlter
substrate.

Moreover, the author picked a cordierite wall ﬂow monolith ﬁlter medium because
it provides the best compromise in all desirable characteristics and positive experi-
ence. In their research work, the regeneration of the diesel particulate ﬁlter was done
by supplying heat from fuel burner i.e. thermal regeneration. They also suggest that
thermal regeneration is the simplest method of regeneration of DPM as less fuel quan-
tity is required to burn the soot. Their work appears like a substantial achievement
in trap technology development for a light vehicle.

224

R. S. Bharj et al.

Cooper and Thoss (1989) analysed necessity of catalyst to start the regeneration
of a DPF substrate, which is used to activate the oxygen in the exhaust is causing
increment in the temperature, which leads to initiation of particulate combustion.
They addressed that variation of regeneration temperature remain in the range of
350 °C or above. He also added that regeneration took place as low as 265 °C
temperature by using the catalyst, actually author checked regeneration capability
for hundreds of hours.

Horiuchi et al. (1990) stated that DPM and sulphur content could be reduced using
the ﬂow-through oxidation catalysts under steady and dynamic engine condition. He
founds a reduction of 40–90% in sulphur content, when exhaust gas temperature
was observed 100–500 °C. This sulphur reduction is accomplished by its absorption
on the catalyst surface at the low temperature and its decomposition at a high tem-
perature. Different type catalyst was used such as Pt/Al2O3, Novel/Base/Al2O3, and
Novel/Base Al2O3 with cordierite substrate.

Niura et al. (1986) practically tested ceramic foam based DPF to oxidize the
diesel particulates. They attempted to see the possibility of “Trapless” trap (self-
cleaning trap). A trapless trap which makes enable the collection of particulates in
diesel exhaust. The conclusion of the study is DPF can be self-cleaned; it means it
eliminates the complex procedure of cleaning the DPF.

Wade et al. (1983) developed the thermal and catalytic techniques for burning
the deposited soot on the trap wall. In thermal technique, a burner is used which
release the heat and increase the temperature which oxidizes the soot. HC, CO,
and DPM pollutants were observed at 25–50% of allowable vehicle emission for
one complete cycle. The author stated that problem with burner nozzle, clogging,
ignition reliability, trap durability, and control systems were identiﬁed. Moreover,
the authors also added that Lead and Copper fuel additives lead to a deposition in
the cordierite trap of about 100% collection efﬁciency.

Pinturaud et al. (2007) studied DPF loading with the regeneration effects. The
authors designed two speciﬁc experiments: (i) To observe the radial distribution
of soot after loading and remaining soot or carbon black after controlled partial
regeneration (ii) To observe the localization of soot in the longitudinal direction. The
controlled regeneration is taking place when the ﬁlter is loaded at 6 g/L. The authors
conduct this controlled regeneration experiments in the following conditions: 15 min
post-injection period; engine speed of 1700 rpm and the engine torque is 94 N m.

Moreover, the amount of soot oxidation utterly depends upon the DPF inlet tem-
perature which is controlled by the volume of injected fuel. The authors conclude
that the soot layer has a uniform distribution on the four sides of the channel wall
which is equally divided into the four walls of the channel. The author founds that
more DPM is collected at the end of the channel than at the entrance of the channel.
Rao et al. (1985) developed advanced techniques for the regeneration of
diesel particulate traps. The regeneration systems were: (i) By passable trap
burner regeneration system (ii) By passable trap electric regeneration system and
(iii) Catalytic regeneration. They measured the heat required for regeneration,

10 Role of Diesel Particulate Filter to Meet Bharat Stage-VI …

225

including its fuel consumption penalties. They concluded that catalytic fuel addi-
tives such as octate base compounds of copper, nickel, cerium lead to a reduction up
to 210 °C in trap regeneration temperature.

Chatterjee et al. (2008) made the study to control the emissions to achieve Euro
IV and Euro V norms on heavy-duty diesel engines. Diesel engine emitted low CO2,
high DPM, and NOx emissions. Advanced after-treatment technologies such DPF,
DOC, and SCR are introduced to comply the stringent emission standards which are
capable for converting four harmful pollutants, i.e., NOx, DPM, HC, and CO in other
nonharmful gases. They concluded that DPF could signiﬁcantly reduce DPM, HC,
and CO emissions from the diesel engine.

Mizutani et al. (2007) described the characteristics of DPF and how the design of
the DPF affects particulate ﬁltration efﬁciency, emission levels, and the pressure drop
of DPF. They reported that pore size smaller than 15-µm results in 100% ﬁltration
efﬁciency and ﬁltration efﬁciency decreases with increasing mean pore size up to
20% and after they did not observe any change in ﬁltration efﬁciency. He also stated
that pore size has some effect on pressure drop with soot loading.

Tsuneyoshi and Yamamoto (2012) studied hexagonal and square type DPF under
controlled and uncontrolled catalysed regeneration. They reported that a honeycomb
monolith with a hexagonal cell structure offers a lower pressure drop compared to
the square type cell structure.

The discussed investigations demonstrate that DPF is the best solution to meet BS-
VI emission norms for diesel-powered vehicles. It can be understood from the above-
discussed literature, that the DPF’s design and operation for collecting and trapping
particles has a prior effect on how easily the particles can be removed later. Proper
maintenance of the DPF will beneﬁt in aggregating the fuel economy, increasing
horsepower, optimizing DPF performance, lower down the overall maintenance costs
and will increase the life of a DPF. However, a particular plan is required to develop
the DPF which can meet the BS-VI norms.

10.4 Action Plan for Developing BS-VI Compatible DPF

For diesel-powered light-duty and heavy-duty vehicles, DPF is considered as the best
after treatment technology device, economically and technically. However, modiﬁ-
cations are prerequisite for the existing DPF. Government of India (GOI) is ﬁrst time
introducing a stringent limit on PN. As exhaustive research has to be done to design
the new DPF such that it can meet the BS-VI norms. Essential points that should be
considered and investigated meticulously are as follows:
(cid:129) Development of new material base DPF
(cid:129) The chemical property of newly selected material should be studied well
(cid:129) Development of new design based DPF, it must be other than honey comb structure
(cid:129) Development of dedicated catalytic converter for the DPF
(cid:129) Exhaustive study in the ﬂow ﬁeld and stress ﬁeld of the DPF

226

R. S. Bharj et al.

(cid:129) Reduction in exhaust back pressure and cost reduction
(cid:129) Trials of newly designed DPF on the existing vehicle
(cid:129) Durability studies of the DPF
(cid:129) Ensure developed DPF is not increasing the exhaust back pressure
(cid:129) Developed DPF must have a high ﬁltration efﬁciency.

10.5 Conclusions

An exhaustive review of the DPF and its materials and properties has been done in
this chapter. The requirement of regeneration in the DPF is also discussed. In India,
DPF is narrated as the possible after treatment technology for the reduction of the
DPM to meet the BS-VI norms, because of: (i) High ﬁltration efﬁciency, (ii) technical
difﬁculties such as material compatibility and high latent heat of vaporization, (iii)
less exhaust back pressure, (iv) researchers acceptance because it is already proven
technology in foreign countries where Euro-VI norms are already implemented.
Firstly, DPF would play a signiﬁcant role to cut out the exhaust DPM. Secondly, DPF
utilization promotes the development of indigenous technology as it is possible to
manufacture in India. DPF utilization in high duty vehicle may cause a fuel economy
penalty. However, it can be resolved quickly if further research will be done in this
ﬁeld. The table below summarises various aspects of DPF to meet the BS-VI norms,
meticulously discussed in this chapter.

Pollutants effects

• Tailpipe harmful pollutants such as DPM and NOX are worsening the air

BS-VI norm

quality

• Diesel emitted DPM is more harmful pollutant than CO and HC
• Inhalation of polluted air leading to a dangerous disease such as asthma

• DPM is made of inorganic oxides, sulphur-containing compound, and

and chronic lung diseases

polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon

• BS-VI emission norms have 50 and 67% lesser DPM emissions based on
steady-state and transient dynamometer test cycle respectively compared
to BS-IV norms

• Restricted Particle number (PN) emission standards are 6 × 1011/kW h
and 8 × 1011/kW h for transient cycle testing and steady-state test cycle
for diesel-powered vehicles

DPF

• Diesel particulate ﬁlter (DPF) is a device which physically captures the

particulates such that it cannot release into the atmosphere

• DPF is the most effective technology to control the particle mass and

numbers at high efﬁciencies

(continued)

10 Role of Diesel Particulate Filter to Meet Bharat Stage-VI …

227

(continued)

Regeneration

• Regeneration is a burning process of deposited soot particle, and it
required because DPM thermally oxidizes at high temperatures

• Two types of regenerations: (i) Active regeneration where soot particles
burn periodically using an additional heat source such as an electric
heater or fuel injection. (ii) Passive regeneration where soot particle burns
without any heat source, it burns by a complex reaction mechanism
performs into a catalytic converter

Finally, DPF ﬁtted vehicles are capable of meeting stringent BS-VI norms, includ-
ing particle numbers. Diesel-fuelled vehicles can quickly meet the particulates limits
in upcoming norms using DPF, which is considered as quite challenging as per the
vehicle manufacturers. DPF makes sense as a best after-treatment technology as far
as particle numbers are concerned.
Design and Development of Small
Engines for UAV Applications
Abstract Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have been extensively used for a wide
range of applications since World War-II. UAVs are used for several defence pur-
poses such as surveillance, communication, terrain mapping, reconnaissance, and
attack. In this chapter, we discuss reciprocating internal combustion engine as a
propulsion system for UAVs and the challenges in development of such an engine
for aviation. The reciprocating piston engine is one of the most effective powerplants
to energise the UAVs. The purpose of these propulsion systems in UAVs is to provide
durable, reliable, and extended ﬂight. Currently, no such engine for UAV applica-
tions are manufactured in India, and defence sector relies on imported engines only,
which severely restricts their application for various other defence applications. This
chapter addresses technical issues present in these systems, thus contributing to their
development. Aspects related to structural and thermal analysis of engine compo-
nents have also been discussed, which are essential for designing such engines. This
chapter gives broad idea about future of UAV propulsion systems and associated
challenges.
Keywords UAVs · Structural analysis · Thermal analysis · Defence · Small
engines
11.1.1 Background of UAVs

UAV has been known by a remotely piloted vehicle, a drone, a robot plane, or a
pilotless aircraft. Public and media often use the term “drone” for this application. A
UAV is deﬁned as a powered, pilot-less aerial vehicle, which can transfer a lethal or
non-lethal pay load. They can ﬂy for long period at controlled speed and height and
have many applications in defense, industrial and civilian sectors. They were initially
developed for 3-D missions: “Dull, Dirty or Dangerous” for humans. A sophisticated
UAV may cost up to tens of millions of US dollars, and their weight may range from
½ to 20,000 kg (Friedrich 2014).

UAVs have been used across the globe since last couple of centuries. The earliest
reported use of a UAV was by Austrians, who destroyed the Italian city of Venice
with unmanned explosive balloons in 1849. In 1930s, use of a drone as moving target
shooting by aircrafts was an important application, in which a two-stroke gasoline
engine was used to power these drones. Remote-controlled aircrafts gained popularity
during this phase. These aircraft featured in model Aircraft Nationals Competition
held in Detroit in 1937. Later, in 1980s, USA developed aircraft to meet growing
demand of the market with the aim of cost optimization. In 1986, USA and Israel
worked together to develop a new aircraft named as RQ2 Pioneer (Tsach et al. 2004;
Kumar et al. 2015). In 2000, USA introduced drones for the search of Osama Bin
Laden in Afghanistan. In 2014, Amazon planned to use drones for doorstep delivery
to enhance customer service experience. There is a vast potential for research and
development of UAVs and their expansion to numerous ﬁelds of life.

11.1.2 Potential Applications of UAVs

There are many sectors, where UAVs can be used, such as military, agriculture,
civilian, healthcare, and many more. Below are some sectors for applications of
UAVs:

11.1.2.1 Geomorphic Mapping

UAVs provide a low-cost and high-pixel aerial photography in different areas. Such
photography is vital for mapping studies in earth sciences. Techniques like laser
scanning and low-altitude aerial photography by light aircrafts may provide excellent
spatial resolution, however they are expensive and time-consuming. There are strict
restrictions for UAVs usage in many areas, however due to their application in a broad
range of resolutions, popularity of UAVs in geomorphic studies has increased. Recent
technological developments have seen UAVs act as a means, by which we can collect

11 Design and Development of Small Engines for UAV Applications

233

high-resolution aerial photos over large spatial areas. The ﬂexibility and shorter
response time of UAVs are the reason for increasing interest of geomorphological
community (Hackney and Clayton 2015).

11.1.2.2 Pedestrian Trafﬁc Monitoring

UAVs are used for collecting data, and controlling pedestrian trafﬁc ﬂows, in order
to monitor the pedestrian demand. Present methods such as manual observers, video
recording on site, questionnaire survey are less efﬁcient and less accurate. Such prac-
tices have several limitations, when surveying a large area. UAV technology has been
used in many foreign countries such as Thailand (Tsach et al. 2004), where UAVs
collect data comprehensively to overcome space constraints. It is a safe and less
costly technology to use. However, UAV have few limitations in terms of technical,
working, and legal issues, therefore use of UAVs need legal permissions from avi-
ation authorities, which makes its deployment challenging for various applications,
including pedestrian trafﬁc monitoring (Sutheerakul et al. 2017).

11.1.2.3 Agriculture

UAVs have been used in agriculture due to their ability to cover large areas quickly
without damaging the growing ﬁeld. They are quickly becoming popular in develop-
ing countries like India. They are widely used to achieve precision farming and smart
agriculture in crop research and development. For monitoring small and medium
sized areas in lesser time, UAVs can provide detailed information about the soil con-
dition, crop, and soil moisture. Precision farming includes sensor data and real-time
data analysis in order to improve farm productivity. Data collected from drones are
used for soil health scans, in order to monitor crop health, and planning irrigation
schedules. Upcoming agricultural revolution is predicted to be driven by data, which
will help increase agricultural productivity with minimum damage to the environ-
ment and provide beneﬁts to farming communities.

11.1.2.4 Aerospace and Military

The aerospace industry has been exploring the use of UAVs to provide increased
accuracy and ease of documentation. These UAVs are capable of offering onboard
image processing, and locking onto a target, apart from tracking it. UAVs are exten-
sively used in military operations since last one decade for collecting information,
surveillance, monitoring enemy activities, and to attack military targets and terror-
ist hideouts. Generally, they are preferred for a mission that is too dangerous for
manned aircraft. Drones are a real-time tool for commanders to make better decision
in resource allocation and to search for lost or injured soldiers. Military UAVs are

234

U. Sonawane and N. N. Mustaﬁ

classiﬁed based on the kind of operations they perform. Advantages such as light-
weight, quieter operation, smaller size and high efﬁciency render them useful for
defence applications.1

11.1.2.5 Civil Engineering

Most civil engineering inspections pose a risk to inspection staff, inconvenience to
the public, and potential damages to the structures. Traditional inspection methodol-
ogy requires signiﬁcant human resources and equipment, resulting in increased costs.
UAV’s vertical and oblique photography can collect real-time data for site data anal-
ysis. UAVs add great value by safely navigating into hazardous and harsh terrains.
Innovative and rapidly evolving drone technology would beneﬁt civil engineers and
surveyors enormously.2

11.1.2.6 Healthcare

Drones are used for surveillance of sites affected by biological and chemical dis-
asters. One of the best application of drones for healthcare is to deliver emergency
medication or equipment to remotely located patients. Flood, earthquakes, ﬁre, and
severe drought can prevent on-site interaction with medical persons. Drones could be
helpful in an emergency, where no one might be available. They can deliver medical
aids to refugees and victims of war or military conﬂict. In future, smaller drones
would provide medicine to patients at home, leading to rapid care and reduction in
cost of assisting people.

On the other hand, there are technical challenges such as improving the ability of
drones to detect and avoid objects during ﬂight, reducing their size and weight, and
preventing hackers from misusing this technology. It is therefore required to acceler-
ate research efforts related to safety, response time, and privacy-related issues. Other
challenges for UAV systems include ﬂexibility of refueling and overall efﬁciency
compared to manned aircraft.

11.2 Prospects and Limitations of Various Propulsion

Systems for UAVs

A propulsion system provides effort to the aircraft for traveling from one point
to another. Hence propulsion system should be durable, controllable, and energy
11 Design and Development of Small Engines for UAV Applications

235

efﬁcient. Failure of propulsion may lead to loss of aircraft control. Therefore an in-
depth research study on pros and cons of different propulsion systems available in
the market should be done before their implementation for UAV applications. In the
following sections, few propulsion systems are listed, along with their advantages,
disadvantages, and associated technical challenges.

Extended range and reliability of UAVs are two major constraints for the Wankel
rotary engines, gas turbine engines and electric motor-based systems. Internal com-
bustion (IC) engines are a potential solution to overcome some of these challenges.
In the next section, reciprocating piston engines as a propulsion system for UAVs is
discussed (Table 11.1).

11.3 IC Engine as UAV Propulsion System

Engines used in civil aviation and general aviation sectors are either gas turbines
fuelled by aviation kerosene or IC engines fuelled by gasoline. These engines oper-
ate on the same principle as spark ignition (SI) engines used for automotive sector
(Masiol and Harrison 2014). Reciprocating piston engines are classiﬁed based on the
number of cylinders used (single-cylinder, two-cylinders and so on), the arrangement
of cylinders (in-line, radial, opposed, V-conﬁguration etc.) and working cycle (two-
strokes and four-strokes). High power-to-weight ratio, compactness, low-cost, high
efﬁciency, and reliability are the essential requirements for designing a piston engine
for aviation sector and UAVs. Two stroke engines offer advantages such as high
mechanical efﬁciency and high-power density. Supercharging of these engines may
further improve power density and fuel efﬁciency at higher altitudes. The main issue
with two-stroke engine is its poor scavenging process. Many researchers have given
attention to scavenging models in order to optimize the design of port arrangement.
Qiao et al. (2018) performed optimization of geometric parameters of the scavenging
ports of a two-stroke small aero engine. This work provides necessary information
about the design of crankcase scavenging system of aero engines. Visualization tool
such as AVL FIRE software was used to study the gas composition and its distribu-
tion inside the combustion chamber during scavenging process. Borghi et al. (2017)
investigated the design and modiﬁcations of a two-stroke single-cylinder engine.
The primary step of this study involved fabrication of scavenging and combustion
systems. The air metering system was modiﬁed for the constructed prototype during
the second step. This modiﬁed engine was compared with the four-stroke engine
developed for the same application. The only problem with the two-stroke engine
was poor emission compliance of low NOx limits, which can be possibly solved by
using an efﬁcient exhaust gas after-treatment device. Carlucci et al. (2016) simulated
two-stroke engine by varying the design parameters such as modiﬁcation of exhaust
valves, scavenging ports (area of each port and number of ports), compression ratio,
pressure ratio of both compressors (high and low) and air-fuel ratio (AFR). The
objective was to increase the brake power output and to reduce the speciﬁc fuel
consumption of the engine for having an economical ﬂight.

236

U. Sonawane and N. N. Mustaﬁ

Table 11.1 Types of propulsion system used in UAVs

S. No.

Propulsion system

Advantages

Disadvantages

Reciprocating
piston engines
(Grifﬁs et al. 2009)

Light in weight,
small in size,
forced induction
for high altitude
application

Noisy, produce
vibrations as it has
many moving
parts, lubrication
and cooling
required

1.

2.

3.

4.

Wankel rotary
engines

Gas turbine
engines (Grifﬁs
et al. 2009)

High
power-to-weight
ratio, compact, less
noisy, less
vibrations, lighter
in weight, not
prone to knock

High power
density,
tremendous thrust
capability,
insensitive to fuel
quality

Fuel consumption
is more, not
capable to meet
emission norms,
limited
information
available, complex

Expensive, loud,
complex, less
efﬁcient than
reciprocating
engines at idle,
high internal
temperatures

Electric
motor-based
systems (Chan
2019)

Reliable and
robust, high
torque, less noisy,
less maintenance
required

Interference
caused due to
electromagnetic
ﬁeld, requires an
enormous amount
of current (Wu and
Bucknall 2016).
May be sensitive to
water and other
conductive liquids

Technical
challenges

Noise and
vibrations affect
reliability and life
of the engine; seal
failure may cause
power loss, high
temperature may
lead to engine
seizure or failure

High exhaust gas
temperature,
engine cooling is
difﬁcult due to the
intricate and
complex design

Blade imbalance
leads to vibrations,
wear in bearing
due to improper
lubrication, high
operating
temperature, high
energy rotation of
the engine may
damage the system

Electromagnetic
interference,
corrosion,
transients and
noise produced by
electromagnetic
activity may
obstruct the UAV
electronics and
communication
devices, high
current densities
can corrode
terminals

11 Design and Development of Small Engines for UAV Applications

237

11.4 Design and Development of Engine for UAV

Application

The constraints of time and range of UAV ﬂight are the two main challenges, which
need to be resolved for strengthening UAV applications. This study can be viewed as
an attempt to resolve these problems to some extent. Engines are a viable alternative
due to the advantages they offer such as high power output, greater reﬁnement,
and smoothness during the engine operation. Also, compact and small sized engine
designs can enhance their usage in defence applications.

The methodology for design of UAV engines is summarised as follows: (Fig. 11.1).

(cid:129) CAD model development of engine components,
(cid:129) Structural and thermal analysis of the engine prototype,
(cid:129) Manufacturing and testing of engine components for prototype development,
(cid:129) Development of experimental setup for the prototype engine testing and experi-

mental investigation for engine performance and durability characteristics,
(cid:129) Powering the UAV using a compact engine and its functional ﬂight testing.

IC engines have played a great role in human life, and researchers continuously
seek to develop an engine with higher efﬁciency, low brake fuel consumption, and
lower emissions from exhaust tailpipe. The transport industry uses IC engines to
transfer people and goods from one place to another. If we look closely, an IC
engine operates best when there is perfect synchronization between its components.
Therefore, different IC engine component such as piston, piston rings, cylinder liners,
valve assembly, connecting rod, crankshaft, camshaft, cylinder block, bearing cap,
cylinder head, gear trains, etc. have to go through essential structural and thermal
failure analysis to prevent any accident. These design aspects are discussed in the
following sections.

Fig. 11.1 Methodology for design and prototyping of UAV engine

238

U. Sonawane and N. N. Mustaﬁ

11.4.1 Structural Analysis of Engine Components

Yu and Xu (2005) studied the crankshaft failure due to propagation of a fatigue
crack in a stress concentration region. The crankshaft failed in a lesser than average
life cycle. It was observed that surface hardening by nitriding could increase the
fatigue strength of the material. Çevik and Gürbüz (2013) reported the effect of ﬁllet
rolling on the fatigue behavior of the crankshaft. The result showed that induced
compressive residual stresses provide remarkable advancement in the fatigue strength
of the component. Ktari et al. (2011) investigated the failure of three crankshafts
made of forged carbon steel. Reasons for all failures was crack propagation and
fatigue caused due to high stresses at ﬁllet radius. Witek et al. (2017) performed
numerical modeling of the crankshaft of a compression ignition (CI) engine using
Finite Element Method (FEM). They reported that the main reason for early fatigue
failure was the alternating bending stresses due to notch effect. Oil ﬁlters got clogged
due to collection of metal debris in the lubrication channels, causing catastrophic
engine failure, which further led to damage of other components such as piston,
connecting rod, bearing, crankcase.

11.4.1.1 Piston

Piston is one of the most important components in the engine. Its function is to
convert force from high pressure, high-temperature expanding gases to reciprocat-
ing motion, which is eventually converted to crankshaft rotation by crank-slider
mechanism. Reciprocating motion of the piston leads to balancing issues in the
engine, which cause vibrations. Friction between the cylinder wall and piston rings
leads to components wear and degradation, hence reduces useful life of the engine.
Noise generated by the engine can be unbearable sometimes. To diminish the loud-
ness of engines, many reciprocating engines use heavy noise suppression devices.
Figure 11.2 shows the induced stresses in the piston.

Generally, Aluminum alloys are used for manufacturing piston since it has excel-
lent thermal conductivity and they are light in weight. Aluminum expands when the
temperature increases, hence appropriate clearance should be given to provide free
piston motion inside the cylinder bore under high temperature conditions. Insufﬁcient
clearance may lead to piston seizure in the cylinder, however excessive clearance may
result in loss of compression and generate piston noise.

The piston includes the piston head, piston pin bore, piston pin, skirt, ring grooves,
and piston rings. Piston head is the top surface of the piston, which bears immense
pressure and heat during the engine operation. Piston pin bore is created to hold the
piston pin, which connects the small end of the connecting rod to the piston. A portion
of the piston closest to the crankshaft is called skirt, which aligns the piston during
reciprocating motion in the cylinder bore. The secondary aim of the skirt proﬁle is
to reduce piston weight and to provide space for rotating crankshaft counter-weights
(Siva Prasad et al. 2016).

11 Design and Development of Small Engines for UAV Applications

239

Fig. 11.2 Induced stresses in typical piston (Hemasundaram and Suresh 2015)

11.4.1.2 Piston Rings

A ring grooves are provided on the outer diameter of the piston and are used to hold
different piston rings (Fig. 11.3). A piston ring is a dynamic seal, which prevents
leakage of high-temperature gases from the pressurized combustion chamber. Piston
rings are subjected to wear since they move in the cylinder bore. They get worn out in
preference to cylinder walls, in order to prevent frequent replacement cylinder liner.
Piston rings are generally made of cast iron, which provides good wear resistance.
Piston rings also transfer heat from the piston to the cylinder walls and also scrap
the excess lubricating oil back to the engine crankcase. Piston ring conﬁguration and
number of rings used in an engine depends on the engine capacity and material of
the cylinder liner (Satyanarayana and Renuka 2016).

Piston rings used commonly include compression rings, wiper ring, and oil ring.
A compression ring is located in the ring groove closest to the piston head, in order
to prevent any gas leakage during combustion. Wiper ring is inserted in between

Fig. 11.3 Typical piston
rings (Hemasundaram and
Suresh 2015)

240

U. Sonawane and N. N. Mustaﬁ

Fig. 11.4 Camshaft
(Hemasundaram and Suresh
2015)

the compression and the oil ring. Its function is to seal the combustion gases further
and wipe excess oil from the cylinder wall. Oil ring is generally located near the
crankcase, and it mainly transfers excess lubricating oil to the oil reservoir during
piston motion.

11.4.1.3 Camshaft

Camshaft (Fig. 11.4) function is to open and close inlet and exhaust valves in sync
with the motion of piston. Main part of camshaft is lobes. Camshaft is forged from a
single piece of steel. There are twice as many lobes as the number of cylinders plus one
additional lobe for the fuel pump actuation (Swamulu et al. 2015; Naga Manendhar
Rao et al. 2017). Crankshaft powers the camshaft. Rotational speed of the camshaft
is always half that of crankshaft. For a four-stroke engine cycle, camshaft rotates by
180° for every 360° rotation of the crankshaft.

The most common conﬁgurations of the overhead camshafts are:

I. Single Over Head Cam (SOHC): In this conﬁguration, a single camshaft is used

to actuate all valves of the engine—Inlet valves and exhaust valves.

II. Dual/Double Over Head Cam (DOHC): In this conﬁguration, two separate
camshafts are used to operate the intake and exhaust valves, respectively.
III. Over Head Valve (OHV): This particular conﬁguration is suited for V engine
conﬁguration. In this arrangement, a single camshaft is mounted between the
two banks of cylinders. The cam lobes actuate the intake and exhaust valves
through pushrods.

11.4.1.4 Crankshaft

The function of crankshaft is to convert the reciprocating motion of the piston into
rotary motion and vice versa. Crankshaft is connected to a ﬂywheel in order to damp
pulsations in the cycle. Flywheel acts as an energy reservoir, which stores excess
energy from the piston generated during the power stroke and uses the same energy
for piston movement during remaining three strokes due to its high inertia. The

11 Design and Development of Small Engines for UAV Applications

241

Fig. 11.5 Induced stresses in a typical crankshaft (Hemasundaram and Suresh 2015)

crankshaft is connected to camshaft via a belt-drive, which controls the opening and
closing of inlet and exhaust valves. Crankshaft should be carefully designed for its
weights and balances in order to reduce engine vibrations. Both ends of crankshaft
are ﬁxed on the engine block by using crank bearings. Balancing of crankshaft is vital
for perfect functioning of the engine. Material selection and weight distribution on
the sides of the journal should be done carefully. Failure analysis of crankshaft using
ANSYS software helps predict critical design points in the model for UAV applica-
tion. Figure 11.5 shows the crankshaft and its variation of induced stresses. Generally,
heavy cast iron is used for manufacturing crankshaft for automotive applications and
stainless steel for high-performance UAV engines (Reddy et al. 2017).

11.4.1.5 Connecting Rod

Connecting rod links the piston to the crankshaft, and its function is to transfer forces
from the piston to the crankshaft, which further passes it on to the transmission
(Kushwaha and Parkhe 2018).

Connecting rod is often a major source of catastrophic engine failure; therefore
it requires care to ensure that it does not fail. Figure 11.6 shows the variations of
induced stresses in a typical connecting rod. The traditional connecting rod used in
the automotive industry is forged, and is suitable for lower horsepower engines (Singh
et al. 2017). The materials used for manufacturing the connecting rods are steel alloy,
aluminium, and titanium, depending on application requirements. A lightweight con-
necting rod is preferred for improved efﬁciency of the engines for UAV applications.
However this goal should not be achieved by removal of material or changing design
parameters but by using lightweight stronger materials.

242

U. Sonawane and N. N. Mustaﬁ

Fig. 11.6 Induced stresses in typical connecting rod (Hemasundaram and Suresh 2015)

11.4.2 Thermal Analysis of Engine Components

Thermal failure is a bottleneck for engine development, which affected engine perfor-
mance and efﬁciency. Engine heat transfer phenomenon is still not well understood
by designers due to complex geometry and lack of understanding of combustion phe-
nomenon. Therefore, it is necessary to study temperature distributions in the engine
components for controlling thermal stresses and strains within acceptable limits and
avoid component deformation. Thermal analysis allows researcher to design com-
ponents and understand their temperature distribution even before the construction
of the ﬁrst prototype (Li 1982). It saves time and is a cost-effective way to optimize
component design. Many researchers have reported critical design considerations for
thermal expansion, which ultimately lead to catastrophic failure of engine compo-
nents.

Abbes et al. (2004) studied the behavior of a direct injection compression ignition
(DICI) engine piston, which was subjected to both thermal and mechanical stresses.
Results obtained from the simulation were used to analyze the working temperatures.
In another study, Esfahanian et al. (2006) studied three combustion boundary condi-
tions and investigated heat transfer through the piston using KIVA and NASTRAN
codes. Lu et al. (2013) used an inverse heat transfer method to study thermal analysis
of a marine CI engine piston. New design showed improved performance from piston
thermal loading analysis perspective.

Yao and Qian (2018) carried out research involving improvement in engine perfor-
mance when nano-ceramic coating was applied over aluminum piston. Steady-state
thermal analyses were used to determine the effects of ceramic coating on piston
temperature distributions. By using FEM analysis, comparison between coated and
uncoated pistons were made, as shown in Fig. 11.7. They showed that the tempera-
ture of the coated piston crown was higher than the uncoated piston, which improved
the thermal efﬁciency and reduced the emissions.

11 Design and Development of Small Engines for UAV Applications

243

Fig. 11.7 Temperature distribution of the a thermal barrier coating (TBCs) piston, b aluminum
alloy substrate of the TBC piston, and c conventional aluminum alloy piston (Yao and Qian 2018)

Satyanarayana et al. (2018) conducted quasi dynamic stress analysis for different
compression ratios of a diesel engine. Figure 11.8 shows the variations in temperature,
Von-mises stress, total heat ﬂux, factor of safety (FOS), total deformation, and elastic

Fig. 11.8 Structural and thermal analysis of piston for a compression ratio of 16.5 (Satyanarayana
et al. 2018)

244

U. Sonawane and N. N. Mustaﬁ

strain on the piston. The maximum and minimum temperatures were observed at the
piston crown and skirt respectively at all compression ratios. They reported that the
compression ratio had a profound effect on the stresses developed.

11.5 Challenges of Research in UAV Propulsion Systems

Air pollution is a major concern for developing countries like India due to rapid
expansion of transport and civil aviation sectors. Most studies highlighted that avia-
tion emissions affect local as well as global air quality adversely. Emission standards
for new aviation engines are enforced by the International Civil Aviation Organiza-
tion (ICAO).

Design and optimization of small IC engines to achieve maximum efﬁciency
includes modiﬁcations in various components of the engine. The intake port is one
of the most vital part of the IC engine, which supplies air to the engine cylinder.
It inﬂuences the quantity of air entering into the cylinder, velocity distribution, and
in-cylinder air-ﬂow characteristics. Therefore design of intake port becomes criti-
cal to reduce emissions and fuel consumption. For the optimization of in-cylinder
air-ﬂow characteristics, study of ﬂow-ﬁeld can be done by using advanced optical
diagnostic techniques such as Laser Doppler Anemometry (LDA) and Particle Image
Velocimetry (PIV). Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) analysis can help detect
problems in the engine design.

Wang et al. (2019) proposed an AFR controlled fuel supply system to optimize
the efﬁciency of UAV, when operating at required engine speed. The results showed
9–33% improvement in engine efﬁciency. Hassantabar et al. (2019) studied the elec-
tronic fuel injection system since carburetor was not suitable for two-stroke UAV
engine. They investigated the airﬂow and fuel spray structure in the throttle body
injection system using CFD tools. Simulation of two-stroke engine was performed
using ‘Lotus’ engine. They also developed models to compute the performance of
the system in different working conditions, which showed the effect of engine speed
on the pressure drop, spray characteristics, and turbulence patterns.

Light weighing of the engine is an effective way to achieve small and compact
UAVs. It involves use of lightweight material and advanced manufacturing processes
to deliver enhanced technical performance. This concept is widely explored in auto-
motive industry as well. Aluminium alloys have been used as major material used in
aerospace industry. Nayak and Date (2018) redesigned the UAV engine piston using
sheet metal manufacturing process consisting of deep drawing, redrawing, ironing,
punching, and hole ﬂanging. Die and punch of forming process were developed and
implemented successfully. A 24% reduction in weight was achieved compared to the
existing piston. Decisions like whether to use one or multiple propulsion for speciﬁc
ﬂight segment creates a new dimension of research for researchers. Opportunities
do exist, however they also bring challenges such as engine design modiﬁcations

11 Design and Development of Small Engines for UAV Applications

245

to optimize engine design parameters for UAV engines. we need to explore novel
approaches to improve overall efﬁciency and ﬂow simulation techniques to meet
emission norms for these UAV engines.
Abstract Automotive emissions account for a substantial percentage of the planet’s
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions and the numbers have been steadily soaring.
Environmental bodies and governments are therefore constantly enforcing tighter
legislations and as a result automotive OEMs are forced to ensure decreased emis-
sions. While safety requirements and luxurious interiors have resulted in a gain of
weight over the decades thus increasing emissions, OEMs are persistently being
asked to cut down emissions from fossil fuel driven vehicles, especially given the
rise of electric vehicles in recent years. OEMs have thus started replacing parts origi-
nally made with heavier materials with lighter materials in order to reduce the overall
weight of the vehicle—also known as lightweighting. While the original cast iron
engine blocks have long been replaced with steels followed by Aluminium, Magne-
sium alloys and the more recent carbon ﬁbre for certain engine parts; studies have
also started exploring the beneﬁts of advanced composites such as cellulose based
composites.
Keywords Lightweighting · GHG emissions · Aluminium

12.1 Introduction

Growing environmental awareness has constantly been highlighting the need for a
reduction in GHG emissions across the globe. As such, there has been tremendous
pressure on the transport industry in the form of various legislations continuously
demanding lower vehicular emissions and setting ambitious targets for further reduc-
tions in new vehicles. Naturally, tighter regulations have had an impact on the design
and development of new vehicles. Therefore, manufacturers have been steadily work-
ing on Vehicle Lightweighting—the process of reducing the weight of the vehicle.
Lightweighting is an established strategy known to improve fuel economy in
vehicles, thereby reducing fuel consumption in the transport industry. A reduction
in the mass of the vehicle results in lowering the inertial forces that the engine must
overcome when accelerating, thereby resulting in a reduction in the energy required
to move the vehicle, thus saving fuel and resulting in reduced emissions. Literature
reports that everytime a 10% reduction in vehicle weight occurs, a 5–7% reduction
in the fuel consumption of vehicles follows (Cheah 2010).

However, increasing safety norms have in turn been adding to the overall weight
of the vehicle forcing manufacturers to work twice as hard to cut down the weight
further. The ever-increasing demands for comforts and entertainment by consumers
have also led to a rise in the average vehicle weight over the years.

Car bodies have undergone a complete metamorphosis starting from heavy mild
steel bodies in the 1950s to Aluminium to AHSS to carbon composites. Taking a cue
from the aerospace industry which has been constantly investigating and investing
in lighter materials, the automotive industry has been trying to catch up, replacing
the traditional cast-iron and steels. Today we see an array of materials in a vehicle
ranging from aluminum, carbon-ﬁber composites, high-strength steel, magnesium,
titanium, to various types of foam, plastic and rubber as well as natural ﬁbers such
as bamboo and kenaf (Kulkarni et al. 2018). Mixed materials are now a norm with
OEMs however joining different materials together impeccably is still an ongoing
challenge, given the differences in material properties, textures, etc.

Car manufacturers have gone back and forth on the material used in the body
depending on factors like weight reduction, cosmetic effects, costs amongst others.
While car manufacturers are increasingly steering towards cleaner fuels like electric-
ity, the additional weight contributed by heavy weight batteries, complex powertrains
and other parts must not be overlooked.

This article aims to understand the choice of different materials in Automotive
Lightweighting and also explores the impact of lightweighting on CO2 emissions in
Heavy Duty Vehicles.

12.2 Materials in Lightweighting

The ﬁrst commercial car was designed in 1885 by Karl Benz as a combination of wood
and steel, which was soon replaced by an all steel car in 1912 by Budd. Since then, the
automotive industry has experimented with a variety of metals and alloys to achieve
speed, crash resistance, creep resistance and of course taking into consideration the
element of beauty. Various materials posed a plethora of challenges which has led
to the constant development of newer manufacturing techniques, joining processes
and opened up several opportunities for R&D in the automotive industry.

For example, the traditional ferrous castings had been cast aside and replaced by

newer materials like Aluminium, HSS, AHSS and magnesium alloys.

12 Automotive Lightweighting: A Brief Outline

249

12.2.1 Steel

Steel has long been known for its strength, stiffness and corrosion resistance amidst
other critical properties. It has therefore been an integral part of the automotive body
structure. Although steel had been the best solution for almost all body structures,
manufacturers started to look for cheaper and lighter alternatives. This led to the
evolution of steel grades such as advanced high-strength steel (AHSS) which have
been a huge hit in the automotive sector.

Some recent examples of lightweighting with steel include the 2015 Nissan
Murano which saved 146 lbs using AHSS; the 2015 Chrysler 200 body structure
with 60% AHSS, the 2016 Hyundai Tucson with more than 50% of the new struc-
ture and chassis being AHSS (ICCT 2017).

12.2.2 Aluminium

Aluminium is well known for its light weight, can be recycled from one product to
the next several times without losing its properties even after going through several
rounds of recycling. The transport industry has been demanding aluminium at an
increasing rate every year as illustrated in Fig. 12.1. However, its use in safety
critical parts was questioned, before stronger Aluminium alloys were developed
with strength multiplied three times (Bertram et al. 2007).

Fig. 12.1 Global total and transport related aluminium use (1990–2020) (Bertram et al. 2007)

250

A. Chebolu

12.2.3 Magnesium Alloys

Magnesium is the lightest of the structural automotive metals. Its alloys ﬁnd appli-
cations in Magnesium alloys have a high strength to weight ratio and a very high
speciﬁc strength but have issues such as corrosion resistance, creep resistance and
high costs.

Magnesium is less stiff than aluminium, thus requiring the addition of stringers
and stiffeners. It also has to be formed at a higher temperature if it is to be used for
stamped parts. Welding the alloys is a huge challenge as there is a high potential for
porosity in these alloys, along with a tendency for distortion and cracking.1 Presently,
magnesium is mostly used in die casting process in the automotive industry (Tang
2017). The resultant die castings are more robust than plastic moldings and have
tighter dimensional tolerances. With die castings, the problem of joining various
parts together does not arise and therefore, the question of weak joints does not arise.

12.2.4 Composites

The introduction of novel materials replacing existing materials is very challenging.
This is because of the need to set up new tooling, designing joining mechanisms,
training the workforce, changing the shop ﬂoor arrangement and so on. Although
initial studies might seem lucrative, practical deployment often pose problems and
unsolved hurdles causing delays, wastage and escalating costs. A transition to a new
material is always expensive initially and then the costs start yielding returns as the
technology matures and competitors emerge. For instance—there is a high energy
consumption for carbon ﬁbre production, there is a risk for negative CO2 impact; it
is expensive to tool/hard to form and so on. However, manufacturers are increasingly
steering towards carbon ﬁbres as it is an extreme lightweight material with superior
material properties.

Thermoset as well as thermoplastic composites are currently used in the automo-
tive industry. These include sheet molding compounds or bulk molding compounds
(SMCs/BMCs), glass ﬁbre mat thermoplastics (GMTs) and long ﬁbre reinforced
thermoplastic composites (LFRT), with glass ﬁbre being the ﬁbre component. Using
natural ﬁbres in the place of glass ﬁbres allows further lightweighting because natural
ﬁbres have a lower density (Pervaiz et al. 2016).

Studies also show the introduction of natural cellulose and kenaf in place of glass

ﬁbres for automobile components (Boland et al. 2016) (Fig. 12.2).

The resistance to the introduction of new materials right away is due a variety of
reasons, principally the costs. To begin with, most automotive manufacturers have
already invested heavily into in-house metal work to save the costs incurred by
buying from suppliers. In order to use new materials, the entire investment into the
metalworking becomes redundant. In 2013, several new applications helped create

1https://doi.org/10.1533/9780857095466.150. Last accessed on 01 June 2019.

12 Automotive Lightweighting: A Brief Outline

251

Fig. 12.2 Lightweight packages apply different lightweight material mixes with different weight
and cost impact (Heuss et al. 2013)

an interest in composites especially for automotive applications (promising to reduce
weight thereby increasing the fuel economy), but eventually plateaued once the costs
started added up.

This trend can be observed in the BMW’s i-Series wherein the i3 boasted of a
massive percentage of composites. Enthusiasts projected that 60% of vehicles would
have 20% composites usage by 2020. However, one can see a much lower percentage
of composites in BMW’s i5 and i7 models.2

12.3 Lightweighting Versus Fuel Consumption and CO2

Emissions

Sections 12.1 and 12.2 talk about the potential weight saving that can be achieved
by replacing the existing materials by lighter alternatives, the advantages and disad-
vantages of the various substitute materials. However, this leads to the most impor-
tant question—What levels of energy and CO2 savings can be accomplished by
lightweighting? This section talks about the targets set by the EU for emissions
reduction in HDV (heavy duty vehicles) and predicts if these targets might be met by
lightweighting. The following are the proposed targets for average CO2 emissions
from new lorries: The CO2 emissions should be 15% lower in 2025 than in 2019;

2http://compositesmanufacturingmagazine.com/2017/09/feedback-composites-global-
automotive-lightweighting-materials-conference/. Last accessed on 01 June 2019.

252

A. Chebolu

and in 2030, the emissions should be at least 30% lower than they are in 2019 (these
are the proposed targets, and will be reviewed in 2022) (EU Directorate-General for
Climate Action (DG CLIMA) 2016).

While cars like the Audi A8 have made headlines for their high Aluminium content
exceeding 500 kg, the aluminium content in cars has been steadily growing and
tripled between 1990 and 2012 and is expected to go higher (European Aluminium
Association 2013).

There is no one way to quantify the relationship between lightweighting and the
corresponding reduction CO2. Several theories have been proposed and several sim-
ulation tools have been developed to arrive at an empirical relation between the two.
For example, lightweighting without reducing the engine size versus lightweighting
with an increase/decrease in engine size will yield different results. There are one
too many variables involved and additionally certain studies include the emissions
involved in the material lifecycle—i.e., from its production to end of life cycle stage.
On an average, various studies have reported a reduction in CO2 emissions from

a meagre 3 g/km to as high as 15 g/km for a weight reduction of 100 kg.

In order to appreciate the reason behind this variation, one needs to understand

the fundamental difference between weight savings and fuel savings.

It can be seen from Fig. 12.3 that a combination of direct weight savings and
primary fuel savings exclusively will result in the lowest CO2 emissions reduction.
Correspondingly, the highest CO2 reductions can be targeted by combining indirect
weight-saving with secondary fuel saving (European Aluminium Association 2013).
In order to design new vehicles with lower emissions, several tools and simulation
models have been developed. Most models make use of Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
for their emissions predictions (Uslu and Celik 2018). VECTO is one such sim-
ulation tool, developed by the European Commission and is used for determining
CO2 emissions and Fuel Consumption from Heavy Duty Vehicles (trucks, buses

Lightweighting

Weight Savings

Fuel Savings

Direct Weight Savings

Indirect Weight Savings

Primary fuel saving

Secondary fuel saving

Replacing a heavier 
material with a 
lightweight alternative 
in one or more 
components

Additional lightweighting

Achieved by downsizing 
certain components while 
keeping the vehicle 
performance and 
functionality constant

Fuel savings achieved 
by moving a lighter 
mass

Achieved by 
optimising the drive 
train to keep vehicle 
performance constant

Fig. 12.3 Lightweighting classiﬁcation [inspired from European Aluminium Association (2013)]

12 Automotive Lightweighting: A Brief Outline

253

Fig. 12.4 Simulated CO2 emissions from a 12 t GVW rigid truck having various weights (reference
weight (100% point) for the vehicle in VECTO was 7750 kg) (Ricardo-AEA 2015)

and coaches) with a Gross Vehicle Weight above 3500 kg. Figure 12.4 shows the
simulated emissions computed using the VECTO tool as reported in Ricardo-AEA
(2015).

For the different vehicle categories, when driven over their commonly used drive

cycles, the CO2 emissions were calculated as:

Reference mass, Mref;
Reference CO2 emissions (in g CO2/km) CO2ref;
The gradient in the linear relationship between CO2 emissions and vehicle light
weighting, LWG;
The constant in the linear relationship between CO2 emissions and vehicle light
weighting, LWC;
The general formula for the emissions from a truck with Y% lightweighting is:
CO2 emissions/km for lighter vehicle = CO2ref × [(1 − Y) × LWG + LWC] (Ricardo-
AEA 2015).

12.3.1 The Global Impact of Light-Weighting

Apart from a per vehicle based analysis to understand the effect of lightweight-
ing, estimates have also been made to determine the prospective contribution of
lightweighting to a reduction of the global transport energy consumption and GHG
emissions (Helms and Lambrecht 2004). Reports welcome a global initiative to
implement lightweighting across various sectors.

Studies determined that as of 2000, a total of about 7600 million tonne (Mt) of
greenhouse gas emissions (CO2 eq) were released by a combination of all the modes
of transport. About 660 Mt of GHGs could be saved by replacing all the transport units
with lightweight vehicles with the same functional properties; with supplementary
savings of about 220 Mt of GHGs if these units were built by utilising additional
possibilities of light-weighting (Figs. 12.5 and 12.6).

254

A. Chebolu

Fig. 12.5 Potential of global annual greenhouse gas savings by lightweighting of vehicles (Bertram
et al. 2007)

Fig. 12.6 Savings per 100 kg weight reduction for different vehicle categories and their drive cycles
(Bertram et al. 2007; Ricardo-AEA 2015)

12.4 Conclusions

The weight of a vehicle impacts the energy consumed in overcoming the total resis-
tance (sum of rolling, gradient and acceleration resistance which is directly propor-
tional to the weight of the vehicle being considered). As such, reducing the vehicle
weight is of prime importance when aiming for a reduction in the emissions and
energy consumed. While various material alternatives are being explored in the trans-
port industry, each has its limitations ranging from costs, material properties, man-
ufacturing techniques to sustainability and recyclability. When the lifecycle of the
material itself is taken into account, the overall GHG emissions starting from mate-
rial production raise questions about the utility of such a choice. Tougher regulations

12 Automotive Lightweighting: A Brief Outline

255

aiming at increasingly ambitious reductions in emissions are pushing manufactur-
ers towards alternatives to traditional IC engines which in turn increase the vehicle
weight due to the heavy parts involved. Implementing lightweighting techniques is
therefore the ideal solution for reducing emissions and must be investigated so as to
be able to use novel materials in the automotive bodies.

Rather than treating lightweighting exclusively as an option, it must be coupled
with other techniques aimed at increasing the fuel economy or decreasing emissions.
For example, fuel additives help in better and complete combustion, modifying the
engine or other principal components of the car like the powertrain or even develop-
ing smarter catalytic converters especially in the case of diesel fuelled vehicles. In
systems as complicated as automotive vehicles—which are a combination of several
mechanical, electrical and electronic subsystems there is no direct solution to the
problem of reducing emissions, as seen in the course of this article. Furthermore,
the demand from consumers for bigger cars with an increasing focus on comfort and
entertainment coupled with stringent safety regulations adds to the overall weight of
the vehicle. This once again increases the energy consumption and therefore the fuel
emissions. Each time lightweighting takes some weight off the vehicle, it is added
back on because of factors such as the above. This was indeed the reason why vehicles
in the 2000s weighed more than those in the 1980s despite replacing all the heavier
steel. Therefore, in conclusion the problem of reducing vehicular emissions needs to
be solved modularly, yet needs to be looked at universally with all the subsystems
considered together.