Introduction to Combustion Simulations
and Optical Diagnostic Techniques
for Internal Combustion Engines
Abstract In the last few decades, application of advanced combustion technolo-
gies, engine design modiﬁcations, after-treatment techniques, etc. have improved
engine performance and reduced exhaust emissions. However, advancement in tech-
nologies introduced a large number of parameters, which need to be optimised for
satisfactory results. This increases the system complexity therefore it become very
difﬁcult to perform experiments for optimization of each parameter. In recent years,
simulation techniques have shown their potential to resolve this issue. Simulation
techniques can optimize such complex systems and provide optimized solution with
less effort involvement. Optical diagnostic techniques are the other important area
for internal combustion engines. These techniques can provide information about in-
cylinder conditions, spray parameters, fuel-air mixing and combustion, which is not
possible with conventional techniques. This book is based on these simulation and
optical diagnostic techniques and provides case studies to resolve several technical
issues involved with internal combustion engines. Few chapters based on advanced
topics such as microwave-assisted plasma ignition, laser ignition, etc. are the impor-
tant aspect of this book. Chapters are based on review of state-of-the-art models
for combustion, with special focus on the theory, development and applications of
these combustion models in internal combustion systems make this book suitable
for researchers, working in the area of alternative fuels and advanced combustion
techniques.
Keywords Combustion simulations · Optical diagnostics · Fuel spray · Numerical
techniques · Advanced combustion techniques
Rapid depletion of petroleum and associated environmental pollution lead to sus-
tainability issues for internal combustion (IC) engines. Various techniques such as
advanced combustion techniques, alternative fuels, aftertreatment devices, etc. have
successfully reduced exhaust emissions from IC engines however, these techniques
are complex and have several limitations (Singh and Agarwal 2018). It is very dif-
ﬁcult to perform IC engine experiments using all these techniques to optimize the
combustion, performance and emission characteristics simultaneously because this
is a time consuming process. Lack of understanding of different in-cylinder pro-
cesses such as fuel spray evolution, fuel-air mixing, etc. also play important role
in engine performance. Therefore, it become necessary to take these processes into
consideration during performance and emission optimization. These processes can
be investigated using different optical diagnostic techniques. This book is focussed
on all such techniques including simulations and optical diagnostics. This book has
been divided into four sections, starting with introduction chapter as ﬁrst section.

Second section of this book is based on simulation techniques. First chapter of this
section gives an idea about the simulation technique in internal combustion engines.
Inclusion of strategies for adaptation of alternative fuels such as methanol, ethanol,
biodiesel, etc. makes this chapter more important for IC engine researchers. Dis-
cussion about the design aspects of the after-treatment devices is another important
aspect of this chapter by which better emission results can be achieved from IC
engines. This chapter discusses about the modelling aspects in the entire complex
engine system by discussing the critical components of the system comprehensively.
Second chapter of this section emphasizes on the application of modelling and opti-
cal diagnostic techniques for IC engines. In this chapter, a droplet breakup model has
been developed and optimized under non-evaporative diesel spray with a large-eddy
simulation. This chapter describes about a hybrid breakup model, which combines the
Kelvin–Helmholtz and modiﬁed Taylor analogy breakup model, which are used for
the primary and secondary breakup models, respectively. For validating these mod-
els, spray simulations were performed under non-evaporative condition and results
showed a good agreement with the simulation results of Kelvin–Helmholtz–Modi-
ﬁed Taylor analogy breakup models. Third chapter of this section discusses about the
emulsiﬁed fuel technology for reducing the pollutant emitted from IC engines and to
slow down the rate of conventional fuel consumption. This technology is based on
blending of water or some other alternative fuel such as alcohols in conventional fuel.
This technology has signiﬁcant impact on oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and particulate
matter (PM) reduction. This chapter presents the numerical analysis of emulsiﬁed
fuel utilization in compression ignition (CI) engines.

Third section of this book is based on different optical diagnostic techniques used
for spray investigations in CI and spark ignition (SI) engines. First chapter of this
section discusses about the development of spray in CI engines. Main objective of
this chapter is to emphasize on fuel spray impingement on the cylinder wall and
piston top because it affects hydrocarbon (HC) and PM emissions. This chapter
reviews several experimental investigations such as phase Doppler interferometry
(PDI), spray imaging etc. to get idea about different physical processes involved
with fuel spray in a diesel engine. Second chapter in based on spray evolution in a

1 Introduction to Combustion Simulations …

5

gasoline direct injection (GDI) engine. Main objective of this chapter is to investi-
gate the effects of fuel injection pressure (FIP) on spray characteristics because spray
characteristics at high FIPs affect engine performance and emission characteristics.
This chapter presents a combined investigation using both simulation as well exper-
imental techniques. Simulation experiments were performed in an optical accessible
constant volume chamber and results were analysed using large-eddy simulation
(LES) method and a standard Lagrangian spray model. The fuel spray atomization
was modelled using the Kelvin Helmholtz–Rayleigh Taylor (KH-RT) model, and
droplet size distribution followed the Rosin-Rammler distribution function. For val-
idating the simulation results, results such as liquid penetration length of spray, the
mean droplet sizes such as arithmetic mean diameter and Sauter mean diameter
(SMD) of the spray droplets were compared with the measured droplet sizes as a
function of pressure. Third chapter of this section shows the cavitation process, which
is a common phenomenon of high pressure fuel injectors. This chapter presents both
the advantages as well as disadvantages of cavitation process. This chapter reviews
different studies related to cavitation process and emphasizes the importance of this
process in fuel spray. Last chapter of this section discusses about the complexity
involved with the fuel injection equipment’s of modern CRDI system. The operation
of these devices is highly unsteady, involving moving geometries such as needle
valves. Phase change or transition from subcritical to transcritical/supercritical state
of matter is another difﬁculty involved with fuel injectors. This chapters deals with
all these issues and discusses the techniques to resolve these issues.

Last section of this book includes two chapters covering two different aspects
related to IC engines. First chapter is based on development of laser ignition (LI)
technology for multi-cylinder engines, which can deliver higher engine efﬁciency
and has potential to reduce harmful gaseous emissions such as NOx (Agarwal
et al. 2017). This chapter emphasizes the application of laser ignition technology
in gaseous fuelled engines and adaptation in for implementation in automotive sec-
tor. LI technology is capable of igniting leaner fuel-air mixture which is not possible
by conventional spark plugs. Second chapter is based on ﬂame kernel growth by
microwave-assisted plasma ignition (MSPI). This chapter describes the application
of non-thermal plasma ignition system, which seems to be a promising path to develop
efﬁcient and clean gasoline vehicles. This chapter presents different aspects involved
in the development of microwave-assisted plasma ignition with customized electric
components and igniter. Inclusion of high-speed shadowgraph imaging and hydroxyl
(–OH) radical imaging under various air-fuel ratio, ambient pressure, and ignition
strategy conditions are another important aspect of this chapter.

Speciﬁc topics covered in the monograph include:

(cid:129) Introduction to combustion simulations and optical diagnostic techniques for inter-

nal combustion engines

(cid:129) Engine modelling aspects for adaption of alternative fuel
(cid:129) Advanced techniques for combustion simulations and optical diagnostics in inter-

nal combustion engines

(cid:129) Numerical investigations on water-ethanol-diesel emulsiﬁed fuel

6

A. P. Singh et al.

(cid:129) Optical diagnostics of spray development in diesel engines
(cid:129) Investigation of inﬂuence of injection pressure on gasoline fuel spray characteris-

tics using numerical simulation

(cid:129) Cavitation in Injectors: A brief review of the diagnostics of liquid-vapour ﬂow

within injector nozzles

(cid:129) Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems
(cid:129) Laser ignition technology for gaseous fuelled auto-motive engines
(cid:129) Improvement of ﬂame kernel growth by microwave-assisted plasma ignition.

The topics are organized in four different sections: (i) General, (ii) Simulations
in Internal Combustion Engines, (iii) Optical Diagnostics in IC Engines, and (iv)
Miscellaneous.
Simulations in Internal Combustion
Engines

Chapter 2
Modelling Aspects for Adaptation
of Alternative Fuels in IC Engines

Hardikk Valera, Dhananjay Kumar, Akhilendra Pratap Singh
and Avinash Kumar Agarwal

Abstract Deteriorating environment and stricter emission norms are motivating
researchers for ﬁnding sustainable transport solutions. Researchers are focusing
on two approaches namely adaptation of alternative fuels, and exhaust gas after-
treatment. Utilization of alternate fuels such as methanol, ethanol, and biodiesel etc.
in internal combustion (IC) engines reduces inherent chemical components present
in conventional fossil fuels. These chemical species are a major source of harm-
ful pollutants such as particulate matter (PM), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs), PM bound trace metals, etc. Advancement in after-treatment technologies
such as optimization of hexagonal cells of substrate, use of noble metals, etc. are
also effective in reducing pollutants from engine tail-pipe. However, developments
for adaptation of these technologies in existing engines is a challenging task. For
adaptation of any alternative fuel, engine components need to be modiﬁed accord-
ing to fuel properties. However, optimization of design parameters of thousands of
engine components is a tedious task, which cannot be done experimentally. This
can be done easily using modelling techniques, in which a prototype engine can be
developed to investigate the effect of engine design parameters and fuel properties
on the engine performance and emission characteristics. In last few years, 1-D and
3-D simulation tools have been extensively explored for engine design and perfor-
mance optimization. This chapter discusses basic modelling techniques, which can
be used for engine research. This chapter also presents heat transfer models, which
are important for in-cylinder combustion analysis. Few ﬂuid-ﬂow models have also
been discussed in this chapter, which are mainly used for in-cylinder air-ﬂow inves-
tigations, fuel ﬂow in the fuel injection system, etc. Overall, this chapter discusses
modelling aspects related to engine design so that alternative fuels can be adapted.
Keywords Transportation sector · Engines · Modelling · 1-D modelling · 3-D
modelling
Internal combustion (IC) engines are primary choice for transport sector due to their
proven durability, reliability, cost, and user friendliness. Now-a-days, new technolo-
gies such as electric vehicles (EVs), hybrid vehicles, etc. have been introduced in
transport sector, however, these vehicles have certain limitations such as cost, com-
plexity, limited range, etc. Therefore, IC engines still are the main choice in the
transport sector. Since last few decades, IC engines are facing bad press because of
energy security and environmental issues. To resolve these issues, IC engines have
changed remarkably due to advancement in engine technologies, introduction of new
fuels and development of emission compliance technologies. Development of oxida-
tion catalysts for SI engines reduced carbon monoxide (CO) emission signiﬁcantly.
Introduction of three-way catalytic (TWC) converter reduced the toxic exhaust gases
hydrocarbons (HC), oxides of nitrogen (NOX), and CO emissions. However, these
interventions are not enough for meeting upcoming emission norms.

Rapidly depleting fossil fuels and continuously increasing demand for these fos-
sil fuels are the other challenges. International Energy Agency (IEA) reported that
demand for petroleum may increase by 20% by 2035 compared to 2010 (Statistics by
International Energy Agency 2018). In such a critical situation, automotive industry
is desperately looking for alternative energy sources, which would improve ambi-
ent air quality, reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and contribute to national
energy security (Knothe 2010; https://www.e-education.psu.edu/egee439/node/684;
Agarwal 1998; Agarwal and Das 2001; Urja 2013). Therefore, researchers are explor-
ing sustainable alternative fuels, which can be utilized in new engines as well as
existing engines. Design of existing engines is the main constraint for adaption of
alternative fuels because current engines are designed to operate on conventional
fuels, which have fuel properties quite different from the alternate fuels. Therefore,
100% replacement of fossil fuels with alternate fuels is very challenging. In such a
scenario, it is important to modify the design of engine component so that engines
fuelled by alternative fuels can be operated efﬁciently and in an eco-friendly manner.
These engine modiﬁcations are tedious tasks because an engine consists of hundreds
of components. Modelling and simulation techniques make this task relatively easier
compared to experimental techniques. Modelling is generally regarded as the pro-
cess of describing the physical phenomena in a particular model with the help of
mathematical equations and solution of these equations predicts the effects of new
fuel, without actually performing any engine experiment. Using these techniques,
initial effects of alternative fuels on engine performance and emissions can be pre-
dicted by making the computational models of the physical process involved in the
engine using different simulation tools. Using sophisticated modelling techniques,
more extensive analysis is also possible, which helps in understanding various phe-
nomenons such as fuel-air chemical kinetics, fuel sprays, in-cylinder combustion,
etc.

In last few decades, engine modelling efforts have primarily concentrated on
engine performance improvements and reduction of emissions. There are numerous

2 Modelling Aspects for Adaptation of Alternative Fuels …

11

on prepared models.

(cid:129) Provides

ics/animations.

plex engine test cells.

modelling studies available in open literature, which show the potential of modelling
and simulations in the domain of IC engine research. Initially, researchers used these
techniques for preliminary research studies however now-a-days, these techniques
are used for solving complex engine problems, which are not solvable by experiments.
Some features of modelling techniques are given below:
(cid:129) Opens the door for exploring solutions, which never appeared in reality.
(cid:129) Provides opportunity to generate new ideas and takes innovative decisions based

(cid:129) Helps to understand the effects of proposed solution on each engine parts such as

on the piston, cylinder, fuel injection equipment, mufﬂer, etc.

comparison among different possible

solutions using graph-

(cid:129) Allows to perform tests on physical models without preparing expensive and com-

(cid:129) Perform experiments without harming the person or the ambient environment.
(cid:129) Modelling can show simultaneous effects of new design of different engine parts.

Basic procedure for engine modelling to study the effects of alternative fuels in

an IC engine is given below:

Step 1: Conduct the engine experiments using baseline fuel and collect engine per-
formance and emissions data at selected operating conditions.
Step 2: Prepare an engine model in 1-D/3-D simulation softwares and compute the
engine performance and emissions data at tested conditions.
Step 3: Validate the computational model using the experimental data. Use calibration
procedures, if required.
Step 4: Replace baseline fuel with alternative fuel in the validated engine model to
compute the results.
Step 5: Analyse the effects of alternative fuels on engine performance and emissions.

solving problems

several commercial

Due to extensive research in IC engines,

simula-
such as GT-Power, Converge, and KIVA, etc. are avail-
tion softwares
able, which are especially designed for
related to IC
engines, combustion and ﬂuid ﬂow. These softwares have a number of mod-
ules, which can solve complex problems of
IC engines using governing
mathematical equations (https://www.gtisoft.com/gt-suite-applications/propulsion-
systems/gt-power-engine-simulation-software/, https://convergecfd.com/, https://
www.mechanicalbooster.com/2017/10/spark-ignition-engine.html). Currently 1-D
and 3-D modelling softwares are the most used simulation tools in the domain of IC
engines. 1-D Modelling is used to simulate complex behaviour of entire engine sys-
tems as a whole, such as fuel injection system, gas exchange system, turbocharger,
etc. On the other hand, 3-D Modelling focuses on a single component of the system
(such as cylinder, injector, etc.) without considering their dynamic interaction with
other components.

This chapter is based on these two modelling techniques with greater emphasis
on 1-D modelling. This chapter includes general description of these modelling

12

H. Valera et al.

techniques and covers different modelling aspects of the IC engines. Thrust is given
on modelling of essential components such as injectors, cylinders, valves, etc. using
1-D modelling. Required comprehensive details for each component has also been
discussed. Attention is given to the heat transfer model since it calculates how the
heat will transferred to the combustion chamber walls. In the last section, a 1-D
model using GT-Power software is demonstrated.

2.2 General Architecture of IC Engines

There are two types of engines used in transportation sector. First type is spark
ignition (SI) engines, operating on Otto cycle using a spark plug as an ignition source.
SI engines use either carburetor or port fuel injectors for supplying the fuel in the
engine intake manifold. Second type is compression ignition (CI) engines in which
the engines, operating on diesel cycle and ignition is initiated by high-pressure and
temperature generated during the compression stroke. In CI engines, fuel injectors are
used to inject fuel directly into combustion chamber. During combustion, chemical
energy of fuel is released and transferred as mechanical work to the piston, through
which power comes as an output to move the wheels. Fuel supply system is the most
important part of an engine, which supplies the required amount of fuel at a certain
point of time in each engine cycle.

2.2.1 SI Engine

SI engines require an ignition source such as spark plug, which creates the
spark inside the combustion chamber (https://www.mechanicalbooster.com/2017/
10/spark-ignition-engine.html). Spark engines use gasoline like fuels (high octane
fuels). Working of a typical SI engine is summarized below:

(i) Suction stroke: Air-fuel mixture enters the cylinder.
(ii) Compression stroke: Air-fuel mixture get compressed, resulting in high pres-

sure and temperature.

(iii) Power stroke: Power generation due to combustion of fuel-air mixture.
(iv) Exhaust stroke: Burnt gases evacuate out of the engine.

Generally the fuel is injected via carburetor during the suction stroke, and is shown

in Fig. 2.1.

Some essential features of the SI engines are mentioned below:

(cid:129) The compression ratio of the engine is between 6 and 10.
(cid:129) Lightweight makes these engines suitable for light-duty applications such as

motorcycles and lawnmovers.

2 Modelling Aspects for Adaptation of Alternative Fuels …

13

Fig. 2.1 Schematic of a SI engine system

(cid:129) Higher maximum engine speed can be achieved due to their lightweight construc-

(cid:129) Fuels having high self-ignition temperature (high octane fuels) are suitable for SI

tion.

engines.

2.2.2 CI Engine

In CI engines, fuel is ignited due to its injection in the heated and pressurised air
at the end of the compression stroke (https://www.howacarworks.com/basics/how-
a-diesel-engine-works). In CI engines, diesel like fuels with high cetane numbers
are preferred due to their low knock tendency. General working of diesel engines is
given below:

(i) Suction stroke: Air enters into the cylinder.
(ii) Compression stroke: Air is compressed, and fuel is directly injected into the
cylinder in high temperature and pressure air at the end of the compression
stroke.

(iii) Power stroke: Power generation due to combustion of fuel-air mixture.
(iv) Exhaust stroke: Piston pushes the burnt gases out of the engine cylinder.

Generally fuel is injected directly into the combustion chamber through an injector
at the end of the compression stroke (Fig. 2.2). Other features of the CI engines are
given below:

14

Fig. 2.2 Schematic of a CI
engine system

H. Valera et al.

(cid:129) Compression ratio of the engine is between 14 and 22.
(cid:129) Heavyweight due to high injection pressure makes it suitable for heavy-duty appli-

cations such as buses, trucks and tractors.

(cid:129) Relatively low engine speeds are preferred due to its heavy-weight construction.
(cid:129) Fuel having low self-ignition temperature are desirable.

In the next section, modelling of different engine sub-systems are discussed.

2.3 Modelling of IC Engines

The engine consists a large number of components such as fuel injector, cylinder,
cranktrain, valves, etc. Each part affects the performance and emission character-
istics of the engine. Therefore it is very important to model each part carefully for
simulating the engine experiments. Simulation softwares require a set of minimum
information about each part before starting the modelling. Next sub-section dis-
cusses required critical information about the engine components and explains the
modelling aspects of these components.

2.3.1 Fuel Injector

Fuel injector is used to deliver the fuel into the port or into the engine cylinder for
powering the engine. Injector contains one needle, which acts as a valve to open
or close the injector passage hole through which fuels comes out at certain fuel
injection pressure (FIP). Injector nozzle performs two important functions namely
fuel atomization and fuel distribution inside the combustion chamber. Fuel distri-
bution is also affected by several other parameters such as FIP, ambient air density
at the time of fuel injection, and physical properties of the fuel. High FIP leads

2 Modelling Aspects for Adaptation of Alternative Fuels …

15

to improved fuel atomization and fuel spray penetration however, high air density
inside the combustion chamber results in superior dispersion of fuel. Fuel properties
such as vapour pressure, viscosity, and self-ignition temperature also play a vital role
in fuel spray characteristics. In a pressure-activated injector, one end is exposed to
the fuel pressure, and the another end is exposed to preloaded spring. Needle is in
closed condition, when spring force is greater than the fuel pressure. Fuel pump is
connected to injectors via a high pressure pipe. Fuel injection starts with upward
movement of needle from the needle seat, until the fuel pressure is sufﬁcient to over-
come the spring force. In a pneumatically-activated injector, one end is exposed to
the fuel pressure, and the other end is connected to the needle. Opening and closing
of the needle can be done by changing the hydraulic pressure. Injector modelling
requires some essential inputs, as shown in Table 2.1.

2.3.2 Cylinder

Cylinder is the most critical part of engine, which can be sleeved and sleeveless.
Sleeved cylinders are lined with a harder metal compared to block metal, and sleeve-
less cylinders are coated with wear resistant materials. A cylinder’s displacement is
calculated by multiplying its cross-sectional area and stroke length. Multi-cylinders

Table 2.1 Required inputs for injector modelling

Parameter

Description

Start of injection (SoI)

End of injection (EoI)

Injected fuel mass

Injection duration

Injection proﬁle

Nozzle discharge coefﬁcient

Time at which fuel injection starts. Usually expressed as
crank angle degree (CAD) relative to TDC

Time at which fuel injection stops. Usually expressed as CAD
relative to TDC

Mass of fuel injected into the cylinder. Usually expressed in
terms of mg/stroke or mg/cycle

Time period during which fuel is injected into the combustion
chamber. Injection duration can be expressed as time
difference between EoI and SoI

Fuel injection rate, which can be expressed as injection shape
such as boot, ramp, square etc.

It is a correction factor used to deﬁne the actual mass injected
into the cylinder

Number of holes

Type of ﬂuid

Number of holes available at the nozzle tip

Diesel, gasoline, methanol, ethanol, etc.

Injected fuel temperature

Temperature of fuel at the time of injection

Nozzle/atomizer hole diameter

Individual nozzle hole diameter

Injector location

In case of port injection, it is the distance between injector
and the intake valve/port

16

H. Valera et al.

displacement is calculated by following the above mentioned procedure and further
multiplying with the number of cylinders. Modelling of cylinders is quite complex
because it involves the simultaneous motion of several components. Generally, three
combustion models are used for cylinder modelling (Hariram and Bharathwaaj 2016).

(i) Zero-dimensional model
(ii) Quasi-dimensional model
(iii) Multi-dimensional model

Zero-dimensional models are the most suitable and simple models for under-
standing the effects of engine operating parameters on overall heat release rates and
in-cylinder pressure. These models use various assumptions and simpliﬁcations and
do not consider complex ﬂow-ﬁeld dimensions. Zero-dimensional model is an open
system, which generally evaluates the instantaneous in-cylinder combustion charac-
teristics such as pressure, temperature, heat release rate, etc. by utilizing mass and
energy conservation equations (Payri et al. 2011). Single composition of the cylinder
contents and uniform state is assumed throughout the control volume, which leads to
limitation in terms of emission predictions. Overall, this is a good tool for predicting
combustion parameters for different engines and operating conditions (Payri et al.
2011). Due to complications of the engine, various input constraints such as injection
timing/spark timing, EGR, etc., can not be incorporated in this model, leading to inac-
curate predictions. Zero-dimensional models are further classiﬁed into single-zone
models, two-zone models and multi-zone models (Neshat et al. 2017). Single zone
models are the ones, in which working ﬂuid is considered as one thermodynamic
system, and energy released from the fuel combustion is calculated by using ﬁrst law
of thermodynamics applied to the system. In two-zone models, the working ﬂuid is
considered in two zones, namely burned zone and unburned zone (Fig. 2.3). These
zones act like two different thermodynamic systems with energy and mass inter-
actions having common surrounding of cylinder walls. However, two-zone models
have several assumptions as mentioned below.

Fig. 2.3 Burned and unburned zones in the engine cylinder

2 Modelling Aspects for Adaptation of Alternative Fuels …

17

(cid:129) The burned and unburned zones are modelled as ideal gases with different physical

properties.

(cid:129) Unburned zone is modelled as a premixed fuel-air mixture. Therefore it is more
accurate/realistic to model SI engine combustion rather than CI combustion.
(cid:129) Characteristic gas constants for both zones do not vary with temperature and
pressure in the modelling. If it varies up to certain extent, then it is modelled using
explicit relationship between gas constant and involved gas properties (T, P, etc.)
(cid:129) Heat does not transfer from burned to unburned zone and vice versa in modelling.
(cid:129) Enthalpy of fuel is ignored during modelling, since it is not signiﬁcant.
(cid:129) Crevice losses are not considered.
(cid:129) Instantaneous pressure in both zones is considered to be the same.

Based on the assumptions as mentioned earlier, combustion is modelled in the

following manner using two different equations.

1. Cylinder acts like two divided chambers namely burned zone and unburned zone.
It also contains residual gases from the previous cycle (https://www.gtisoft.com).
2. As combustion progresses, air-fuel mixture is transferred from the unburned zone
to the burned zone. Rate of transfer of air-fuel mixture from unburned zone to
burned zone is considered as ‘burn rate’, which is an important parameter for
modelling.

3. Chemical equilibrium calculations start once air-fuel mixture transfers from the
unburned zone to the burned zone and calculate thirteen combustion product
species, i.e., H2O, CO2, N, O, H, CO, H2, OH, NO, SO2, Air, N2, O2.

Governing Equation for Unburned Zone (https://www.gtisoft.com):

d(mubeub)
dt

= −p

dVub
dt

− Qub

+

dmf
dt

hf + dma
dt

ha

+ dmﬁ
dt

hﬁ

(2.1)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

where,
mub = Mass of the unburned zone, vub = Volume of zone
mf = Mass of fuel, Qub = Heat transfer rate in unburned zone
mﬁ = Mass of injected fuel, ha = Enthalpy of air mass
ma = Mass of air, hf = Enthalpy of fuel mass
eub = Unburned zone energy, hﬁ = Enthalpy of injected fuel mass
ma = Mass of air, hf = Enthalpy of fuel mass
eub = Unburned zone energy, hﬁ = Enthalpy of injected fuel mass
p = Cylinder Pressure

ub denotes the unburned zone.

Governing Equation for Burned Zone (https://www.gtisoft.com):

d(mbeb)
dt

= −p

dVb
dt

− Qb

+

dmf
dt

hf + dma
dt

ha

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

(2.2)

18

H. Valera et al.

where b denotes the burned zone, and remaining symbols are similar to that of
unburned zone.

Multi-zone models give results closer to reality since it considers the energy
and mass balance between the two zones. However for modeling, some additional
parameters are required as shown in Table 2.2.

2.3.3 Heat Transfer Models

There are various heat transfer models used for 1-D modelling. In GT Power,
WoschniGT model is used for calculating the heat transfer coefﬁcients if measured
swirl data is not available. This model uses following equation for calculating the
heat transfer coefﬁcient (Heywood 1988).

hc = 3.01426 p0.8w0.8

D0.2T 0.50

(2.3)

Table 2.2 Required input parameters for cylinder modeling

Parameter

Fluid initial state

Wall temperature

Heat transfer model

Flow object

Description

Initial condition of the cylinder

Initial temperature of cylinder before starting of combustion

There are some models, which are used to calculate the heat
transfer coefﬁcients such as WoschniGT, WoschniClassic,
WoschniSwirl, WoschniHuber and Hohenberg. These
models use different coefﬁcients to calculate heat transfer
in the cylinder

Comprehensive data of piston geometry is used for
calculating the inside ﬂow behavior

Combustion object

Object which gives fuel burn rate proﬁle as input

Head initial temperature

Initial temperature of head mass, which are in contact with
the combustion gases

Piston initial temperature

Initial temperature of entire piston including piston rings

Cylinder initial temperature

Initial temperature of the cylinder liner

Inlet valve initial temperature

Exhaust valve initial temperature

Cylinder coolant temperature

Head oil temperature

Initial temperature of an inlet valve including associated
valve guides

Initial temperature of an exhaust valve including associated
valve guides

Temperature of the coolant, which ﬂows on the back-side of
the cylinder walls

Temperature of the lubricating oil, which ﬂows over the
head surface

Head oil heat transfer coefﬁcient Heat transfer coefﬁcient of the oil, which ﬂows over the

head surface

2 Modelling Aspects for Adaptation of Alternative Fuels …

19

The WoschniClassic model calculates the heat transfer coefﬁcient without con-
sidering the effect of swirl and uses the following equation for calculating the heat
transfer coefﬁcient (Heywood 1988).

hc = 3.26 p0.8w0.8
D0.2T 0.53

(2.4)

where,
hc = Convective heat transfer coefﬁcient (WK/m2)
D = Cylinder bore (m)
p = Cylinder pressure (kPa)
T = Cylinder temperature (K)
W = Average cylinder gas velocity (m/s)

WoschniSwirl and WoschniHuber model uses the same equation as used by
WoschniClassic model, but these models utilize swirl number from the center region.

2.3.4 Engine Crank-Train

Crank-train translates the reciprocating motion of the pistons into the rotary motion.
This is comprised of three parts namely connecting rod, crankshaft and ﬂywheel.
Connecting rod is modeled as a simple beam, which connects the piston and the
crankshaft via rotating bearing. Crankshaft drives the cooling system and valve train
of the system.

It is a most stressed component of the system as it is subjected to the high ten-
sile, bending and compressive stresses. Flywheel performs multiple functions in the
engine. It adds additional inertia on the crankshaft to minimizes the cyclic variations
produced by the reciprocating motion of the piston. Some additional parameters have
to be deﬁned for modelling the crank-train (Table 2.3).

2.3.5 Valves

Accuracy in valve modelling is very important because it affects the volumetric
efﬁciency, engine noise, mechanical friction and pumping loss. Valve controls the
inlet and outlet movements of charge and exhaust gases in the cylinders concerning
different piston positions. Valves are located in the cylinder head on all the engines.
The most popular shape of poppet-valve for automobile application is a small cup at
one end of the stem. A valve stem is placed in a circular passage in the cylinder head.
Valve disc head basically opens and closes the ported passage during the in and out
movement of the stem. However, some additional parameters have to be deﬁned for
modelling the valvestrain as shown in Table 2.4.

20

H. Valera et al.

2.3.6 Oriﬁce Connection

Oriﬁce connections is used to measure the ﬂow rate of fuel or exhaust gas, which
mainly work on the differential pressure measurement principle. This connection is
used at the location, where ﬂow-rate measurements are required. The oriﬁce connec-
tion offers the following advantages.
(cid:129) It measures a wide range of ﬂow rates in a pipe.
(cid:129) Most suitable for measuring the fuel and exhaust ﬂow rates.
(cid:129) Offers very small amount of pressure drops across the sides of oriﬁce plates.

For modeling, some additional parameters are required as given in Table 2.5.

2.4 Model Demonstration

This section describes the simple model preparation using commercialized 1-D soft-
ware GT-Power. GT-SUITE have a comprehensive set of automotive components
in their libraries, which are used to simulate the physics of ﬂuid ﬂow, thermal,

Table 2.3 Required input for crank-train modelling

Parameter

Engine type

Description

2-stroke; 4-stroke

Speed or load speciﬁcations

Start of cycle (CA at IVC)

It depends on the study objective of the model. Either it is for
different speeds or percentage of total load

It is a value after the closing of the inlet valve and before the
start of combustion

It is a detailed geometry of the cylinder such as bore, stroke and
compression ratio

This value is necessary during the modelling of multi-cylinder
engine

It shows the sequence of cylinder ﬁring

It is an angle of the ﬁring relative to the preceding cylinder

Cylinder geometry

Firing order

Cylinder number

Firing intervals

Geometry of connecting rod All dimensions are required such as big end bore, main rod

length and connecting rod length

Table 2.4 Required inputs for valves

Parameter

Description

Cam timing angle Angle between the cam timing anchor reference and cam timing lift array

Distance through which valve is opened maximum from its seated position

Valve lift

Valve lash

Clearance between valve and camshaft

2 Modelling Aspects for Adaptation of Alternative Fuels …

21

Table 2.5 Modelling of
oriﬁce connections

Parameter

Hole diameter

Geometric area

Description

Diameter of the oriﬁce

Total area of the oriﬁce

Forward discharge coefﬁcient Discharge coefﬁcient of the

oriﬁce in the forward direction

Reverse discharge coefﬁcient Discharge coefﬁcient of the

oriﬁce in the reverse direction

mechanical, electrical, magnetic properties of materials and controls (https://www.
gtisoft.com/). These libraries are used to build accurate models of entire vehicle,
engine, driveline, transmission, general powertrain, mechanical systems, hydraulics,
lubrication, friction, thermal management, cooling, chemistry, after treatment and
much more (https://www.gtisoft.com/). GT-SUITE provides 1-D modeling solutions
for real-time, HiL/SiL, and control system simulations. Also, a broad array of built-in
advanced features such as design of experiments (DoE), optimization. In addition,
distributed and parallel processing enhance user productivity and effectiveness. The
software is designed around a series of icons and connectors that deﬁne each engine
components and a logical interface for their use (Kmec et al. 2009). There are two
main operating domains of this software called GT-ISE and GT-POST. GT-ISE pro-
vides an environment, where various components are taken out in project map to
make the model, simulations setting are declared, simulations are launched in single
or batch mode. 1-D model is then prepared using the following steps where dummy
values are selected to present the demonstration model. Typical view of the model is
shown in Fig. 2.4.

Step 1: Inlet end environment is selected from the template library and different
boundary conditions such as pressure, temperature, humidity are deﬁned in the inputs.

Fig. 2.4 Typical map view of the 1-D model of a single cylinder engine

22

H. Valera et al.

Step 2: Pipe round object is selected to deﬁne a pipe connections, which are generally
used in the air intake. Cross-section area is given as input.
Step 3: Bend pipe round is selected to deﬁne a bend pipe connections, where bend
angle is given as input.
Step 4: Oriﬁce is selected from the library to calculate the mass ﬂow rate between the
adjacent ﬂow volumes, where oriﬁce diameter and discharge coefﬁcients are given
as inputs.
Step 5: Cylinder is selected from the library to specify the attributes of the engine
cylinder. Required inputs are given as mentioned in Table 2.2.
Step 6: Valve cam connections are selected to deﬁne characteristics of a cam-driven
valve where essential inputs such as geometry, lift proﬁle, and ﬂow characteristics
are deﬁned.
Step 7: Engine crank-train is selected from the library to model the kinematics and
rigid dynamics of a common reciprocating IC engine crank-train. Required inputs
are given as mentioned in Table 2.3.
Step 8: Injector is selected to deﬁne the required parameters such as injection of a
periodic mass ﬂow rate or pressure proﬁle of fuel.

Da Silva Trindade and dos Santos prepared 1-D model using GT-Power to validate
the simulation results. Figure 2.5 (da Silva Trindade and dos Santos 2018) shows the
in-cylinder pressure variations w.r.t. crank angle degree (CAD) position of an engine
fuelled with BU40 (60% gasoline and 40% butanol on volume basis) and gasoline.
Good correlation between experimental and computational results was reported (8%
deviation between experimental and simulation results). The maximum value of

Fig. 2.5 In-cylinder pressure versus CAD for BU40 and gasoline (da Silva Trindade and dos Santos
2018) (experimental results: red lines and computational results: black lines)

2 Modelling Aspects for Adaptation of Alternative Fuels …

23

experimental results was slightly lower than simulation results because of pressure
losses in the real engine.

Several other researchers performed comparative investigations of alternate fuels
vis-à-vis baseline petroleum based fuels to investigate the effects on engine per-
formance parameters. Table 2.6 shows the modelling results for performance and
emissions of the engines fuelled with different alternative fuels. Preliminary results
of modelling can be validated using experimental results and after the validation of
model, more extensive investigations can be done using modelling and simulation
tools, making the development process quicker and cheaper.

2.5 Conclusions

Modelling techniques help extensively in feasibility studies and preliminary investi-
gations of new fuels in IC engines and these studies can be done without extensive
engine experiments. This chapter presents a review of the requirements IC engine
modelling. Suitability of methanol in CI engines is also discussed in this chapter
brieﬂy. Two main tools namely 1-D modelling and 3-D modelling are touched upon.
1-D modelling shows the effects of possible alternate fuels on engine performance
and emissions however, 3-D modelling provides a platform for exploring the effect of
alternate fuels on speciﬁc engine components. Using 3-D modelling, different com-
ponents of the engine such as injector, cylinder head, etc. can be optimally designed
to improve the engine performance and lower emissions. Finally, modelling in engine
research can reduce the efforts required for adaptation of alternate fuels. These tech-
niques help in preliminary investigations of performance and emissions studies of
alternative fuels and play an important role in feasibility studies for new technology
adaption.

Table 2.6 Typical results of 1-D simulation studies

Team

Aim

Results

Chougule et al.
(2013)

Determine the
potential of dual fuel
(CNG and Diesel) to
improve the engine
fuel economy

Procedure followed
for modelling

Step 1: Experiments
were performed
using diesel in a
4-cylinder, 2500 cc
engine

Step 2: Engine
model was prepared
using GT-Power

Deviations between
the experimental and
simulation results
were less than 10%
and 5% for torque
and BSFC
respectively

(continued)

24

H. Valera et al.

Table 2.6 (continued)

Team

Aim

Results

Mtui (2013)

Determine the
performance of dual
fuel (Natural
Gas/diesel) using
1-D/3-D simulations

Jadhav et al. (2017)

Determine the engine
performance of dual
fuel (Diesel-CNG)
using GT Power

Step 1: Experiments
on diesel fuel using
4-cylinder, 3000 cc
engine

Procedure followed
for modelling

Step 3: Validation of
simulation results
using experimental
results

Step 4: CNG was
injected along with
diesel in the validated
engine model

Step 5: Results of
engine performance
were discussed

Step 1: 1-D model of
18-cylinder engine
was prepared using
GT-Power

Step 2: Prepared
model was coupled
with 3-D based KIVA
software to provide
accurate boundary
conditions to the
intake and exhaust
valves during
transients

Step 2: Baseline 1-D
model was prepared

Step 3: Simulation
results were validated
with the
experimental results

Step 4: CNG was
injected along with
diesel in a validated
baseline model (Port
Injection)

BSFC increased by
13 and 9 for 50 and
70% load
respectively using
CNG as fuel

Fuel economy
improved by 10% in
a dual fuel engine,
where diesel was
injected as a pilot

Natural gas can be
used as a fuel for
replacement of up to
60% baseline fuel

Beyond 40% diesel
replacement, engine
power output
decreased

Performance:
BSFC, and
volumetric efﬁciency
decreased by 8% and
5% respectively for
dual fuel model
compared to baseline
fuel model
Emissions: CO and
HC emissions
increased for dual
fuel model, whereas
PM emissions
increased compared
to baseline fuel
model

(continued)

2 Modelling Aspects for Adaptation of Alternative Fuels …

25

Table 2.6 (continued)

Team

Aim

Soid et al. (2015)

Determine the
performance of
methane-fuelled
engine

Procedure followed
for modelling

Step 1: Experiments
on 4-stroke, single
cylinder, 100 cc SI
engine

Step 2: Baseline 1-D
model was prepared
using the engine data

Step 3: Simulation
results were validated
using calibration
methods

Step 4: Methane was
injected in a
validated baseline
model using port fuel
injection method

Results

Engine torque,
BMEP, brake power,
and peak cylinder
pressure decreased
for methane-fuelled
model compared to
gasoline-fuelled
model
Optimization was
done using different
inlet valve openings
and outlet valve
openings
They retarded
exhaust valve timing
by 10° and found
comparable results to
gasoline-fuelled
model
Abstract Enhancing the predictability of diesel spray numerical simulation, a
droplet breakup model has been developed and optimized under non-evaporative
diesel spray with a large-eddy simulation. In the spray simulation community, the
model called Kelvin–Helmholtz and Rayleigh–Taylor model has been widely used
even nowadays, both of which are modeled for high Weber number conditions. While
upstream region of spray considers as high Weber number thanks to high injection
pressure, downstream of the spray represents by low Weber number region. In this
study, a hybrid breakup model which combines the Kelvin–Helmholtz and modiﬁed
Taylor analogy breakup has been proposed. The Kelvin–Helmholtz and modiﬁed
Taylor analogy breakup models are used to the primary and secondary breakup
models, respectively. For validating the breakup model, one of the unique optical
diagnostics techniques has been introduced to capture both macroscopic and micro-
scopic spray characteristics at the same time. The system called super high spatial
resolution photography lens is able to capture sufﬁcient area of the spray with hav-
ing a 5 μm spatial resolution. Spray simulations under non-evaporative condition
were performed to validate the Kelvin–Helmholtz–modiﬁed Taylor analogy breakup
model. It is found that the simulation results of Kelvin–Helmholtz–Modiﬁed Taylor
analogy breakup are in good agreement with experimental measurements of droplet
distribution under non-evaporative spray.
Development of internal combustion engines (ICE) is strongly progressed by optical
observations of in-cylinder spray and combustion. Especially, the advancement of the
illumination source has been contributed to measure spray and combustion dynamics
as in situ; it is non-contact, non-destructive, and not affected the observation ﬁeld.
Since physics in ICE is a quite short period, high time resolution measurement
technique is also necessary to capture time-development of spray and combustion
characteristics. However, to obtain enough time resolution limits spatial resolution
to capture entire spray ﬁelds. Depending on the observation target, it is necessary to
choose the proper photographic technique and setting.

A result of an experiment is utilized to develop a predictable model and for
the validation of numerical simulation (computational ﬂuid dynamics: CFD). Until
recently CFD is highly limited by computational resource, most of all CFD has been
used Reynolds averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) simulation. The result of RANS
simulation considers as ensemble average, it is crucial for engine design in auto-
motive manufactures, but lack of instant information is a challenge to understand
physics and develop future high-efﬁciency engines. Thanks to the development of
computer performance, large eddy simulation (LES) has been utilized for ICE sim-
ulation. Depending on computer resources, cycle simulation also can be done by
LES (Pasunurthi et al. 2017; Masouleh et al. 2018; Goryntsev et al. 2009; Granet
et al. 2012; Enaux et al. 2011). Coupling with the machine learning technique, it
extracts the important design factor for improving engine performance (Kodavasal
et al. 2018; Di Mauro et al. 2019).

In this chapter, one of the unique optical diagnostics has been introduced to obtain
characteristics of the fundamental diesel spray (Marubayashi et al. 2011). As men-
tioned in earlier, there is a trade-off relation between capturing macroscopic (e.g.,
spray penetration and spray angle) and microscopic (e.g., droplet diameter and distri-
bution) characteristics of the diesel spray at the same time. With using a unique lens
system and large-ﬁlm, it is able to measure both features. LES simulation also per-
forms to simulate non-evaporative spray. Each technique and simulation is mentioned
brieﬂy, and please note that it does not represent all-optical diagnostics technique
and numerical simulation. Following is mainly extracted brieﬂy from reference paper
and journal (Kitaguchi et al. 2012, 2014; Fujii et al. 2015).

3.2 Optical Diagnostics of Super High Spatial Resolution

Photography (Kamata et al. 2008)

General optical measurement techniques are challenged to have both macroscopic
and microscopic characteristics. To make it an open possibility to over-come this
problem, one of the unique optical diagnostics techniques called super high spatial
resolution photography (SHSRP) is introduced to the diesel spray. Detail lens system

3 Simulation and Optical Diagnostics for Internal Combustion …

29

with SHSRP and a thinner depth of ﬁeld can be found in Kitaguchi et al. (2014) and
Kamata et al. (2008). Since the length of the lens system has achieved to design
only 204 mm, it can minimize the total experimental setups with maintaining a
5 μm spatial resolution, 400 mm working distance, 2.7–5.0 magniﬁcation range, and
100 μm depth of ﬁelds.

The optical setup for the spray injection experiments also founds in Kitaguchi
et al. (2014) and Kamata et al. (2008). Unlike to use the high-speed camera as a
measuring device, the image is taken on a large-sized ﬁlm (Kodak: TMAX100),
254 mm (10 in.) in height and 202 mm (8 in.) in width, with resolution ranging from
63 to 200 line/mm.

3.2.1 Image Analysis Technique (Marubayashi et al. 2011;

Kamata et al. 2008)

As post-processing for evaluating the droplet in this optical system, following evalu-
ation are performed: (1) droplet position, (2) circle-equivalent diameter, (3) relative
dispersion, and (4) average intensity gradient (ADG) of the periphery of droplet
images. Applying (2) to (4) evaluations to each droplet, blurred droplet images and
background noise are eliminated from the results of the measurement. Circle equiv-
alent diameter is calculated as:

where A is the area of droplet image. Relative dispersion of L/LO is used isoperimetric
inequality s2/A ≥ 4π:

(cid:2)

4 A
π

,

D =

L
L O

= S2/A
4π

,

(3.1)

(3.2)

here S is perimeter, L is degree of dispersion, LO is degree of dispersion circularity.
Since droplet images are an elongated shape with increasing L/LO, droplet images are
eliminated from observation target considered as droplet overlapping or background
noise when the L/LO ≥ 1.2.

In this technique, spray images are scanned into the computer by ﬁlm scanner
(EPSON: GT-X970). Image resolution while scanning is set 0.98 μm/pixel to resolve
5 μm droplet diameter. For minimizing the background noise, averaged intensity
gradient (ADG) is used to eliminate the blur droplet. Because the depth of ﬁelds in
this system is 100 μm, image processing ﬁeld was deﬁned ±50 μm from the focus
position of this lens system.

Image samples of SHSRP and droplet distribution after the image analysis are
displayed in Fig. 3.1. Macroscopic spray information is represented in Fig. 3.1a
and enlarged spray microscopic information is in Fig. 3.1c. Figure 3.1b and d are

30

K. Yasutomi et al.

Fig. 3.1 Image samples of SHSRP and droplet distribution after the image analysis: a Row image
and b After the image processing for macroscopic spray and c Row image and d After the image
processing for macroscopic spray surrounded by black lines in (a) and (c). Kitaguchi et al. (2014)

corresponding with after the image processing against Fig. 3.1a and c, respectively.
As mentioned in earlier, both macroscopic and microscopic characteristics of diesel
spray at the same time can capture by this technique. Thanks to this optical diagnostic
technique, the relation between large vortex structure and droplet distribution are
clearly represented in this image. While relatively big droplets are distributed in
the periphery of the vortex structure, small droplet follows the vortex ﬂow, because
of smaller Stokes number. The SHSRP results were used for validating the spray
break-up model by comparing droplet size distribution and entire spray distribution.

3.3 Simulation Setups

Large-eddy simulation (LES) is introduced into the KIVA code to produce KIVA-LES
(Sone et al. 2000a, b, 2001), spray simulation had done in this code. While simi-
lar simulation can be done by various commercial simulation code such as ANSYS
Fluent, AVL Fire, Convergent science Converge, Riccardo Vectis and Siemens Star-
CCM, etc., one of the advantages using KIVA is derived from open-source code.
Recently OpenFOAM is also a useful code to simulate spray and combustion simu-
lation as referenced in Hanasaki et al. (2015) and Nguyen et al. (2014).

Detail governing equation for KIVA-LES is described in Fujii et al. (2015) and

Sone et al. (2000b).

3 Simulation and Optical Diagnostics for Internal Combustion …

31

3.3.1 Breakup Model

The purpose of this chapter is summarized as spray characteristics comparison using
breakup models including the KH–RT (Beale and Reitz 1999) and the KH–MTAB
(Kitaguchi et al. 2012, 2014; Fujii et al. 2015) hybrid model. A fuel injection events
are strongly dominated by distributions of Weber number which is high in nozzle
exit whereas relatively low as leaving from the nozzle exit. It is a reasonable to
use a hybrid model of KH model developed based on high Weber number region
and MTAB model designed based on low Weber number region. Breakup model
equations are summarized in Fujii et al. (2015).

Both KH-RT and KH-MTAB models are a hybrid model of KH and RT model,
and KH and MTAB model, respectively, it requires a hybrid scheme to switch the
primary breakup model to secondary breakup model. In the KH-RT model, the KH
model simulates the primary breakup below the breakup length and the RT model
represents the secondary breakup beyond the breakup length. Breakup length is
deﬁned by Levich theory (1963),

(3.3)

(3.4)

L b = Cld0

(cid:3)

,

Cl
ρa

W e =

ρdU 2
r d p
σ

,

where d0 and Cl are the nozzle diameter and the experimental constant, respectively.
The value of Cl is given by 10 in this chapter (Hori et al. 2007). The threshold of
the breakup is found near Weber number We = 450; therefore, in the KH–MTAB
model, KH model is used for primary breakup at We > 450 and the MTAB model for
secondary breakup at We ≤ 450. Because of the result of optimization, there is no
physical mean that We is 450. The Weber number is given by

where ρd is the droplet density, U r is relative velocity between the gas and the liquid,
and dp is the droplet diameter.

3.3.2 Computational Scheme and Condition

A blob model was applied to fuel injection so that the diameter of the injected
fuel droplet is equivalent to the nozzle diameter. The effects of the collision and
coalescence of droplets in the spray were not considered. The momentum exchange
between the gas phase and the droplets was considered using a source term in the
momentum equation. To calculate the drag coefﬁcient, CD, sphere was assumed as a
rigid sphere of a droplet

32

K. Yasutomi et al.

Table 3.1 Numerical setups

Ambient gas

Ideal gas

Convective terms in the
momentum equation
Space derivatives

Convective terms in the
momentum equation
Time derivatives

Central difference

Forth-order Runge-Kutta

Other space derivatives of the
convective term

QSOU

Other time derivatives of the
convective term

Computational domain

Euler’s forward

30 mm diameter × 100 mm
height
60 × 60 × 200

Computational grid
resolutions

Total number of cells

720,000

Wall boundary conditions

Non-slip wall

C D, spher e =

(cid:4)

24
Rel

(cid:5)
1 + (1/6)Re2/3
0.424,

l

(cid:6)
, Rel < 1000
Rel ≥ 1000

(3.5)

Since KH-MTAB model was used the TAB based model as secondary break up,
distortion of the droplet also needed to take into account. Therefore, Liu et al.’ (1993)
equation employed for KH-MTAB model

C D = C D,spher e(1 + 2.632y),

(3.6)

where y is the length of deformation of the droplet computed from the TAB model.
Numerical setups were summarized in Table 3.1.

3.3.3 Computational and Experimental Conditions

Computational and experimental conditions in a non-evaporative spray ﬁeld were
executed under main and pilot sprays. The injection duration of the main and pilot
sprays were 1.30 and 0.45 ms, respectively. With changing the injection duration,
fuel amount was 12.0 and 3.72 mg for main and pilot sprays, respectively. single
hole 0.20 mm diameter of the diesel injector was employed and the n-C13H28 with
77 MPa injection pressure was injected. Fuel temperature was kept 300 K. For the
purpose of observing the effect of ambient density under the non-evaporative spray,
ambient gas was used CO2. Ambient pressure was changed from 1.8 to 2.7 MPa, it
is corresponding with 35.5 to 55.7 kg/m3 under 300 K ambient gas temperature.

3 Simulation and Optical Diagnostics for Internal Combustion …

33

3.4 Results and Discussion

Effectiveness of spray breakup model was validated for macroscopic spray character-
istics (e.g., Spray penetration) as well as droplet size and distribution from SHSRP.
One of the distinct differences between KH-MTAB and KH-RT models could
be found from the particle-size distribution frequency (PDF) of droplet diameters
against the entire spray range during injection (0.65 ms) and the end of injection
as shown in Fig. 3.2. Both data were taken with an ambient density of 48.4 kg/m3
under main spray conditions. The concentration of small droplets tends to decrease in
KH–RT and KH–MTAB with developing the spray. As a low Weber number region in
the spray increases with time, there is observed that the decreasing of the frequency
of small droplets. In addition, the result using KH-RT model is difﬁcult to reproduce
a spray structure as shown in Fig. 3.1, because most droplets break up to a very small
diameter.

In diesel spray, Weber number is high in the region near the nozzle as opposed to
the downstream of the spray, resulting in a high number of small-diameter particles.
On the other hand, the PDF distribution of the droplet de-rived from KH-MTAB
model is evenly distributed, the droplet spatial distribution in the diesel spray repre-
sents the spray structure more accurately.

Verifying the effect of breakup model more detail, SHSRP image taken at
t/tinj = 7.0 (normalized time by injection duration) was used due to this photo-
graphic technique is challenging to apply high number density region such as during
injection.

The results of LES and the experimentally obtained droplet spatial distribution
using SHSRP under the pilot spray condition at t/tinj = 7.0 are shown in Fig. 3.3.
Distribution images are plotted from the center of gravity of droplets, which are
divided into four classes: 7.8–10, 10–20, 20–30 mm, and more than 30 mm. This
classiﬁcation of particle size was also used in the LES.

Fig. 3.2 PDF distribution of
droplet diameter in the spray
during injection and the end
of injection. Kitaguchi et al.
(2014)

34

K. Yasutomi et al.

Fig. 3.3 Spray images organized by droplet range from LES and SHSRP

In the LES and experimental results, the small droplets are distributed over the
entire region, whereas there is a high proportion of droplets with diameters of >30 μm
at the spray tip because large droplet with high momentum is difﬁcult to follow the
ambient gas through the central axis of the spray and to stay near the spray tip. For
supporting these ﬁndings, Stokes number was introduced to each droplet sizes.

The Stokes number is deﬁned by the following equation

where τ A is the response time for the ﬂow ﬁeld and τ F is the characteristic turbulence
time

St =

τA
τF

,

τA =

τF =

ρ pd 2
p
18μ
δ(x)
U (x)

,

,

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

3 Simulation and Optical Diagnostics for Internal Combustion …

35

where ρp is the droplet density, dp is the droplet diameter, and μ is the coefﬁcient
of viscosity of the gas ambient. δ(x) is deﬁned as the average of the spread of the
spray in the radial direction and U(x) is deﬁned as the average relative velocity at
t/tinj= 7.0. There has not conducted particle image velocimetry (PIV) type mea-
surement in this setups before, velocity information for experimental data are also
employed from simulation results. In this result, there is a strong correlation between
droplet diameter of >30 μm and St ≥ 1. While droplet smaller than 30 μm are evenly
distributed in the spray, there is strongly suggested that St ≥ 1 droplets are present
in the periphery of the spray and vortex structure.

3.5 Conclusion

In this chapter, the unique optical technique called super high spatial resolution pho-
tography (SHSRP) was introduced to capture both macro and microscopic spray
characteristics at the same time. Under diesel engine conditions, obtaining macro-
scopic spray characteristics during the injection periods are challengeable in espe-
cially high number density region, but applying this technique revealed that large
droplets were distributed periphery of the large vortex structure and the tip of the
spray. Coupling with the Stokes number analysis, such droplet represents more than
30 μm droplets.

For improving the numerical simulation accuracy, KIVA based large-eddy sim-
ulation was also conducted to optimize the spray break up model by comparing
experimental results from SHSRP. In diesel sprays, the region near the nozzle oriﬁce
is considered as higher Weber number, middle and downstream of the spray consists
of lower Weber number as exchanging the momentum with ambient gas.

In this study, the breakup model call KH-MTAB hybrid model was employed
instead of the famous KH-RT breakup model. While both KH and RT breakup models
are designed from high Weber number phenomenon, applying MTAB model as for
secondary breakup instead of RT model consider as more representing a real-world
spray physics. This hybrid model was applied into the non-evaporative spray and
compared to KH-RT model under wide-range of ambient density.

Using KH-MTAB model, droplet distribution in the diesel spray is able to repro-
duce experimental results more accurately, which large droplet more existing tip of
the spray and periphery of the large vortex structure.

For developing a numerical engine spray and combustion model, it is always
important to have reliable experimental results obtained by proper optical di-
agnostics and validated by numerical simulation.
Numerical Investigations
on Water-Ethanol-Diesel Emulsiﬁed Fuel
Abstract The depleting oil resources and harmful emissions from fossil fuel have
raised keen attention whole world wide. Emulsiﬁed fuel technology might prolong
availability of earthborn fossil fuel along with the reduction of the pollutants. It
may also be seen as a useful technique to meet the latest stringent Bharat Stage VI
norms in diesel engine. Emulsiﬁcation requires mixing fossil fuel with water in the
presence of a surfactant. Oxygenated fuels like alcohols may also be blended due to
its renewability. Oxides of nitrogen tend to reduce owing to cooling effect of water
content in the emulsiﬁed fuel. At the same time decrease in the amount of particulate
matter in the tail pipe was observed because of reduced molecule size of emulsiﬁed
fuel. The combustion and exhaust emissions characteristics have been elaborated
numerically with the help of simulation software in this chapter. Acceptability of
emulsiﬁed fuels has also been highlighted for its use in compression ignition engines.
Keywords Emulsiﬁcation · Simulation · Ethanol

4.1 Introduction

Compression ignition engines have been playing an immense role in the transport
and power generation. However the imminent energy crisis in future, increasing
costs and harmful emissions associated with mineral diesel have forced researchers
to ﬁnd out and explore the possibility of alternate clean and non-polluting fuels
for compression ignition engines (Gilbert and Perl 2008). Several techniques have
been followed to get rid of emissions and to impede the depletion of pending hydro-
carbons. Commonly considered alternative fuels include alcohol based biofuels and
non-conventional fossil fuels derived from different sources. High viscosity and poor
atomization of vegetable oils restrict their use in diesel engine. Natural gas, propane
and hydrogen reduce emissions to some extent however they are products of fossil
fuel. Diesel engines play a supreme role in transportation, agriculture and indus-
try (Dewulf and Van Langenhove 2006). About thirty years ago, the technology of
application of emulsion fuels to compression ignition engine has attracted much
attention. Emulsiﬁed fuel consists of continuous and dispersed phase where water
is used as dispersed phase with/without surfactant. To alleviate the drawbacks of
emulsiﬁed fuel, potential additives have been introduced in them in order to achieve
reduction in emissions and improvement in combustion attributes at par with per-
formance (Anton and Vandamme 2010; Becher 1965). However NOx and PM from
diesel engines cause a serious challenge to manufacturers and threat to environment.
However, emulsiﬁcation of diesel fuel is the best method which needs no engine
modiﬁcation. Emulsiﬁcation is the process of adding water to the fuel in micro or
macro scale (Bibette et al. 1999).

On the accounting of the nature of the continuous and dispersed phase, emulsions
can be categorized as W/O (water in oil)—Water works as a dispersed phase and the
oil behaves as a continuous phase. They can be also called as oil emulsions. Cold
cream, butter and, cod liver oil are examples of this type of emulsion. O/W (oil in
water)—Oil is considered as a dispersed phase and water is served as a continuous
phase. Milk is an appropriate example of O/W emulsion. On the basis of droplets
size, emulsions can be classiﬁed into two categories: Macro emulsions—generated
by a process of shearing and have sizes of 0.1−10 μm. They have a tendency of
settled down with respect to time. They are kinetically stable and look milky and
opaque. Micro emulsions—produced spontaneously and have sizes in the range of
10–200 nm. They are isotropic, thermodynamically stable and translucent in appear-
ance (Bibette et al. 1999).

Emulsiﬁed fuels have certain advantages and disadvantages in terms of com-
bustion and emission concerns. The addition of water in emulsiﬁed fuel lowers the
combustion temperature due to its high latent heat of vaporization characteristic but
at the same time it promotes the micro explosion of emulsion fuel droplets which
in result, improves the fuel atomization. The better atomized fuel can be sprayed
uniformly inside the combustion chamber that can improve combustion efﬁciency
by complete combustion of emulsiﬁed fuel. The lower combustion temperature stops
the formation of NOx because only at higher temperatures (above 1200 K), Nitrogen
is decomposed into atomic nitrogen which is very reactive and forms NOx by react-
ing with oxygen of air. Owing to complete combustion of emulsiﬁed fuel, there is
reduction in soot emissions.

Various numerical computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) simulation studies are
available on combustion of methane, natural gas, diesel-biodiesel blends, diesel-
water mixtures and ethanol-diesel blends (Cook and Law 1978; Heywood 1988).
But CFD studies on combustion of water-ethanol-diesel emulsions and comparison
with diesel-water and diesel-ethanol blends have not been discussed. Combustion
study of alternative fuel directly on internal combustion engine may become severe
time consuming, complex and costlier if results are not predicted via simulation and
numerical investigation.

Shirneshan and Jamalvand (2016) have compared combustion temperature, CO2,
NOx, SO2 and soot emissions in a furnace chamber from combustion of wood,

4 Numerical Investigations on Water-Ethanol-Diesel Emulsiﬁed Fuel

39

peat, methane and gasoil using CFD Ansys Fluent software. They reported lower
combustion temperature, CO2, NOx and soot emissions for biomass fuel (wood and
peat) than methane and gasoil but higher SO2 emissions.

4.2 Mathematical Model

The different fundamental mathematical equations of species, energy, mass, momen-
tum and turbulence have been used to describe the mathematical model. In this study,
CFD simulations were executed using a standard k-e viscous turbulent ﬂow model
and the eddy dissipation (Shirneshan and Jamalvand 2016; Hussain et al. 2012;
Palaniswamy et al. 2016). The heat transfer and radiation effects are neglected for
this particular mathematical model to make the calculations easier. To calculate the
fuel consumption rate, the eddy dissipation and reaction kinetics models were imple-
mented in conjunction with each other without considering turbulent disturbances.
The universal governing equations for the conservation of energy, mass, momentum
and species transport can be deﬁned as follows:
Continuity equation (mass conservation):

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

∂ϑr
∂r

+

ϑr
r

+ 1
r

∂ϑθ
∂θ

+

∂ϑz
∂z

= 0

Momentum equation in θ-axis:

(cid:2)

ρ

−

(cid:3)

∂ϑθ
∂t
∂ p
r ∂θ

+ ϑr
(cid:2)

+ μ

+

∂ϑθ
∂r
∂ 2ϑθ
∂r 2

ϑθ ∂ϑθ
r ∂θ
∂ϑθ
r ∂r

+

+

ϑr ϑθ
r

−

+

ϑθ
r 2

+

=

ϑz∂ϑθ
∂z
+ 2∂ϑr
r 2∂θ

∂ 2ϑθ
r 2∂θ 2

(cid:3)

+

∂ 2ϑθ
∂z2

Momentum equation in X-axis:
(cid:2)

ρ

∂ϑx
∂t
∂ p
∂ x

+ ϑr
(cid:2)

∂ϑx
∂r
∂ 2ϑx
∂r 2

+

+

ϑθ ∂ϑx
r ∂θ
∂ϑx
r ∂r

−

+ μ

(cid:3)

=

+

ϑx ∂ϑx
∂ x

+ 1
r 2

+

∂ 2ϑx
r 2∂θ 2

+

∂ 2ϑx
∂ x 2

(cid:3)

Energy equation:

(cid:2)

∂ T
∂t

ρc p

+ ϑr

∂ T
∂r

+

ϑθ ∂ T
r ∂θ

+

ϑz∂ T
∂z

= k

∂
r ∂r

r ∂ T
∂r

+

∂ 2T
r 2∂θ 2

+

∂ 2T
∂z2

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

WED combustion can be written as:

(4.1)

(4.2)

(4.3)

(cid:5)

(4.4)

40

R. S. Bharj et al.

Fig. 4.1 Schematic—geometry of the combustion chamber

Table 4.1 Combustion
chamber geometry
dimensions

Cylinder length (L)

Cylinder radius (R)

Fuel nozzle radius (r)

79.5 mm

37.5 mm

0.10 mm

Fuel nozzle protrusion length inside cylinder (l)

2 mm

C10 H22 + uC2 H5 O H + v H2 O + w(O2 + 3.76N2) = nC O C O + nC O2 C O2 + n H2 O H2 O + n N2 N2 + n O2 O2

+ n N O N O + n N O2 N O2 + n N2 O N2 O + n S O2 S O2 + n H C H C
+ nC C + n H2 H2 + n H H + n O O + n O H O H + n N N (4.5)

where u, v and w are the amount of ethanol, water and air per kmol of emulsiﬁed
fuel and ni represents the number of by-product species moles of i in kmol.

This model was prepared and analyzed in ﬂuent module of CFD Ansys software.

4.3 Geometry Measures

In the present study, the model geometry has been used for a diesel engine combustion
chamber. The geometry details (length and diameter), inlet and outlet conditions and
axis-symmetry have been represented in Fig. 4.1. Table 4.1 displays the combustion
chamber geometry dimensions.

4.4 Solution Procedures

The boundary conditions of combustion chamber were deﬁned for all zones such as
axis, wall, and inlet mass ﬂow rates for air and fuel and pressure outlet. The cylinder
wall, air and fuel inlet temperatures were taken constant as ambient atmospheric

4 Numerical Investigations on Water-Ethanol-Diesel Emulsiﬁed Fuel

41

temperature 303 K. The model was made in 2D dimensions to make it less complex.
Ansys software (Fluent module) was selected to make the geometry of the combustion
chamber model.

Ansys Fluent software has been used for simulations, geometry creation and mesh
formation to study the air-fuel ﬂow behavior inside combustion chamber model
(Govindan et al. 2014). The convergence criterion for kinetic energy, continuity,
momentum and energy has been selected as 10−3. In the current study, the non-
premixed combustion has been used with inlet diffusion model to model combustion
of air-fuel mixture. The inlet mass ﬂow rate of air is 0.0551 kg/s while for fuel
is 2.66 kg/s. The higher mass ﬂow rate of fuel denoted the injection of fuel from
fuel nozzle which is very small opening compared to air opening. A small opening
increased the velocity of fuel ﬂow and permitted the higher amount of fuel in given
time. The ﬂow of air and fuel is assumed only in axial direction. The turbulent
intensity is used as 10% and hydraulic diameter 0.0347 m according to speciﬁcations
of combustion chamber.

The air inlet species is used in terms of mass fractions means 23% oxygen and
77% nitrogen in the inlet air. The cylinder wall temperature is assumed constant of
303 K so heat generation rate has been neglected in this study. The cylinder wall
is assumed as stationary wall similar to combustion chamber cylinder of real CI
engine without considering any slip as shear condition. The cylinder wall roughness
height is neglected with roughness constant of 0.5. The fuel inlet species included
diesel (C10H22), mixture of water (H2O) and diesel, mixture of ethanol (C2H5OH)
and diesel, mixture of water, ethanol and diesel. The fuel species has been taken in
mass fractions. All the fuel species, inlet fuels and combustion by products have been
added or selected into fuel species library. The combustion by products are O2, CO2,
H2O and N2. Fuel species can be searched via their chemical formula. Total nodes
are 40,401 in the designed mesh. Mesh type is tetrahedral to make the calculations
easier and ﬂow of air-fuel mixture to be smooth. The advanced sizing function option
is kept off as geometry model is considered 2-dimensional and simple. The relevance
center is selected as ﬁne. The smoothing has been put in high mode during meshing
to make the mesh as smooth as possible (Burnete 2017). The radiation, acoustic and
heat exchange effect is neglected in this study.

Elaborated model is standard k-epsilon viscous turbulent ﬂow model and species
transport model with eddy dissipation. The different mesh sizes were used for mesh
independency test those were 200 × 200, 250 × 250, 300 × 300, 350 × 350,
400 × 400 and 450 × 450 out of which 250 × 250 was selected. So used cell
size in the present model is 250 × 250. The species transport model is selected to
predict emissions of NOx, SOx and soot (Burnete 2017; Sharath and Ajith 2016;
Subramaniam et al. 2017; Varghese and Karunanidhi 2015). Fuel NOx is not con-
sidered for calculations and results because fuel is considered free from nitrogen.
Thermal and prompt NOx are considered to show the NOx emission results. Ther-
mal NOx is generated due to high combustion temperature while prompt NOx is
formed via high reaction rate between fuel and air. The patch function has been
used to ignite the fuel-air mixture in the ﬂow domain zone which is a necessary
requirement to study the combustion phenomenon. Patch temperature is selected as

42

R. S. Bharj et al.

2500 K at nearby section of fuel inlet. In the patch zone, shapes of ﬂow particles is
considered quadrilateral and very small area (0.001 × 0.001 mm2) is considered.

The absolute convergence criterion is selected in the residual monitors section. The
pseudo transient explicit relaxation factors are considered for pressure, momentum,
density, body forces, turbulent kinetic energy, turbulent dissipation rate, turbulent
viscosity, C10H22, O2, CO2, H2O, soot, NO and energy as 0.5, 0.5, 1, 1, 0.75, 0.75,
1, 0.75, 0.75, 0.75, 0.75, 0.75, 0.75 and 0.75 respectively. The hybrid initialization
has been used as initialization method to initialize the solution. In solution methods,
pressure-velocity relations are considered to be coupled. The least square cell based
gradient is selected under spatial discretization. The second order pressure, momen-
tum, turbulent kinetic energy, and turbulent dissipation rate have been considered.
The pseudo transient is activated to make the calculations and results more smooth
and accurate. The process parameters have been selected as default for two-step soot
model. The standard k-epsilon model is selected with standard wall functions using
default model constants.

4.5 Results and Discussion

4.5.1 Diesel Combustion

Figure 4.2, Fig. 4.3, Fig. 4.4 and Fig. 4.5 show the temperature, CO2, NOx and
soot for diesel combustion, respectively. Figure 4.2 display the temperature of gas
(gas produced by burning of diesel fuel mixed into air) in the chamber for diesel
fuel combustion. As per the results shown, the maximum temperature has been
occurred in the initial zone in radial direction. The combustion temperature has not
shown signiﬁcant change in the axial direction. The emission of CO2 from diesel
combustion is shown in Fig. 4.3. According to ﬁgure, the maximum emission of CO2
was occurred in the initial zone along the radial direction of the combustion chamber.

Fig. 4.2 Temperature distribution contour for diesel

4 Numerical Investigations on Water-Ethanol-Diesel Emulsiﬁed Fuel

43

Fig. 4.3 CO2 contour for diesel

Fig. 4.4 NOx contour for diesel

Fig. 4.5 Soot contour for diesel

In the middle and outer zone, CO2 emissions happens almost zero or non-signiﬁcant
along both the directions, radial and axial (Burnete 2017).

Figures 4.4 and 4.5 represent the emissions of NOx and soot generated from the
combustion of diesel where it can be observed that maximum production rate of these
emissions occurs only in small inlet area of the combustion chamber while the other
areas of combustion chamber are not affected by these emissions. Since soot and
NOx generation is dependent on the combustion temperature inside the cylinder, it
can be clearly noticed that the maximum soot and NOx is occurred at the maximum
combustion temperature area.

44

R. S. Bharj et al.

4.5.2 Water-Diesel Emulsion Combustion

In water-diesel emulsiﬁed fuel, water is mixed with the diesel in the proportion
of 10% with remaining diesel. The water-diesel emulsiﬁed fuel containing 10%
water is designated as W10D90. Figure 4.6, Fig. 4.7, Fig. 4.8 and Fig. 4.9 show
the temperature, CO2, NOx and soot for W10D90 emulsion respectively. Similar to
diesel combustion, water-diesel emulsiﬁed fuel reacts instantly as the combustion
starts and this can be reported that the mass fraction of water-diesel emulsiﬁed fuel
was propagated only at inlet of combustion chamber.

According to Fig. 4.6, the highest combustion temperature takes place at inlet
section of the combustion area and a relatively the lowest range of temperatures
across the cylinder can be reported. The CO2 mass fraction distribution is represented
in Fig. 4.7. CO2 has the highest concentration at starting of the combustion area of
the chamber while it’s showing moderate level along the axial direction but no effect
along radial direction throughout the combustion cylinder. Figure 4.8 and Fig. 4.9
show the mass fraction of NOx and soot, respectively. On the basis of results obtained,
the maximal soot generation occurs at intake of the combustion chamber, but it has
nil effect (zero soot) in all other parts of combustion cylinder. In the starting phase
of combustion, more soot is formed because it takes a little time to achieve required

Fig. 4.6 Temperature distribution contour for W10D90 emulsion

Fig. 4.7 CO2 contour for W10D90 emulsion

4 Numerical Investigations on Water-Ethanol-Diesel Emulsiﬁed Fuel

45

Fig. 4.8 NOx contour for W10D90 emulsion

Fig. 4.9 Soot contour for W10D90 emulsion

pressure or temperature for complete combustion of fuel. The same pattern was
followed by the NOx formation.

4.5.3 Ethanol-Diesel Emulsion Combustion

In ethanol-diesel emulsiﬁed fuel, ethanol is mixed with the diesel in the proportion
of 10% with remaining diesel. The ethanol-diesel emulsiﬁed fuel containing 10%
ethanol is designated as E10D90. Figure 4.10, Fig. 4.11, Fig. 4.12 and Fig. 4.13 show
the mass fraction of E10D90, temperature, CO2, NOx and soot, respectively.

According to Fig. 4.10, the highest combustion temperature occur form the start-
ing to middle of the combustion chamber and a moderate level of temperature is
reported after the middle section. The CO2 mass fraction distribution is represented in
Fig. 4.11. CO2 has almost similar pattern like temperature distribution contour while
its maximum range covers more area of combustion chamber than highest tempera-
ture area. The reason behind this could be more complete combustion. Figure 4.12
and Fig. 4.13 show the mass fraction of NOx and soot, respectively. According to
results, the maximal soot generation area is shifted from inlet to outlet means soot
formation does not take place at inlet which indicated smooth combustion, but it has
nil effect (zero soot) in all other parts of combustion cylinder. Only a little NOx of

46

R. S. Bharj et al.

Fig. 4.10 Temperature distribution contour for E10D90 emulsion

Fig. 4.11 CO2 contour for E10D90 emulsion

Fig. 4.12 NOx contour for E10D90 emulsion

Fig. 4.13 Soot contour for E10D90 emulsion

4 Numerical Investigations on Water-Ethanol-Diesel Emulsiﬁed Fuel

47

minimal value was observed at the boundary of combustion chamber (Sharath and
Ajith 2016; Varghese and Karunanidhi 2015).

4.5.4 Water-Ethanol-Diesel Emulsion Combustion

In water-ethanol-diesel emulsiﬁed fuel, water and ethanol is mixed with the diesel
in the proportion of 10% each with remaining 80% diesel. The water-ethanol-diesel
emulsiﬁed fuel containing 10% ethanol and 10% water is designated as W10E10D80.
Figure 4.14, Fig. 4.15, Fig. 4.16 and Fig. 4.17 show the mass fraction of W10E10D80,
temperature, CO2, NOx and soot, respectively.

According to Fig. 4.14, the temperature distribution contour shows the highest
combustion temperature at ﬁrst half area from starting and then in a decreasing pattern
afterwards in axial direction, exactly similar to Fig. 4.10. The CO2 mass fraction
distribution is depicted in Fig. 4.15. CO2 mass fraction contour for W10E10D80
looks like CO2 mass fraction contour of E10D90 as shown in Fig. 4.11 where most
of the area of combustion chamber shows highest temperature range. It could be
owing to complete combustion. Figure 4.16 and Fig. 4.17 show the mass fraction
of NOx and soot, respectively. According to results, the soot generation area for

Fig. 4.14 Temperature distribution contour for W10E10D80 emulsion

Fig. 4.15 CO2 contour for W10E10D80 emulsion

48

R. S. Bharj et al.

Fig. 4.16 NOx contour for W10E10D80 emulsion

Fig. 4.17 Soot contour for W10E10D80 emulsion

W10E10D80 is increased compared to E10D90, W10D90 and diesel. It has shown
effect only in the axial direction of chamber. NOx is almost zero or minimal value
compared to all other blends.

4.6 Validation with Literatures

Sharath and Ajith (2016) achieved the similar pattern of temperature distribution for
diesel and E10 blend. They showed more area of maximum temperature with 10%
ethanol blending into diesel. They have reported a small NOx area for diesel and E10
blends similar to the present work.

Varghese and Karunanidhi (2015) have shown similar soot pattern for ethanol-
diesel blend, maximum at the piston head and then decreasing up to the cylinder
head.

Fernandez (2015) has presented similar results of mass fraction of NOx for water-
diesel fuel blends and concluded that increasing water concentration reduced the
formation of NOx.

4 Numerical Investigations on Water-Ethanol-Diesel Emulsiﬁed Fuel

49

4.7 Conclusions

This chapter presented a numerical investigation on combustion of water-ethanol-
diesel emulsiﬁed fuel into diesel engine using CFD software Ansys (Fluent Mod-
ule). The different fuel combinations; diesel, diesel-water, diesel-ethanol, and water-
ethanol-diesel emulsions were selected and effects on combustion temperature, CO2,
NOx, and soot were analyzed. Diesel emulsiﬁed fuel seemed to be better alternative
fuel owing to its superior combustion and lowering emissions characteristics. Induc-
tion of water into diesel reduced the combustion temperature because of higher
vaporization latent heat (cooling effect) which further resulted in lower NOx. Soot is
increased for water-ethanol-diesel emulsiﬁed fuel compared to water-diesel, ethanol-
diesel emulsions. Blending of ethanol in ethanol-diesel and water-ethanol-diesel
emulsions increased temperature distribution inside combustion chamber improved
mass fraction of CO2 which indicated better combustion of above said fuels. It could
be possible to use diesel emulsiﬁed fuel with little modiﬁcation to the diesel engine.
The micro explosion combustion phenomenon improved the combustion of presented
emulsiﬁed fuel.
Optical Diagnostics in IC Engines

Chapter 5
Optical Diagnostics of Spray
Development in Diesel Engines

Abstract In order to comply with the current and future emission norms applicable
to diesel engines, understanding the fuel-air mixing phenomena in depth is quite cru-
cial. Fuel spray inside the cylinder of an engine in operation interacts with in-cylinder
gases as well as with solid boundaries. Fuel spray impinging on the cylinder wall
and piston top, may subsequently enhance soot formation and hence, study and anal-
ysis of fuel spary characteristics can help to minimize these effects. However, study
of the physics of spray evolvement and dynamics demands advanced diagnostics
and numerical techniques. Many attempts have been made in developing compu-
tational models for analyzing the fuel-air and fuel-wall interactions. Despite those
efforts it remains an exciting area of research to accurately model the spray behavior
under dynamic conditions inside the engine cylinder. These models need continuous
inputs from experimental studies for validation and for further development pur-
poses. For experimental investigations point of view, several optical methods have
been adopted viz. Phase Doppler Interferometry (PDI), Shadowgraphy, Schlieren
photography etc. However, deployment of these techniques for acquiring precise
and reliable data requires certain expertises. The aim of this chapter is to conﬁne
various optical diagnostics techniques applicable to diesel engines. A critical review
of these methods has been presented for further advancement in the ﬁeld.
Keywords Spray wall impingement · Optical diagnosis · Diesel engines

5.1 Introduction

5.1.1 Spray Wall Impingement: Causes and Consequences

In Direct Injection diesel engines and Gasoline Direct Injection (GDI) engines, fuel
spray may penetrate longer than the dimension of the combustion chamber. This
leads the fuel droplets to interact with the wall, and a wall ﬁlm may be formed
(Mathews et al. 2013). The phenomenon of spray touching the cylinder wall or com-
bustion chamber wall is termed as spray wall impingement.The probability of spray
wall impingement is higher for small bore engines during cold starting conditions
and for engines with early injection strategies (Werlberger and Cartellieri 1987);
Tang et al. 2017. Figure 5.1 shows the typical diesel spray impinging on piston bowl
and cylinder liner.

In order to resolve the soot-NOx tradeoff, many new and innovative developments
in engine combustion strategies have been proposed and put into practice. Engine
downsizing has been given priority to improve fuel economy. On the other hand,
injection pressure is on the rise through CRDI technology to promote better fuel

Fig. 5.1 Spray impingement
on piston bowl and cylinder
wall (Tang et al. 2017)

5 Optical Diagnostics of Spray Development in Diesel Engines

55

atomization. Combined effect of both these strategies tends to increase the proba-
bility of spray impingement on piston bowl. In a recent study (Wang et al. 2011),
use of ultra-high injection pressure of 300 MPa with microhole nozzle (0.08 mm)
demonstrated a deeper penetration of the spray tip into the combustion chamber,
and signiﬁcant spray impingement on piston bowl. This condition is thus almost
inevitable in downsized diesel engines operating with high injection pressures.
Borman and Nishiwaki (1987) studied the effect of wall heat transfer of imping-
ing ﬂames and reported that at least 30% of the total heat loss was due to the ﬂames
touching the piston cavity. Due to the wall-impingement of ﬂame, heat transfer to
the piston increased, which led to a decrease in thermal efﬁciency as a consequence
of higher heat loss.

Advanced combustion technologies such as homogeneous charge compression
ignition (HCCI) and premixed charge compression ignition (PCCI) require advanced
injection timing in order to provide adequate time for homogeneous air-fuel mixture
preparation (Yao et al. 2009; Berggren and Magnusson 2012; Musculus et al. 2013;
Mwangi et al. 2015). However, this exposes cylinder liner to the spray. Relatively
low gas density increases spray tip penetration, which may dilute the lube oil leading
to more harmful pollutant formations (Kook et al. 2007); Kitasei et al. 2008. It
has been reported by previous studies that HCCI and PCCI diesel engines generally
suffer from increased soot, CO (carbon monoxide) and HC (Hydrocarbon) emissions
as a consequence of wall impingement. Fuel deposited on piston bowl due to early
injection resulted in increased particulate matter (PM) emission (Benajes et al. 2012).
These increased emissions as a result of spray wall impingement can be attributed
to two aspects:development of rich fuel/air mixture in the vicinity of the ﬁlm (Peng
et al. 2011; Yu et al. 2015) and a phenomenon called pool ﬁre also occurs in the
piston cavity (Fang and Chia-fon 2011). Early injection also causes liner oil ﬁlm
dilution, which results in oil loss (Jia et al. 2009). In recent years, substantial research
efforts have been made to resolve the issue of wall impingement so that the stringent
emission requirements can be met.The phenomenon can be broadly understood by
two processes: splash process, and wall ﬁlm formation.

The physics behind the occurrence and growth of wall ﬁlm need to be under-
stood in order to design an efﬁcient combustion chamber and injection equipment.
However, this is a complex phenomenon since it involves a number of geometric
and physical parameters. Injection pressure is one of the key parameters that inﬂu-
ences the phenomenon has been studied extensively. Increasing injection pressure
increases the area of impingement ﬁlm due to an increase in impact velocity (Abo-
Serie et al. 2003; Park and Lee 2004). This, in turns, increases the number density
of small-sized droplets (Meingast et al. 2000). Liquid ﬁlm growth can be mitigated
by utilizing and optimizing multiple short injections (Stanton et al. 1998; Nhumaio
and Watkins 2005).

The distance of impingement cavity from the injector tip also plays a major role
because the impact momentum of droplets varies with it (Su 1999). Sufﬁcient time
for air entertainment into the spray promotes vaporization, which reduces the adhered
fuel mass (Meingast et al. 2000). The velocity and angle of spray impingement also

56

A. Jena

affects the dynamics of ﬁlm formation. By analyzing mean velocity ﬁeld of the post-
impingement spray using Particle image velocimetry (PIV) technique, Zama et al.
(2014) concluded that the impinging droplet momentum played a key role in wall
ﬁlm formation and adhered mass decreased with increase in inclination angle. Very
few studies have investigated the effect of the presence of oil ﬁlm on the impingement
wall. Seel et al. (2015) performed experiments on an impingement disc with lube
oil ﬁlm and found a signiﬁcant rise in the count of small-sized fuel droplets. Other
study showed a strong dependence of impingement ﬁlm stability with initial oil ﬁlm
thickness (Seel et al. 2018).

From the above discussion, it is clear that spray-wall interaction is a complicated
phenomenon and plays a vital role in the combustion process and thus in thermal
efﬁciency and emissions of modern IC engines. Because of such complicated physics,
developing an accurate physical model would rely on fundamental experiments.
Optical techniques being the most promising method have provided a deep insight
into the spray-wall interaction process in this context.

5.2 Heat Transfer Evaluation Due to Wall Impingement

Study of heat loss through cylinder walls and piston cavity has great importance since
it directly affects thermal efﬁciency of the IC engines. By improving combustion
efﬁciency and decreasing heat loss, higher thermal efﬁciency can be achieved. Spray
wall impingement affects both the quality of combustion and heat loss through the
cylinder wall. Hence, predicting the mechanism of heat transfer accurately under
these conditions holds the key to efﬁcient design of combustion chamber and injection
strategies.

Over the years, many attempts have been made to develop empirical correlations
for estimating the heat transfer coefﬁcient. However, when applied to the engine
in-cylinder conditions, these correlations may differ by up to 200% (Woschni 1967),
which limits their application for practical design purposes. Hohenberg (1979) has
developed a correlation to determine instantaneous heat ﬂux after conducting exten-
sive studies on DI diesel engine, which has been applied successfully in combustion
analysis.

hC =

130 × P 10.8
cy
V 0.06
inst

× (u p + 1.4)0.8
× T 0.4
cyl

(5.1)

hc
Heat transfer coefﬁcient
up
Piston velocity
Instantaneous cylinder volume
Vinst
Tcyl Temperature of the in-cylinder gases

The instantaneous heat transfer coefﬁcient then can be used to accurately deter-
mine the instantaneous heat ﬂux by the expression given below (Babu and Murthy
1976).

5 Optical Diagnostics of Spray Development in Diesel Engines

57

dQ
dθ

= Ahc(Tcyl − Twall)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

1
6N

Instantaneous surface area

A
Twall Wall temperature

Woschni (1967) has developed an accurate correlation for predicting heat transfer
coefﬁcient in the impingement location inside the combustion chamber. This heat
interaction is involved in NOx formation mechanism and hence, it is very helpful and
widely accepted for combustion chamber design. The Woschni correlation is given
below,

hC = C*L−0.2Pcyl0.8 uwall0.8Tm−0.35

(5.2)

where

Coefﬁcient of heat transfer
Constant
Characteristic length/impinged ﬁlm diameter/mean diameter of ring

hc
C*
L
Pcyl Ambient pressure, bar
uwall
Tm Mean temperature of outer and inner boundaries of the ring section

Impinging spray velocity, m/s

The foot of the impinging spray is subdivided into several annular rings, as shown
in Fig. 5.2. For every annular segment, mean temperature and heat ﬂux are calculated.
Integration is performed over the entire domain to obtain the total heat ﬂux.

hf, ring = hc

(cid:4)
Tm − Tp

(cid:5)

(5.3)

Fig. 5.2 Annular sections of
wall ﬁlm approximated as a
circle

58

where,

(cid:6)

hring =

hf, ringAring

A. Jena

(5.4)

Piston temperature, K

hf, ring Average heat ﬂux for an annular section
Tp
ht, ring Average heat transfer for annular section
Aring Area of an annular division

These empirical correlations help to develop simulation models and to predict

heat losses in transient condition.

Experimental determination of heat ﬂux in IC engine environment is a compli-
cated process. Study of heat ﬂux on wall-impinging ﬂames has been done mostly
in a Constant Volume Combustion Chamber (CVCC). Mahmud et al. (2018) used
Alumel/Chromel Thin Film Thermocouples Heat Flux (TFTHF, Medtherm 10702B)
sensors to measure the instantaneous heat ﬂux of impinging spray. Each of such
sensors was made up of two thermocouples in pair. One was placed at the surface
concerned and other was at a depth of 3.3 mm from the surface. One dimensional
transient heat transfer equation was used to calculate the temperature distribution.
Finite difference approach was used to solve the equation, and transient data from
TFTHF was used as a boundary condition. The temperature distribution so obtained
was then used for calculating the heat ﬂux. However, Infrared Thermography can
be used to obtain the temperature distribution directly over the desired zone (Schulz
et al. 2011). A simpler alternative can be a series of K-type thermocouples embedded
beneath the impinging plate. However, this approach has been adopted in a spray
cooling study, which can be explored further (Nayak et al. 2016). Serras-Pereira et al.
(2013) used a Vetell made Fast-response heat ﬂux sensor to obtain heat ﬂux data. The
heat ﬂux sensor location varied in angular position on liner at a certain depth from
the injector tip in an Optical DI engine, where the probability of spray impingement
was maximum. The tests were conducted for both static (non-motoring quiescent
ambient conditions) and motoring modes.

5.3 Optical Diagnosis Technique

Over the last few decades, notable developments in spray measurement have been
reported. Accurately quantifying the spray behavior helps in developing improved
spray model for simulation. With the advancement in computing, imaging, and laser
technology, optical diagnostics techniques have emerged as an excellent tool to pro-
vide reliable results regarding spray physics. The two common optical methods for
study of fuel spray impingement that has been commonly adopted by the researchers
are: Schlieren photography and Phase Doppler interferometry (PDI).

5 Optical Diagnostics of Spray Development in Diesel Engines

59

5.3.1 Schlieren Photography

5.3.1.1 Basic Principle

Schlieren imaging has emerged as a rather simple and effective optical technique
over the years. Especially for diesel injection, to visualize vapor phase of the spray,
this is a very effective tool. Many investigations have been aimed to study transient
behavior of vapor phase and impinging jets in both inert and reactive environment.
Schlieren imaging technique is useful to study the macroscopic parameters such as
spray penetration length, cone angle, impingement area, and growth of spray (Payri
et al. 2016; Ismael et al. 2014; Tschöke and Marohn 2017). However, researchers
have also successfully used this technique to study more complicated parameters like
ignition delay and liftoff length (Payri et al. 2015; Payri et al. 2016; Tschöke and
Marohn 2017).

Schlieren photography method uses a collimated light beam for visualization of
the test section. The light beam suffers deﬂection from its path while passing through
a medium having gradients in refractive index. This gradient arises due to variation
in density through the medium. Figure 5.3 shows the schematic of basic components
commonly usedin this method.

Schlieren edge (e.g., a knife-edge) is placed at the point of formation of the image.
This edge blocks some amount of light coming from the source. The amount of light
blocked by the edge depends upon its relative position to the axis of lens/mirror. The
schlieren image is captured on a screen, which is placed after the edge. The intensity
of this image varies with location (in the vertical axis) of edge. When the knife edge
moves closer to the optical axis progressively, more amount of light is covered, and
the undisturbed image gets darker. The sensitivity of a schlieren setup is a strong
function of the position of edge.

When a light beam passes through a varying density medium, it may bend towards
the edge or away from it. Nature of deﬂection depends on the nature of density gradi-
ent. When light is deﬂected towards the edge, the image gets darker. When it deviates
away, the image becomes brighter relative to the case when edge is absent. Two opti-
cal components provide ﬂexibility to have the measurement regime anywhere along

Fig. 5.3 Schematic of a typical Schlieren setup

60

A. Jena

the axis. Though lenses can be used, high-quality mirrors are preferred because of
their availability.

Light source plays a key role in determining the sensitivity of entire setup. Sen-
sitivity is inversely proportional to the wavelength of the light. The point source of
light should be at the focal point of mirror/lens. The incident angle of light beam
should be minimized to avoid beam straightening (Payri et al. 2016; Pastor et al.
2012). Spark ﬂashlight, and Xe Arc lamp, have been used as light source for visual-
ization of fuel sprays by the researchers (Cardenas et al. 2008; Du et al. 2018). Payri
et al. (2015) have used a 150 W halogen lamp for spray visualization. Mercury and
Sodium discharge lamps are other options suitable for schlieren visualization.

Schlieren edge can be of two types:knife edge; suitable for a rectangular light
source, and circular opening; suitablefor circular source. Knife edge has limitations
to capture gradients in one direction. On the other hand, circular opening can visualize
gradients in all directions. Furthermore, circular opening is suggested to deﬁne and
measure the spray boundary accurately (Pastor et al. 2012). Diameter of circular
opening can be varied to obtain a satisfactory result. For high-quality visualization,
edge should be located precisely at the focal point of optical component, which makes
the screen homogenously darker from all sides when edge moves closer to the path
of beam. By successive adjustments, an accurate location can be obtained.

There are a few key points that need to be considered: (i) parallel beam from
the source must pass through investigation volume, (ii) proper alignment of camera
lenses, camera, and circular edge. To ensure the beams are parallel, a simple screen
can be moved along the beam path. Diameter of the bright disc on screen will not
change for parallel beam. If the beam is not parallel, distance between light source
and mirror needs to be adjusted. To have good collection angle, lens is placed as
close as possible to the injector axis. Focus of camera should be perfect at the spray
plane at desired shutter speed of camera. To ensure alignment of camera with beam,
reﬂection of camera diaphragm and diaphragm of the source should perfectly overlap
each other.

5.3.1.2 Effect of the Clustered Oriﬁce on Wall Interaction

Cardenas et al. (2008) have studied the spray-wall interaction using clustered oriﬁce
and schlieren imaging technique. Ambient pressure and temperature condition were
set at 50 bar and 800 K, respectively. Three different walls were used in the investiga-
tion viz. ﬂat wall, straight divided wall, and a slant divided wall as shown in Fig. 5.4.
Details of the nozzle investigated are given in Table 5.1. All nozzles had identical
pressure difference of 100 bar and two nozzles 0.6 mm apart, form one cluster.

For similar wall orientations, images from cluster nozzles were captured. These
images were then further processed to obtain spray widths for each case. It was
observed that after impingement, spray width of the clustered nozzle decreased. This
suggests a decrease in momentum of the wall jet. Due to loss in momentum of fuel
droplets more accumulation takes place near the wall and richer mixer is formed
leading to soot formation in engines.

5 Optical Diagnostics of Spray Development in Diesel Engines

61

Fig. 5.4 Schlieren image of impinging spray from a conventional nozzle on (from left) straight
devided wall, slant devided wall and ﬂat wall (Cardenas et al. 2008)

Table 5.1 Injector
speciﬁcation

Number of oriﬁces Angle between

cluster sprays

Oriﬁce diameter
(μm)

3
3 × 2
3 × 2

–

10˚

20˚

131

93

93

5.3.1.3 Pressure Dependence Study of Impinging Spray

High-pressure injection helps to achieve better atomization of fuel spray, but at the
same time increased momentum makes the spray more prone to wall impingent.
Hence, injection pressure is a key parameter to monitor for better understanding the
formation of wall ﬁlm. Du et al. (2018) have studied the effect of injection pressure
on spray morphology after impingement in a CVCC. Schlieren technique was used
to study the vapor phase structure of the spray impingement. Macroscopic features
of the spray viz. ﬁlm radius, height, area were calculated for both liquid and vapor
phase. Injected mass was kept constant and the pressure was varied between 40 to
160 bar in steps of 20 bar throughout the study, Optical setup included in this study
a Phantom V7.3 camera with a maximum acquisition rate of 20 k fps and a Xe-arc
lamp.

The authors reported that the impingement radius ﬁrst increased and then
decreased with pressure. Increase in radius can be attributed to increased momentum
of droplets, which is transferred to the ﬁlm. After a certain point, increased pres-
sure causes smaller droplet formation, which in turn increases evaporation rate, and
the radius starts to diminish. By optimisation of injection pressure minimum ﬁlm
thickness and ﬁlm area can be achieved.

62

A. Jena

5.3.2 Phase Doppler Interferometry (PDI)

5.3.2.1 Principle

Phase Doppler Interferometry (PDI) has evolved as a pioneering technology for
quantitative spray measurement. PDI works on the principle of light scattered from
two intersecting, coherent laser beams, which is similar to Laser-Doppler velocimetry
(LDV). Sinusoidal doppler burst signals are generated by the sensor. Frequency of
these signals is proportional to droplet velocity, and phase corresponds to the droplet
diameter. PDI is capable of measuring droplet size distribution, velocity, and volume
ﬂux at a high rate of 10000 samples per second (Bachalo 2000; Tropea 2011). In this
method, when a droplet passes through intersection of the laser beam (also called
probe volume), reﬂection and refraction of beams occur. Disturbance created by
the droplet at interference fringes of the intersecting coherent beams is received at
receiver. Light intensity pattern at receiver is transferred to multiplier tubes, which
in turns generates Doppler burst signals. Frequency of signal can be related to the
velocity as (Patel et al. 2016),

The droplet diameter is determined by the following relationship

V = fdδ

d = Fδr
s(cid:4)

fd Doppler frequency
δ Fringed spacing

F Volume ﬂux,
δr Fringe width,
s
Slope factor,
(cid:4) Spatial wavelength

(5.5)

(5.6)

A spatial wavelength is determined using phase shift of the signal between detec-

tors in the time domain along with calibrated spacing of detectors.

Advanced Signal Analyser (ASA) further improves the signal. ASA ampliﬁes
Doppler burst signal generated by the receiver. It also performs necessary signal
ﬁltration before passing them to computer via a high-speed interface card.

A typical PDI experimental setup consists of two transmitters and a receiver. Both
transmitters are placed at an angle of 60˚ to each other. Transmitter-1 generates two
laser beams of green (wavelength 532 nm) and blue color (wavelength 491 nm).
Yellow beam (wavelength 561 nm) emerges from transmitter-2. Beam splitter splits
each beam into two parts. Laser beam alignment is done in such a way that all six
beams intersect at a single point. Perfect alignment is ensured when interference

5 Optical Diagnostics of Spray Development in Diesel Engines

63

Fig. 5.5 A typical PDI setup

fringes can be clearly observed. A dedicated PDI software is used to produce real-
time droplet size distribution and droplet velocity distribution of the spray under
study.

5.3.2.2 Post Impingement Study Near Wall Region

PDI can be effectively used to study microscopic behavior of near wall impingement
region. With the knowledge of droplet velocity and diameter, Weber number can
be calculated, which gives valuable insight of the spray. Pan et al. (2019) have
investigated the glide, spread, and splash phenomenon of impinging droplet using
PDI along with other techniques such as PIV and Mie scattering. In this study, Weber
number was calculated using the data acquired through PDI and Bai, and Gosman
impingement map was used to study splash, stick, and glide behavior. Kay et al.

64

A. Jena

(2012) have studied pre and post impingement behavior using PDI technique. hollow
cone spray was investigated. Figure 5.6 shows the raw data acquired in this study.
A delay in data aquisation can be observed after Start of Injection (SOI). This was
consistent with the injection rate shape used. The initial cluster of data corresponds
to pre-spray. After that the hollow cone develops and then collapse towards the end
of injection. In between the pre-spray and collapse no data has been recorded as the
probe volume falls in the hollow region of the spray cone. This type of distribution
is typical to hollow cone spray. Both, axial and radial velocity approaches to zero as
the cone collapse and end of injection is approached.

Fig. 5.6 Raw data recorded 10 mm downstream of the injector axis Kay et al. (2012)

5 Optical Diagnostics of Spray Development in Diesel Engines

65

5.4 Modeling of Spray Wall Impingement

For better design and optimization of low-emission modern diesel engines, the com-
plicated process of spray-wall interaction needs to be understood in depth. Despite
signiﬁcant advancements in experimental diagnostics, in-cylinder investigation on
engines in operation is still a difﬁcult task. Fortunately, advanced computer modeling,
can potentially predict in-cylinder dynamics. However, it requires the development
of reliable impingement model. Many efforts have been made to develop reliable
models over the years. Naber and Reitz’s model is based on three breakup regimes,
namely stick, reﬂect, and slide. Droplets with very low incident Weber number (Wein)
will stick to the wall and continues to evaporate post impingement. Droplet with Wein
in intermediate range will bounce off the wall. These droplets would retain their tan-
gential components of velocity, but the normal components change its direction. For
Wein greater than 80, droplets slide on the wall forming wall jet. Bai and Gosman
model distinguishes between the dry and wet wall. The authors have provided a map
of impingement regimes based on wall temperature. Win was used as a standard to
predict the outcome of droplet-wall interaction. For dry case stick, spread and splash
regimes are modeled. For a wet wall, rebound is also included in addition to other
modes mentioned. In Mundo, Tropea and Summerﬁeld model only splash and depo-
sition are considered. The two phenomena are different from a splashing parameter,
which is a function of droplets Weber number and Reynolds number. O’Rourke and
Amsden model calculates a splashing Mach number, which is a function of We, ﬁlm
thickness, and boundary layer thickness. For dry wall, ﬁlm thickness becomes zero,
and the model is similar to splash model. There are many modiﬁed and improved
models which have been proposed. O’rourke model has better accuracy in predict-
ing the wall droplets accuracy over the other models discussed. Hence this model
is suggested for the modeling and simulation of droplets interaction in in-cylinder
condition of ICE.

5.5 Summary and Future Scope

Spray-wall interaction study has been the prime area of researchers in the ﬁeld of
combustion for the last two decades. However, the recent developments in high-
speed data acquisition, computing, and imaging have provided a new dimension to
this study. With the introduction of laser technology like PDI, both qualitative and
quantitative analysis is possible with better accuracy. On the other hand, the age-old
technologies like shadowgraphy and Schlieren imaging are much simpler and less
expensive. But at the same time, the experimental setup requires experience and
expertise.

In preceding sections, we focussed mainly on the two optical techniques which
can be used to study the spray-wall interaction. In order to study the effects of fuel
spray on combustion and emissions, none of the technique discussed above can

66

A. Jena

solely characterize the spray behavior completely. Schlieren technology is a simple
and useful tool to study the morphology of spray, especially in vapor phase. While
PDI is capable of measuring both velocity and droplet diameter but it’s a single point
measurement system. PDI technique directly provides spray droplet and velocity
distribution and probably the simplest technique to handle once alignment is done
properly. Hence, use of the combination of these methods can capture complete
physics of the problem.

The literature is enriched with a lot of information regarding the impingement
of spray. However,these informations and understandings are yet to be utilised for
practical purpose. With the help of these fundamental studies, optimised injection
strategies can be developed. Previous research investigations are mostly done inside
the Constant Volume Combustion Chamber (CVCC) in a quiescent environment.
Efforts have been made to replicate engine like environment, but the effect of turbulent
environment is hardly studied. The optical engine can be a breakthrough technology
to solve this problem. Optical access into the cylinder of anengine in operation
provides the scope of using non-intrusive techniques like PDI to study the spray/ﬂame
interaction of the wall in transient condition. For an optical diesel engine, inert
gases like nitrogen or exhaust gases from external combustor can be used to study
the spray interaction and ﬁlm formation in in-cylinder environment. It would help
developing much clearer insight of the phenomenon. Appropriate numerical model
can be helpful in this regard but its development remains a challenge. Fundamental
study of the ﬁlm dynamics is another area that needs to be explored for complete
understanding. Effect of geometry of the impingement surface on ﬁlm stability should
be studied. The geometrical parameters like impingement angle, spray radius can be
optimised to minimise the ﬁlm formation. This will help to develop an efﬁcient
piston bowl geometry for lower emissions. Further optimization of the geometry can
be done by the experimental diagnosis techniques. With the development of new
low-temperature combustion strategies like HCCI, PCCI, the spray-cylinder liner
interaction has become an important issue. This signiﬁcantly changes physics of the
problem due to the presence of lube oil ﬁlm on liner. Very few studies have been
found in the literature dealing with this issue. Future studies can therefore focus on
this area as well.
Investigation of Inﬂuence of Injection
Pressure on Gasoline Fuel Spray
Characteristics Using Numerical
Simulation
Abstract Maximum fuel injection pressure in gasoline direct injection engine is
expected to increase because of its potential to reduce emissions while maintaining
a high efﬁciency in spark ignition engine. Present gasoline injectors in the market
operates in the range of 20–30 MPa. Because of many positive effects of high injec-
tion pressure for the emission reduction and fuel efﬁciency, an interest has been
developed to investigate the spray behavior at around 40 MPa, 60 MPa and even
more higher injection pressure. A fundamental investigation of spray characteristics
at high-pressure injection will help to develop the understanding of spray behavior at
such elevated pressure. In the present study, a gasoline fuel spray was studied through
the numerical model at an injection pressure ranging from 40 to 150 MPa. A numer-
ical simulation was performed in an optical accessible constant volume chamber.
The chamber was effectively non-reacting and non-vaporizing condition since the
focus was on the spray droplets. In the numerical model, gas ﬂow was calculated by
large-eddy simulation (LES) method and the liquid phase was accounted by a stan-
dard Lagrangian spray model. The fuel spray atomization was modelled using the
Kelvin Helmholtz—Rayleigh Taylor (KH-RT) model, and droplet size distribution
followed the Rosin-Rammler distribution function. Simulation results were validated
by comparing the liquid penetration length of spray with the experimental data at
different fuel injection pressures. Then, the mean droplet sizes such as arithmetic
mean diameter and Sauter mean diameter of the spray droplets were compared with
the measure droplet sizes as a function of pressure. The spray droplet size distribution
was also shown along with measured droplet sizes. The result shows that the liquid
length penetration of the spray was signiﬁcantly increases together with the higher
probability of smaller droplet by increasing the fuel injection pressure. Moreover,
the mean droplet sizes were also reducing by increasing the fuel injection pressure,
such as the droplet SMD was reduced from 13.5 to 7.5 µm by injecting the fuel at
pressure 150 MPa instead of 40 MPa.
Emission regulation agencies have strongly inﬂuenced the engine development over
the last decades, encouraging to develop cleaner combustion engine technology. In
the recent year, strict emission norms for CO2 and particulate number (PN) discharge
from the vehicles have been initiated, and more tougher emission control is expected
in near future. To fulﬁl these emission regulations, vehicle manufacturers are explor-
ing several strategies including electriﬁed automotive powertrain. But currently, the
capacity and working lifespan of electric battery is very limited. The intermediate
solution could be a hybrid vehicle, where electric battery and internal combustion
engine can be utilized together. That means, researcher still need to focus on spark
ignition (SI) engine development.

In SI engine, the research is mainly focused on the Gasoline Direct Injection
(GDI) engine because of its capability to improve the fuel consumption and exhaust
emission. In GDI engine, gasoline fuel spray emerged from the injector plays a cru-
cial role in fuel-air mixing formation, combustion process and subsequently on the
exhaust emissions. Therefore, present injector system needs to improve to produce
better spray characteristics. The spray characteristics such as penetration length,
droplet sizes, and droplet distribution helps to enhance a combustion system efﬁ-
ciency. Therefore, it is important to investigate the spray characteristics qualitatively
and quantitatively using measurement and simulation tool to develop an efﬁcient
combustion system.

An effective way to improve the spray characteristics is to increase the fuel injec-
tion pressure. For this reason, fuel injection pressure of injector system has been
increased since the introduction of GDI technique. In the beginning, fuel injector
operated at injection of 5–10 MPa only. The fuel spray at such pressures are very
sensitive to operating and thermodynamics conditions. Then, after the introduction of
turbo-charger, fuel injection pressure was further increased to get an extended injec-
tor ﬂow range (Piock et al. 2002). The second drive to increase injection pressure
was the requirement of better atomization and improved mixture formation (Waltner
et al. 2006). In this way, maximum fuel injection pressure over the last decade has
been increased up to 25 MPa. And, it is expected that the gasoline injection pressure
will increase up to 40 MPa by 2020 and, 60 MPa by 2025.

Relatively few investigations (Mitroglou et al. 2007; Matousek et al. 2013; Buri
et al. 2010) have been performed by experiments or simulation technique concern-
ing the inﬂuence of high-pressure fuel injection. Tian et al. (2016) studied the inﬂu-
ence of high injection pressure on the spray characteristics under vaporizing and
non-vaporizing conditions. They concluded that the spray penetration length was
proportional to time, and signiﬁcantly increased by increasing injection pressure for
both vaporizing and non-vaporizing conditions. Kim et al. (2013) compared fuel

6 Investigation of Inﬂuence of Injection …

71

spray cone angle and penetration length for gasoline and diesel fuel at injection
pressures between 40 and 100 MPa. The result shown that the diesel fuel has a
longer liquid penetration length and a shorter spray cone angle compared to gasoline
fuel. Similar study of comparing diesel and gasoline fuel spray at injection pres-
sure 60–150 MPa was performed by Payri et al. (2012). Moreover, a gasoline spray
at pressure 30–150 MPa under different chamber pressure was studied using high-
speed image technique by Medina et al. (2018). The result revealed that the spray
characteristics (penetration length, spray cone angle and other) have a strong impact
of chamber pressure compared to the injection pressure.

As a summary of literature study, some research gap has been identiﬁed. Previous
studies have mainly been focused on macroscopic spray characteristics for example
spray cone-angle, spray area, and spray tip penetration but rather limited investi-
gations on details of the atomization characteristics were exercised. The efforts to
analyze the spray characteristics at high injection pressure have been highly impor-
tant but a detailed investigation is still needed. Moreover, diagnosis methods are
conﬁned by an optical accessible limit.

Due to the limitations of measurement techniques, use of computational ﬂuid
dynamics (CFD) approach is becoming more reliable and important tool for the
in-depth study of fuel spray and its subsequent processes. In CFD method three
techniques are widely used, that has their own strengths and weaknesses. First, the
Reynolds averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) method is widely used to simulate the
fuel spray (Chrigui et al. 2004; Paredi et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2011). In this method,
averaged (Reynolds) equations of Navier-stokes are solved, and offers a time aver-
age solution with economical computational cost. But, the averaging nature of the
method restrict its use for global predictions only. Second, direct numerical simula-
tion (DNS) method resolves all the scale involved in the ﬂow but it is computationally
very expensive and limits its use to the academic test cases only. Third, large-eddy
simulation method resolves the large ﬂow structure and model the sub-grid scale
structure. The LES method extensively used for unsteady, multiphase phenomenon
because this method can capture an intrinsic time and space dependent phenomenon
with a reasonable computational cost (Apte et al. 2003; Allocca et al. 2018; Senecal
et al. 2013; Pera et al. 2006). The capability of LES method for the engine applica-
tion is highlighted in the review provided by Rutland (2011). In the present work,
fuel spray was modelled using a Eulerian-Lagrangian approach. The fuel was rep-
resented as a discrete set of computational parcels and gas phase was accounted
using the LES method. The atomization of spray parcels depend on the exchange of
mass, momentum and energy with the gas phase, which was accounted using KH-RT
model. Addition models were also provided for droplet breakup, droplet dispersion,
transfer of momentum and kinetic energy.

The aim of present work is to study the gasoline fuel spray characteristics using
numerical models at different injection pressures (40–150 MPa). Another objective is
to evaluate the ability of models to capture the spray, and therefore, calculation results
are compared with the measuremental data. The spray characteristics compared with
the measurement are the spray liquid penetration length, droplet mean sizes and

72

S. Wadekar

distribution. The result suggested that the higher fuel injection pressure increases the
spray penetration length and substantially reduces the droplet size.

6.2 Experimental Set-Up

The measurements were performed in a constant volume spray chamber with optical
access. In the spray investigation, special designed 6-hole diesel-type nozzle was
used, which had a relatively large L/D (nozzle thickness to smaller hole diameter)
ratio to withstand the high injection pressure. The L/D ratio in the gasoline and diesel
type injector is usually around 2–3 and 8–9, respectively. The current investigated
nozzle is divergent towards exit side with exit hole diameter 380 µm, and L/D
ratio is 5.45. A piezo-electric system was used for needle movement. This actuation
system controls the needle movement using the pressure difference between the
fuel injection and return ﬂow pressure. The injection rate of the fuel was measured
using an injection rate meter. The operating conditions for the measurements are
summarized in Table 6.1.

After the injection rate measurement, a high-speed video (HSV) camera was
utilized to capture the shadowgraph images of the liquid spray in an optical accessible
chamber. The black illumination was used because it clear distinct between the
liquid spray region and surrounding air. A schematic diagram of the experimental
setup is shown in Fig. 6.1. The optical access into the spray chamber is provided
through the quartz glass window of diameter 90 mm. The spray chamber contain air
at atmospheric condition. For the shadowgraphy, a LED light was passed towards the
spray, and high-speed camera captured the scattered light. The spray images were
taken for 20 continues shots. The average image of 20 shots was used to postprocess
and analyze the spray characteristics such as spray penetration length and spray
jet-angle for all investigated injection pressures. First, a mask was applied to trim
the spray jet and injector location was determined. Then, the distance between the
nozzle and spray-tip was measured, keeping in mind the camera view angle, as a
spray penetration length. Similar postprocessing technique was applied for spray jet
angle calculation, which as used as boundary condition for the cfd simulations.

Table 6.1 Operating
conditions of the
measurements

Fuel

n-heptane

Chamber pressure (MPa)

Chamber temperature (K)
Nozzle outlet diameter (µm)
Injection mass (mg)

Injection duration (ms)

0.1

293

380

54

3

Fuel injection pressure (MPa)

40, 60, 80, 100, 120, 150

6 Investigation of Inﬂuence of Injection …

73

Fig. 6.1 Schematic diagram of the spray measurements using high-speed shadowgraph imaging

After spray imaging, a 2D Phase Doppler Interferometry was employed to mea-
sure the spray droplet sizes. In this technique, two intersecting laser beams built a
measurement volume. The measurement location was set at 80 mm downstream of
the injector tip and 5 mm outside the spray core. This location was chosen consid-
ering the high density at the center of the spray. The droplet was investigated for
the injection event only. The pulse time, signal delay for needle opening and closing
time was ignored.

6.3 Numerical Modeling

6.3.1 Fluid Motion

Spray phenomenon can be model using a multi-phase numerical model which can
correctly describe a liquid phase, gas phase and an interactions between these two
phases. In the present work a well-known Euler-Lagrangian approach was used to
describe the spray occurrence. In this approach, gas phase was described by Euler
method and liquid spray was modelled by lagrangian particle tracking (LPT) method.
Both phases were coupled using the addition source terms in the Euler (gas phase)
conservation equation. The Eulerian gas phase can be described using the equation
of mass (6.1), momentum (6.2), and energy (6.3), as:

∂

(cid:3)

(cid:2)
¯ρ ˜u j
∂ x j

+

∂ ¯ρ
∂t
(cid:3)

= sev,

∂ ¯ρ ˜u j
∂t

+

∂

(cid:2)
˜ui ˜u j
∂ x j

=

+

∂ ¯τi j
∂ x j

∂τ sgs
i j
∂ x j

−

∂ ¯p
∂ xi

+ si,m,

(6.1)

(6.2)

74

∂( ¯ρ ˜e)
∂t

+

∂

(cid:3)

(cid:2)
¯ρ ˜e ˜u j
∂ x j

+

∂( ¯ρ K )
∂t

+

∂

(cid:3)

(cid:2)
¯ρ K ˜u j
∂ x j

(cid:4)

=

∂
∂ x j

αe f f

∂ T
∂ x j

(cid:5)

+

(cid:2)

∂

¯p ˜u j
∂ x j

S. Wadekar
(cid:3)

+ se.

(6.3)

Here, the overline and tilde represents a Reynolds ﬁltered and a Favre ﬁltered
quantity respectively, with relation ˜q = ρq/ ¯ρ. In the governing equations, ¯ρ is the
density, p is the pressure, ˜u j is the ﬂow velocity, ¯e is the internal energy, K is the kinetic
energy, τi j is the viscous shear stress and αe f f is the effective thermal diffusivity. In
the mass conservation equation, the source term sev can be neglected as there is no
evaporation was considered in the present work. Moreover, the momentum transfer
and heat transfer between the liquid and gas phase was accounted using momentum
and energy source term, respectively. The unclosed Reynold stress tenser τ sgs was
modelled using the standard Smagorinsky model (Smagorinsky 1963), as:

τ sgs
i j

= −2 ¯ρυT

(cid:5)

δi j

˜Skk

,

(cid:4)

˜Si j − 1
3
(cid:6)

(cid:8)2

2 ˜Si j

υT = C 2
s
(cid:4)

˜Si j = 1
2

∂ ˜ui
∂ ˜x j

+

˜Si j ,
(cid:5)
.

∂ ˜ui
∂ ˜x j

(6.4)

(6.5)

(6.6)

Here, δi j is the Kronecker delta, υ T is the turbulent kinematic viscosity and C s
is the Smagorinsky constant. The grid ﬁlter width (cid:8) was calculated using cubic root
of the cell volume. The dynamic viscosity was calculated using the Sutherland law.

6.3.2 Droplet Motion

The liquid spray was deﬁned using the Largangian particles as fuel droplets. In order
to mimic the real spray large number of droplets needs to be considered, but solving
the equation of motion for each fuel droplet was not affordable computationally.
Therefore, the droplets having same properties were combined as ‘parcel’, which
allowed to simulate the spray with reasonable computational cost. In the simulation,
fuel droplet exchanged the momentum with the gas phase when the fuel was injected
into quiescent gas environment at high velocities. The momentum exchange was
estimated using a drag force (Fd ) acting on a liquid parcel, as:

Fd = 1
6

ρ pπ d 3 du p
dt

= 1
2

(cid:2)
ug − u p

(cid:3)(cid:7)
(cid:7)ug − u p

(cid:7)
(cid:7)ρgCd

π d 2
4

,

(6.7)

where d, ρg, ρ p, ug, and u p is the droplet diameter, density of gas, density of fuel
particle, velocity of gas and particle velocity, respectively. The coefﬁcient of drag

6 Investigation of Inﬂuence of Injection …

force (Cd ) acting on a droplet deﬁned as:

Cd = 24
Re p

(cid:8)
1 + 1
6

(cid:9)

2/3

p

Re

for Re p < 1000,

Cd = 0.424 f or Re p ≥ 1000.

The particle Reynolds number was calculated using the viscosity of the gas (υg),

as:

Re p =

(cid:7)
(cid:7)ug − u p
υg

(cid:7)
(cid:7)d

.

75

(6.8)

(6.9)

(6.10)

6.3.3 Droplet Break-up Model

The fuel droplets were injected using the Blob-injection model (Reitz 1987). During
the injection, the liquid droplets (blobs) were continuously introduced with a diameter
equal to the injector oriﬁce diameter. The number of droplets injected per time-step
was determined from the mass ﬂow rate proﬁle taken from the injector rate meter.
It was assumed that no cavitation was generated when the liquid fuel ﬂow through
the injector oriﬁce. The initial big spherical droplets were then broke down into the
smaller droplets with a process called secondary break-up.

In the present work, secondary break-up of droplets was accounted using a Kevin-
Helmholtz Rayleigh-Taylor (KHRT) model described by Reitz (1999). The KH-RT
model was chosen as it is suitable for high Weber number sprays. This model com-
bines the Kelvin-Helmholtz (KH) and Rayleigh-Taylor (RT) instability to calculate
the diameter of new child droplet from the parent droplet. In KH instability, the break-
up was estimated by the wavelength of instability generated by the aero-dynamics
forces. Whereas, in RT break-up, wavelength of instability due to liquid-gas interac-
tion through the density difference between liquid fuel and gas was used to calculate
the break-up. In the simulation, the droplet break-up was ﬁnally considered using a
mechanism (either KH or RT) which predicts the shortest break-up time. The KH
instability was dominated around the nozzle exit and RT instability was dominant in
downstream part of spray. Further detail of the model can be found in Reitz (1999).

6.4 Computational Set-Up

Computational mesh: A spray simulation needs a high-quality mesh to obtain an
accurate numerical solution. The quality of spray in the numerical solution is highly

76

S. Wadekar

depend on the mesh resolution. Moreover, numerical instability and mesh causing
errors can also be reduced by employing a good quality mesh. A study of impact
of gird resolution on the spray formation provided by Banerjee and Rutland (2012)
used to identify the correct mesh resolution for this work. The computational mesh
was created using the OpenFoam’s mesh utility called ‘blockMesh’. The dimension
of spray chamber is 180 mm diameter and 120 mm height. The mesh contains almost
equidistance hexahedral cells with the resolution of 0.5 mm. However, because of
circular shape of the spray chamber the grids were stretched towards the chamber
surface and subsequently mesh resolution increased maximum up to 1 mm. The
whole mesh contains more than 24 million cells which restrict to further reﬁnement
of the mesh gird. The 3D view and top view of the spray chamber is shown in
Fig. 6.2. Moreover, the fuel was injected from the top of spray chamber consisting
6 symmetrical spray jet. The total mass of liquid fuel (54 mg) was injected through
4e7 parcels, which was identical for all the investigated injection pressures.

Numerical set-up: The numerical simulation was performed in an open accessible
library known as OpenFoam-2.2.x (The open source CFD 2014). All the simulation
cases were non-reactive and non-evaporative. The spray chamber was ﬁlled with
the air at atmospheric condition (T = 293 K and p = 0.1 MPa). The liquid fuel
(n-heptane) was injected into the spray chamber at different injection pressure. Total
mass injected and mass ﬂow rate proﬁle was provided as an input to the simulation,
which was measured using ﬂow rate meter. Moreover, the number of parcels per
second of injection was 4e7 and constant coefﬁcient of discharge 0.9 was provided.
The spray-jet angle was deﬁned as constant 8.8° throughout the injection event. The
numerical equation was solved using an implicit backward (second-order accurate)
scheme for time integration and central differencing scheme (second order accurate)
for the treatment of convective scalar ﬂuxes. For all scalar quantities zero-gradient
boundary condition was applied at walls.

Furthermore, in the simulation all 6 spray-jet were considered to mimic the multi-
hole injection event. The primary break-up of spray was accounted by Blob model
with the Rosin-Rammler distribution function (Rosin and Rammler 1933) for the
initial droplet sizes. The initial diameter of blobs was provided corresponding to the

Fig. 6.2 (Left) top view,
(right) 3d view of spray
chamber with pointing the
injector location

6 Investigation of Inﬂuence of Injection …

77

Table 6.2 Sub-models and their model constant used in the simulation (Wadekar et al. 2019)

Type

Injector

Model

Multi hole injector

Droplet distribution

Rosin-Rammler

Primary break-up

Uniform droplet size

Secondary break-up

KH-RT

Dispersion model

Stochastic dispersion

Constants
6 holes, Do = 380 µm
n = 3
380 µm
B1 = 0.61, B2 = 40,
C1 = 1, C2 = 0.1

nozzle exit hole diameter (380 µm). These primary blobs were undergone through
the secondary breakup modelled using Kelvin-Helmholtz Rayleigh-Taylor (KHRT)
model. Also, the turbulent ﬂuctuations in droplet trajectories were modelled by
stochastic dispersion model. The different numerical models and their model constant
are illustrated in the Table 6.2.

6.5 Result and Discussion

Figure 6.3 presents the spray penetration length as a function of time together with
the measured spray penetration length at different fuel injection pressures. In this
work, the spray penetration length was deﬁned as the distance between the farthest
point of spray-tip and the nozzle position along the spray direction. The measured
data presented here were the average of 20 injection shots. The measured data was
determined using a post-processing technique based on pixel-based threshold ﬁlter.
The variation between shot-to-shot is also provided using shaded color band together
with average data. The spray model was tuned in such a way to ensure the correct
calculation of the measured penetration length. The model was tuned only for a
single case i.e. 100 MPa, else cases followed the same tuned values. For all injection
pressure cases, different mass ﬂow proﬁle was provided which was obtained from
the measurement.

The simulation result of spray penetration length is in fair agreement with the
measured penetration length for all injection pressure cases. The better agreement of
penetration length indicate that it correctly mimics the momentum exchange between
liquid fuel and surrounding gas during the injection process. It also exhibits that the
aerodynamic force induced during fuel injection is correctly predicted by the model.
The spray penetration results suggested that by increasing the injection pressure
penetration length increases and injection time signiﬁcantly reduces.

Figure 6.4 illustrates the computed and measured Sauter mean diameter (SMD
or D32) as function of time at different fuel injection pressures. Generally, the D32
diameter is highly affected by the presence of larger droplet. The large droplets usu-
ally come from the movement of needle inside the injector. Therefore, the measure-
ment data of droplet diameters presented here are extracted during the full-lift needle

78

S. Wadekar

Fig. 6.3 The comparison between measured (dot) and calculated (solid line) spray penetration
length at different injection pressures. The ﬁlled area shows the standard deviation of measurement
data

state. That mean, the inﬂuence of larger droplets is eliminated from the measurement
data, and hence, SMD diameter seem to be constant over the time. Moreover, as the
simulation utilized the lagrangian model, no needle movement was considered. The
results indicated that the higher fuel injection pressure signiﬁcantly reduced the SMD
diameter. Which mean the higher fuel injection pressure help in reducing the droplet
diameter and subsequently provide the large surface of the fuel droplet to assist a
faster evaporation under engine conditions.

The calculated result shown the fair agreement with the measured SMD data at all
injection pressure. However, the injection pressure case of 40 and 150 MPa shows
slight discrepancies. The potential cause could be the inﬂuence of large droplets that
might have come during the full-needle opening position. Usually, the bigger droplets
stayed in the spray axis because of their momentum, whereas smaller droplets gen-
erated after the breakup were more distributed around the peripheral area of the
spray. Moreover, the SMD valve during the initial time in the calculation shown the
higher values of SMD diameter. It might be the inﬂuence of poor primary atomization
model, in which the initial droplet was considered to be equal to the nozzle oriﬁce
diameter.

Figure 6.5 presents the comparison of calculated mean droplet diameter against
the measured mean droplet diameter at different fuel injection pressure. The mean
droplet shown are arithmetic mean diameter (D10) and Sauter mean diameter (D32),

6 Investigation of Inﬂuence of Injection …

79

Fig. 6.4 The comparison between experimental and simulated Sauter mean diameter (SMD or
D32) as a function of time at different fuel injection pressures

Fig. 6.5 Illustration of
arithmetic mean diameter
(D10) and Sauter mean
diameter (D32) as a function
of injection pressure for the
simulation (line) and
measurement data (dot)
(Wadekar et al. 2019)

80

S. Wadekar

which are probed at around 80 mm downstream from the nozzle location. The result of
droplet mean diameter shown the good agreement with the measured mean diameters
at all injection pressure cases. The result clearly evident that droplet diameter reduced
by increasing the injection pressure. The D10 diameter shown slight variation by
increasing the injection pressure, in comparison with the D32 diameter. Possibly the
droplet diameters have achieved the adequately small diameter and do not exhibit
the further breakup. However, the D32 valve was signiﬁcantly reduce by exerting
the high injection pressure. Which mean the inﬂuence of larger droplets that came
from needle opening and closing event, was signiﬁcantly reduce and helped in faster
evaporation.

In addition to droplet mean diameter, the droplet size distribution also play sig-
niﬁcant role in the droplet atomization process and subsequently fuel-air mixture
formation. Figure 6.6 illustrate the comparison between calculated local droplet
size distribution against the measured data. The droplet size distribution data also
collected at 80 mm downstream of injector nozzle. Moreover, the droplet size distri-
bution data was collected during the full needle opening condition just to avoid the
inﬂuence of larger droplet from the opening/closing needle position. In the simula-
tion, the same location with the diameter of around 2 mm diameter was considered to
collect the droplet distribution. The simulation result shown overall good agreement
with the measured droplet distribution valves at all injection pressure.

Fig. 6.6 The local droplet size distribution is demonstrated at different injection pressure for
simulation and experimental data

6 Investigation of Inﬂuence of Injection …

81

The droplet size distribution at high pressures (120 and 150 MPa) demonstrate the
higher probability of smaller droplets. At these pressures, 5 to 10 µm diameter shown
more than 30% probability, while the probability of large droplets (i.e. above 15 µm)
were negligible (< 5%). Also, the droplet distribution curve at this injection pressure
looked quite narrow with the highest probability of smaller droplet amongst all the
injection pressure studied here. Moreover, at injection pressure 80 and 100 MPa, the
droplet size distribution still shown the higher probability of smaller droplets, but
the big droplets were also indicated. Then, at 40 and 60 MPa injection pressure, the
chance of ﬁnding the smaller droplets was signiﬁcantly reduced and pointing out
the sufﬁciently number of large droplet diameter valves. The size distribution curve
looked more wider compared to the distribution at highest pressure.

Note that, the droplet size distribution above 100 MPa looks almost similar. The
potential reason was the injection pressure at around 100 MPa was the threshold
or saturation pressure. The injection above this threshold pressure was not anymore
efﬁcient to reduce the droplet size and effectively distributed within the spray jet.

6.6 Conclusion

The purpose of the present work was to study the gasoline fuel spray at very high injec-
tion pressures i.e. 40–150 MPa. Mainly the fuel spray characteristics were analyzed
such as spray penetration length, droplet mean diameters and droplet size distribu-
tion. Another objective was to check the accuracy of numerical model to capture the
spray related phenomenon correctly. The following conclusion were down based on
the simulation results:
• The numerical model correctly captured the spray penetration length for all injec-
tion pressures. It suggested that the higher injection result in signiﬁcant enhance
in penetration length.

• The numerical model appropriately calculated the Sauter mean diameter (D32) of
the fuel droplet when compared to the experimental results. At higher injection
pressure the SMD values are signiﬁcantly reduces compared to D10 diameter. It
suggested that the inﬂuence of large droplet (comes from the needle movement)
was substantially reduced by injecting the fuel at higher injection pressure.

• The Arithmetic mean diameter decreased from 9.2 to 6 µm, when injection pres-
sure increased from 40 to 150 MPa. It concluded that the high injection help in
faster droplet break-up and subsequently promote the faster evaporation of liquid
fuel.

• The local droplet size distribution of spray jet was considerably good predicted by
the model and substantiate that the droplet size was reduced using higher pressure
injection. At 150 MPa injection pressure, the probability of ﬁnding the smaller
droplets (5–10 µm) was highest amongst the investigated pressures.
Cavitation in Injectors: A Brief Review
of the Diagnostics of Liquid-Vapour
Flow Within Injector Nozzles
Abstract Practical injectors typically involve high speed ﬂows and large static
pressure variation along the liquid stream before it exits the injector. As a result,
the phenomenon of cavitation and the formation of a liquid-vapor mixture within the
nozzle is always a possibility. The effects of cavitation may be beneﬁcial (improved
atomization) or undesirable (damage to injector walls due to violent cavitation bub-
ble collapse); but regardless of the nature of effects, in both cases it is important to
characterize cavitation within injector nozzles and understand its dynamics. Previous
work on the diagnostics of cavitation within injectors is reviewed here.

7.1 Cavitation

(cid:4)(cid:5)

Vapour bubbles form in a liquid when it is subjected to a decreasing pressure when
the same falls below a critical value; the critical value depends on several factors
including the saturated vapour pressure, presence of impurities, dissolved gases, and
the ﬁnish of the surfaces in contact with the liquid ﬂow. This is cavitation (Brennen,
1995). The propensity of a liquid ﬂow to cavitate is given by the cavitation number,
(cid:3)
(cid:2)
( p∞ − pv)/
0.5ρlU 2
, with pv denoting the vapor pressure at a reference temper-
∞
ature; p∞, U∞ the freestream pressure and velocity and ρl the liquid density. The
presence of surface defects, impurities in the ﬂuid, which act as nucleation cites for
cavitation bubble formation; and the presence of dissolved gases in the ﬂuid promote
early cavitation. Depending on these factors, cavitation will occur at a certain value
of the cavitation number and a reducing cavitation number within the ﬂow will lead
to an increasing size and number of cavitation bubbles.

Conditions for hydrodynamic cavitation are generally created at corners and area
changes. It is sometimes also referred to as ﬂash boiling (often in the context of
gasoline injectors).
Cavitation bubbles themselves are highly dynamic and would go through stages of
growth, oscillation, coalescence, formation of clusters/clouds, and collapse depend-
ing on various physical factors. Among these, the latter—bubble collapse—is a highly
violent process responsible for the destructive capabilities of a cavitating ﬂuid, and
must therefore be avoided; specially in an injector for obvious reasons.

The advantages of cavitation are in creating a two-phase ﬂow within the injector.
As a result atomization is enhanced—likely at the cost of increased pressure drop.
Cavitation induced in an injector nozzle prior to the exit, would also lead to increased
turbulence levels within the liquid jet emanating from the injector, which would in
turn result in enhanced jet breakup, atomization, and therefore vaporization of liquid
fuels. For this reason, cavitation within injectors is an important phenomenon being
actively investigated by the industry and academia. However, cavitation in injectors
involves small time and length scales; and in a turbulent ﬂuid ﬂow its occurrence
leads to complex multi-phase structures and interactions and is difﬁcult to study
experimentally (in particular, in-situ measurements) and numerically. In this report,
a short account of recent experimental diagnostics is provided.

The effects of cavitation on spray formation and atomization has been reported
in several previous studies. For instance, Baldwin et al. (2016) and Rachakonda
et al. (2018) numerically investigated (including comparison with corresponding
experimental results by the research group in case of Baldwin et al. (2016) and
Zhang et al. (2014) for Rachakonda et al. (2018)) the spray characteristics from a
gasoline direct injection VCO (valve covered oriﬁce) nozzle under conditions where
the internal ﬂow would cavitate. Figure 7.1 from Baldwin et al. (2016) presents a
visual comparison (experimental results) of spray formation from cavitating and non-
cavitating nozzles. In comparison to the non-cavitating case, the spray corresponding

Fig. 7.1 Spray formation for a cavitating (left) and non-cavitating (right) multiport nozzle (Baldwin
et al. 2016). For cavitating nozzles, the atomization is enhanced, spray angle is increased, and the
penetration depth is correspondingly reduced. Standard approaches to correlations (Lefebvre and
McDonell 2017) with respect to Weber or Reynolds numbers fail for spray characteristics of spray
nozzles (Xu et al. 2013)

7 Cavitation in Injectors: A Brief Review of the Diagnostics of Liquid-Vapour …

87

to the cavitating case is wider by a factor of about 1.5. Atomization is improved and
these effects combined, the penetration length of the jet is reduced. Because of the
phenomenon of vaporization within the nozzle, unlike non-cavitating nozzle sprays,
properties of cavitating sprays may not be well-correlated with the Weber number;
rather, the parameters governing cavitation (saturated pressure, cf. Xu et al. (2013))
and nozzle geometry become critical for the spray characteristics. For multi-nozzle
conﬁgurations, it is quite common to obtain string cavitation/ﬂash-boiling associated
with transient vortical structures formed between pairs of nozzles (Andriotis et al.,
2008; Gavaises et al., 2009; Baldwin et al., 2016). These are often observed during
transient operation of multi-hole injectors when the unsteady ﬂow ﬁeld with intense
vorticity connecting pairs of holes is formed at conditions conducive for cavitation
(i.e. conditions at which even a single nozzle conﬁguration would feature cavitation
pockets).

In experiments, the effect of cavitation on spray formation can be diagnosed using
the same techniques as for any spray: once the cavitating ﬂow leaves the injector it is a
two-phase ﬂow just as any other spray. The reader is referred to other reviews (Chigier,
1983; Fansler and Parrish, 2014) on this aspect for further details. The diagnostics
covered in this review concern the investigation of the cavitating ﬂow as it evolves
within the nozzle.

7.2 Diagnostics of Cavitating Flow Inside Injectors

To understand, control, and predict cavitation inside injectors, it becomes essential
to perform diagnostics of the nozzle/injector ﬂow and previous research falls into
the following categories:

1. Optical diagnostics in the visible spectrum but with the injector geometry modiﬁed
(often simpliﬁed) to use transparent materials (plastic or glass) at least along the
desired path of light.

2. Diagnostics with high energy radiation (X-ray, neutron imaging) and with the

injector material transparent to the radiation.

3. Diagnostics with magnetic resonance imaging of the cavitating nozzle ﬂow.

Characterization of the two-phase ﬂow within the nozzle due to cavitation often
involves the determination of the spatial distribution of the vapour fraction. The
vapour fraction is also the basis for comparison between experiments and numerical
simulations of cavitating ﬂow within injectors.

7.2.1 Diagnostics with Visible Light

Cavitation bubbles and clouds strongly scatter light and may be identiﬁed as dark
regions within the nozzle in the backlighting or shadowgraphy conﬁguration or as

88

A. Saurabh

Fig. 7.2 Top: Cavitation in a glass model diesel
injector illuminated by and LED light
source (Miranda et al. 2003); left: cavitation inside nozzles obtained with backlit imaging using a
plasma light source (Falgout and Linne 2016) and right: cavitating nozzle and spray illuminated by
a pulsed laser (Mitroglou et al. 2011)

bright features in the forward scattering mode. Figure 7.2 shows some examples of
the direct optical imaging of cavitation within injectors with the two methods. The
high speed ﬂow necessitates small exposure times (of the order of 100 nanoseconds)
which is only possible with the use of short duration pulses from high power light
sources. Mitroglou et al. (2011) for instance employed a ∼20W pulsed laser source
for illumination.

The main drawback of optical methods with visible light is that the injector must
be optically transparent. The material must be able to handle the high injection pres-
sures (Falgout and Linne 2016). Finally, in order to obtain sharp images, differences
in the optical path of light from different sections of the region of interest (including
the small diameter of the order of 0.1 mm, cylindrical nozzle) due to curvature and
changes in the refractive indices of the material, the liquid being tested, and the sur-
rounding air or ﬂuid (submerging the setup in a liquid in order to reduced differences
in refractive indices helps (Miranda et al. 2003)) must be minimized. Miranda et al.
(2003) and subsequent investigations on the setup, for instance, employed a glass
prism and added α-methylnapthalene to the fuel in order to have a plane surface
(removing the effect of curvature on optical path) and matching refractive indices
between glass and the liquid being tested.

7 Cavitation in Injectors: A Brief Review of the Diagnostics of Liquid-Vapour …

89

Because of the scattering of light from gas-liquid interfaces and additionally from
the walls of the injector, optical methods are limited to visualization and identiﬁ-
cation of qualitative features of the cavitating ﬂow. Measurements in this class of
diagnostics deliver line-of-sight images and tomographic reconstruction is difﬁcult
because measurements from different angles not only sees different views of the cav-
itation geometry but also contains differences due to different optical path lengths
if the rig is not axisymmetric. Light sheet methods are rare because of difﬁculties
at the walls, and scattering problems. Often the injector test assembly is scaled up
for the convenience of diagnostics (Park et al. 2008; Sou et al. 2012; Gavaises et al.
2009). In order to reduce curvature effects, a two-dimensional nozzle has often been
investigated to study cavitation (Park et al. 2008).

Previous attempts to obtain quantitative characterization, speciﬁcally vapour frac-
tion determination with diagnostics in the visible spectrum include Winklhofer et al.
(2001), who used interferograms to obtain optical path lengths in experiments with a
2-D cavitating nozzle and used this information to infer the density of the two-phase
mixture. Cavitation was observed at a pressure difference of 70 bar and was identiﬁed
to coincide with choking of the fuel ﬂow rate.

7.2.2 X-Ray and High-Energy Radiation Diagnostics

Quantitative diagnostics, in particular void or vapour fraction in a cavitating injector
ﬂow, is of particular importance for the validation of numerical simulations. For this
purpose X-ray techniques which are employed for line-of-sight projected vapour
fraction determination in sprays have been extended for the same study in cavitat-
ing nozzle ﬂows in the forms of X-ray radiography (Mitroglou et al. 2016; Vabre
et al. 2009), X-ray averaged tomography (Mitroglou et al. 2016; Bauer et al. 2012)
(see Fig. 7.4 top panel), X-ray ﬂuorescence measurements (with dissolved Kryp-
ton) (Duke et al. 2015), ﬂuorescence spectroscopy (Duke et al. 2018) and phase
contrast imaging (with Cerium as the contrast agent) (Duke et al. 2018).

X-ray diagnostics can be conducted at conditions that one cannot realise in
optically-accessible setups. Depending on the material of the nozzle, speciﬁcally
the absorption of X-rays by the material, the signal-to-noise ratio will be affected,
with previously tested materials such as Beryllium or Aluminium giving high SNR.
But the working pressures are reduced for such soft metals in comparison to steel
used commonly in injectors. Duke et al. (2018) reported that Beryllium and Alu-
minium allow for maximum operating pressures in the range of 100 bar and 500 bar
respectively with good SNR levels.

Small laboratory-scale X-ray sources are limited in their resolution (increased spa-
tial resolution can be obtained at the cost of time resolution and vice versa) (Mitroglou
et al. 2016) but large synchrotron X-ray facilities (Kastengren et al. 2012; Vabre et al.
2009) provide focused X-rays that allow higher spatial (of the order of µm) and tem-
poral (of the order of µs) are possible (Duke et al. 2014, 2015, 2018).

90

A. Saurabh

Fig. 7.3 Top: X-ray imaging of the liquid-vapour interface in a cavitating nozzle (Vabre et al. 2009);
bottom: line-of-sight project void fraction from X-ray radiography of a cavitating nozzle. (Duke
et al. 2015)

X-ray based techniques suffer similar limitations in the diagnostics of cavitating
ﬂows as they have for the diagnostics of sprays. It is only possible to obtain a line-
of-sight imaging of the liquid-vapour interface; and details of cavitation bubbles and
clouds are averaged out (cf. Fig. 7.3 top panel). For this reason their best application
is the measurement of projected vapour fraction (Fig. 7.3 bottom panel) for use in
numerical model validation studies—and in this respect the methods are the state-
of-the-art.

As a means of improving X-ray radiography and phase contrast imaging, the use
of Beryllium alloy for the injector to reduce the absorption of X-ray in the injector
geometry has also been reported recently (Duke et al. 2017).

Similar studies with neutron beams instead of X-rays are ongoing presently (Toops
et al. 2016) and we may expect to see new—possibly more detailed—results on
cavitating ﬂows in the coming years. Neutrons may be well suited for such study due
to their sensitivity to hydrogen atoms in the fuel/water and low interactions with the
metal part of the injector.

7.2.3 Magnetic Resonance Imaging

Magnetic resonance imaging of a cavitating nozzle has been reported recently by
Adair et al. (2018) (see Fig. 7.4). However, in addition to the limitation of the choice
of injector material due to the technique; the technique is also slow and only steady

7 Cavitation in Injectors: A Brief Review of the Diagnostics of Liquid-Vapour …

91

Fig. 7.4 Top: Comparison of shadowgraphy image of a cavitating nozzle and its X-ray CT recon-
struction (Mitroglou et al. 2016); bottom: MRI images of a cavitating nozzle under different pressure
differentials beyond the threshold for cavitation (Adair et al. 2018)

or periodic ﬂows may be diagnosed. Given these conditions are met, the technique
allows accurate three-dimensional reconstruction of a cavitating ﬂow.

As mentioned previously, similar reconstruction may also be achieved using X-ray

radiography.

7.3 Conclusions

Accessing the two phase ﬂow ﬁeld within injectors is difﬁcult and requires spe-
cial considerations concerning the test setup and diagnostic methodology. Research
reported till date involves diagnostics with visible light, high energy radiation, and
even magnetic resonance imaging. Cavitation within injectors be an important aspect
for research and development in the near future and future developments in diagnos-
tics are also expected.
Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel
Injection Systems
Abstract Fuel Injection Equipment (FIE) are an integral component of modern
Internal Combustion Engines (ICE), since they play a crucial role in the fuel atom-
ization process and in the formation of a fuel/air combustible mixture, consequently
affecting efﬁciency and pollutant formation. Advancements and improvements of
FIE systems are determined by the complexity of the physical mechanisms tak-
ing place; the spatial scales are in the order of millimetres, ﬂow may become locally
highly supersonic, leading to very small temporal scales of microseconds or less. The
operation of these devices is highly unsteady, involving moving geometries such as
needle valves. Additionally, extreme pressure changes imply that many assumptions
of traditional ﬂuid mechanics, such as incompressibility, are no longer valid. Further-
more, the description of the fuel properties becomes an issue, since fuel databases
are scarce or limited to pure components, whereas actual fuels are commonly hydro-
carbon mixtures. Last but not least, complicated phenomena such as phase change
or transition from subcritical to transcritical/supercritical state of matter further pose
complications in the understanding of the operation of these devices.

8.1 Introduction

The link between nozzle ﬂow and spray formation has long been an open issue in
the IC engines community. Phase-change dominates injection of liquid fuels into
combustion engines. Depending on the nozzle design and/or operating conditions,
cavitation or ﬂash boiling (for gasoline injectors) are the ﬁrst phase-change processes
taking place even before reaching the combustion chamber and affect atomisation. It
is widely accepted that nozzle ﬂow plays a major role in fuel atomisation and emis-
sions in Diesels. Today’s commercial FIE reach 2750 bar while injection pressures
as high as 4,500 bar are being investigated. The present work aims to discuss in detail
the importance of phase change phenomena and ﬂow mechanisms in the operation of
FIE equipment, or simpliﬁed models resembling such equipment, discussing internal
ﬂow effects. Also, a brief discussion on fuel properties, subcritical/transcritical ﬂuid
state and how it affects atomization will be discussed. The discussions will be based
on prior experimental investigations or numerical studies of the authors’ group.

8.2 Flow Topology

Real-size exact replicas of Diesel nozzles made from transparent (e.g. acrylic) mate-
rials have been successfully manufactured, able to withstand pressures of the order of
1000 bar (Mitra et al. 2019). Parallel to those activities, several studies have focused
on illustrating the in-nozzle, two-phase ﬂow topology in transparent, enlarged repli-
cas at lower injection pressures (see selectively Reid et al. 2010; Reid 2014; Gavaises
et al. 2009). Flow similarity to the actual injector ﬂow is ensured based on non-
dimensional numbers, i.e. with the use of the Reynolds and cavitation numbers
deﬁned as follows:

(8.1)

(8.2)

(8.3)

Re = u · D
ν
pinj − po
po − psat

CN =

σ =

pinj − psat
ρu2

1
2

where u, D and ν in the Reynolds-number deﬁnition are the ﬂow average velocity, the
oriﬁce internal diameter and the diesel kinematic viscosity, respectively. Referring to
the cavitation number deﬁnition, pinj, po and psat are the injection, back (outlet) and
saturation pressure, respectively. An additional deﬁnition of the cavitation number
has also been used in the literature (Schmidt et al. 2014):

where ρ, u are the fuel density and the ﬂow velocity, respectively. Nevertheless,
Eq. (8.2) will be used throughout this chapter where increasing values of CN corre-
spond to more extensive cavitation formation.

8.2.1 Optical Methods

Optical methods, i.e. back-light diffuse illumination or Mie scattering (Pickett et al.
2009; Bardi et al. 2013; Westlye et al. 2017) have been extensively employed for the

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

97

Fig. 8.1 a Nominal fabrication steps of injector/transparent tip assembly b 3-D view of the
transparent-tip schematic indicating visualisation angles. The tip realises a six-hole Diesel injector,
with all holes at angles of 65° with reference to the injector main axis (Mitroglou et al. 2014)

Fig. 8.2 Sequence of representative time instances of an injection event having a duration of 3.5 ms
at 300 bars injection pressure. The injection hole diameter is 0.160 mm (Mitroglou et al. 2014)

visualization of cavitating structures emerging in injector ﬂows. Such methods beneﬁt
from a relatively simple and straightforward optical set-up, mainly comprising an
illumination source, a set of diffusers/lenses and a high-speed camera recording either
the shadows or the Mie signal produced by the vapour formed within the injector
oriﬁce. The schematic shown in Fig. 8.1 illustrates the assembly of a real-size injector
with a transparent tip. The metallic body of the actual injector is machined-off below
the sac region and an acrylic part realising the sac and injector holes is clamped into
position (Fig. 8.1a), allowing the internal ﬂow to be realised from different angles
(Fig. 8.1b). Due to the limited durability of acrylic, experiments reported in this
chapter have been performed for injection pressures up to 500 bars (Mitroglou et al.
2014).

A representative injection event employing the transparent tip depicted in Fig. 8.1
is presented in Fig. 8.2, illustrating the formation of cavitation in the sac region and
injector holes. The sequence at 0 ms reveals that bubbles, consisting of congested gas
and/or fuel vapour, occupy a large portion of the sac and injector-hole regions prior
to injection. Latter time instances clearly demonstrate the presence of fuel vapour
clouds within the injector hole during the needle-opening phase. As can be seen,

98

I. K. Karathanassis et al.

Fig. 8.3 Spatial distribution of average and standard deviation demonstrating the presence of an
interphase, i.e. cavitation bubbles and two-phase spray mixture inside and downstream of the nozzle
exit, respectively during selected time-steps of one injection event corresponding to the raw images
depicted in Fig. 8.2 (Mitroglou et al. 2014)

cavitation is always evident during the ﬁrst half of injection duration with the cavity
forming in the sac region, in the vicinity of the needle tip and propagating into the
oriﬁce core. These distinct cavitation structures of elongated shape, which are not
attached to the injector walls, are characteristically termed as string cavities.

Suitable post-processing and averaging of a large number of time-resolved data
can provide useful information on the extent and dynamical behaviour of fuel vapour
within the injector during the entire injection event. Figure 8.3 presents mean vapour
(or two-phase mixture) presence probability images corresponding to the high-speed
images presented in Fig. 8.2, as produced by a series of different injection events. Also
depicted in Fig. 8.3 are the respective standard deviation images, which are suitable
for highlighting the transient ﬂow features. The mean images corresponding to the
needle-opening phase of the injector operation illustrate that the vapour-presence
probability is close to 1 in the lower part of the injection hole, hence denoting the
presence cavitation during the needle-valve opening. As also revealed by the standard
deviation images, transient features within the injector-nozzle are associated with
unstable spray behaviour. The time instances depicted in Fig. 8.3 clearly demonstrate
that the upper part of the injected spray plume exhibits a ﬂapping behaviour and the
spray cone angle ﬂuctuates.

Apart from real-size optical injector tips, fully transparent enlarged injector repli-
cas have been used in experimental investigations allowing cavitating structures to
be visualised at larger length-scales, hence enhancing the visualisation resolution
(Arcoumanis et al. 2001). A representative example of an enlarged replica of a 5-hole
asymmetrical injector is depicted in Fig. 8.4, with a nominal injection-hole diameter

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

99

Fig. 8.4 a Schematic and bottom-view photograph of the enlarged injector replica, depicting the
needle, sac-region an injector holes. b Bottom view of the two-phase ﬂow emerging inside the
replica. The presence of a string cavity can be clearly discerned in the sac region, also extending
into one of the injection holes (CN = 4.0, Re = 68000) (Andriotis et al. 2008; Andriotis and Gavaises
2009)

of 1.5 mm (Andriotis et al. 2008; Andriotis and Gavaises 2009). The schematic of
the arrangement, shown in Fig. 8.4a, incorporates a hollow slide-type needle that
covers the injection holes directly, and minimises the sac volume when fully closed.
The injector replica discharges the working medium directly into ambient air under
atmospheric pressure and at room temperature and enables the concurrent visual-
ization of the atomization process and the transient cavitating strings arising in the
injector-holes and sac regions, as shown in Fig. 8.4b.

Even more simpliﬁed, enlarged single-oriﬁce layouts have been designed and
examined with reference to injector ﬂows, in order to shed light to the physical ﬂow
processes inﬂuencing the onset, development and collapse of cavitation. An injector-
mimicking oriﬁce that excludes ﬂow perturbations due to the presence of multiple
nozzle holes and transient needle motion is depicted in Fig. 8.5 (Mitroglou et al.
2017). The optical part comprises an off-set injection hole preceded by an axisym-
metric cylindrical ﬂow-path replicating the sac region (Fig. 8.5a). An asymmetric
metallic needle, also depicted in Fig. 8.5a, is placed at a ﬁxed, yet adjustable position
in the sac region and along with the offset injector nozzle give rise to a ﬂow pattern
which leads to the formation of cavitation mainly on one side of the nozzle. Hence,
fundamental ﬂow processes associated with cavitation dynamics can be visualised
from different angles and in a fully controllable manner by adjusting the position of
the metallic needle, as well as the upstream and downstream pressures. A metallic
manifold is assembled upstream the examined nozzle conﬁguration, so as to ensure
a parallel and unperturbed ﬂow entering the injector-replicating layout. The diesel
fuel exiting the nozzle is subsequently discharged into a chamber ﬁlled with liquid
as well, shown on the lower part of Fig. 8.5c. Hence, the overall conﬁguration can
be characterised as a submerged oriﬁce.

The cavitating ﬂow arising inside the single oriﬁce injector depicted in Fig. 8.5
is elucidated by the sequence of high-speed images presented in Fig. 8.6. For ﬂow
conditions characterised by Re = 53760 and CN = 1.3, a cloud cavity is established in
the entrance region of the oriﬁce with an unstable trailing edge from which coherent
vortical structures are shed, as highlighted by the red circle in time instances after

100

I. K. Karathanassis et al.

Fig. 8.5 a Cross-sectional view of the optical part realizing the single oriﬁce of the injector replica.
The metallic needle is also discernible in the middle of the part, while a detailed view of the needle
geometry is shown on the right part of the ﬁgure. b Schematic of the part/manifold assembly
(Mitroglou et al. 2017)

Fig. 8.6 Sequence of side-view high-speed images produced by diffuse back-illumination for the
single-oriﬁce replica (needle lift ﬁxed at 0.5 mm, CN = 1.3 and Re = 53760) (Mitroglou et al.
2017). Flow is from left to right

0.06 ms. The underlying cause for the formation of cloud cavitation in the vicinity
of the nozzle wall is the ﬂow separation downstream the geometrical constriction
between the needle and needle seat. Hence, the low pressure prevailing in the core
of the recirculation pattern leads to the formation of an adverse pressure gradient
in the lower part of the nozzle entrance region. This pressure gradient urges liquid
to ﬂow opposite to the main ﬂow, as denoted in the detailed view of the 0.04 ms
time instance (Fig. 8.6). This is a well-known ﬂow mechanism, commonly termed

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

101

as re-entrant jet in the literature (Gopalan and Katz 2000; Stutz and Legoupil 2003),
which has been demonstrated to be responsible for a cavity shedding sequence, made
evident in the speciﬁc case as well, by the time instances between 0.04 and 0.16 ms.
A coherent vaporous structure can be seen to completely detach from the main cloud
at t = 0.06 ms and being convected towards the nozzle outlet by the main ﬂow in
the subsequent time instances. As shown by the time instance at t = 0.12 ms, the
vortical cavitating structure obtains a hairpin shape and eventually collapses once it
encounters a ﬂow region of elevated pressure. The vortex ligaments are separated
almost entirely at t = 0.16 ms due to viscous decay, while it is worth pointing out
that the cavitating vortex collapses in the near-wall region, highlighting a typical
mechanism of erosion formation in fuel injectors, as will be discussed in more detail
in a subsequent paragraph.

Apart from physical inspection of the in-nozzle cavitation development and col-
lapse, statistical treatment of a large number of high-speed images can provide infor-
mation on the extent of vapour formation and highlight transient features of cavitation
owed solely to the ﬂow conditions. Figure 8.7a presents characteristic time instances
of the cavitating ﬂow arising in a similar single-oriﬁce layout as the one depicted
in Fig. 8.5, with the exception that the needle tip and sac wall have a hemispherical
rather than a ﬂat outline. A cloud cavity, once again sets in at the lower part of the
nozzle wall with the distinct feature of exhibiting an oscillating behaviour with a
frequency of approximately 296 Hz. Although the cavity-trailing region is unsta-
ble, the shedding sequence is associated with a full collapse of a part of the main
cloud and hence cannot be attributed to the re-entrant jet mechanism. A mechanism
based on the formation of a shock-wave within the separated cloud cavity causing
its partial collapse, as described in (Ganesh et al. 2016), seems suitable to describe
the cavitation dynamics in the speciﬁc case. The mean vapour presence probability
and standard deviation images depicted in Fig. 8.7a–b clearly highlight the transient
behaviour of the cavity development. As can be seen by comparison of the mean
images, increase of CN leads to a more extensive cavity attached to the lower part
of the oriﬁce wall. Furthermore, it can be deduced through the standard deviation
images that increase of CN enhances the oscillatory motion of the cavity, as the extent
of the region exhibiting high values increases as well. An additional observation, is
that the mean and standard deviation images also highlight the presence of vortical
(or string) cavities emanating from the needle tip. Their highly transient nature is
once again veriﬁed by the low mean and high standard deviation values.

The experimental investigations incorporating the simpliﬁed single-oriﬁce injec-
tors discussed above demonstrate that fundamental cavitation processes can be elu-
cidated in such conﬁgurations, which omit additional perturbations probable to set
in due to geometry complexity. The cavitation regimes identiﬁed in enlarged replicas
also arise during the operating cycle of actual fuel injectors and therefore identiﬁca-
tion of the underlying ﬂow processes, e.g. pressure gradients in the oriﬁce, presence
and topology of vortical motion, shockwave dynamics, can be directly connected to
spray atomisation, injector fuel delivery effectiveness and durability.

102

I. K. Karathanassis et al.

Fig. 8.7 a Time instances of the cavitating ﬂow arising in a single-oriﬁce replica with curved needle
tip and sac wall. b Mean and standard deviation images of the in-nozzle vapour extent (CN = 1.6
(top) − 1.8 (bottom), Re = 30000 and needle lift of 0.5 mm)

8.2.2 X-Ray Phase Contrast Imaging (XPCI)

8.2.2.1 Vapour Extent and Flow Dynamics

Optical imaging, although offers useful information on in-nozzle cavitation charac-
teristics, is limited as a ﬂow visualisation technique by the excessive light scattering
in the presence of very low amounts of vapour. In fact, it has been demonstrated that
vapour volume fractions of order of 0.15 can completely block a visible light source
(Ganesh et al. 2016). XPCI is also based on the interaction of irradiation with matter
in the same manner as optical visualisation. A refraction index n can be deﬁned for
x-ray beams in the form n = δ + βi, with the real part δ and the imaginary part
β corresponding to the phase shift intensity and decrease (absorption) of the x-ray

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

103

wave, respectively (Russo 2014). XPCI takes advantage of the δ value of the refrac-
tive index corresponding to beam scattering, which is orders of magnitude weaker
compared to visible light for hydrocarbon fuel (Im et al. 2013). Contrast ﬂuctuations
in a phase-contrast image are therefore designated by much stronger index gradi-
ents compared to optical methods and the scattered beam collected by the sensor
bears information for all interactions occurring along its path (Linne 2012). In other
words, features of the cavitating ﬂow, especially in the core of a nozzle, where light
visualisation is not possible due to high optical thickness, can be elucidated through
XPCI.

An XPCI investigation of the two-phase ﬂow arising in the single-hole injector
oriﬁce shown in Fig. 8.7 has been conducted employing a high-ﬂux, 12 keV parallel
x-ray beam, as described in detail in (Karathanassis 2018). As depicted in Fig. 8.8,
the white x-ray beam, after irradiating the injector oriﬁce, is converted to visible light
by a scintillator crystal and subsequently captured by a high-speed camera. A sample
raw image of the irradiated geometry is shown on the left part of Fig. 8.8 illustrating
the beam circular cross-section. Therefore, the oriﬁce is irradiated in a successive
manner along its length, which is divided into ﬁve characteristic locations. A spatial
overlap has been maintained in all locations, so as to ensure a high signal to noise
ratio.

An indicative post-processed x-ray image is depicted in Fig. 8.9a illustrating the
prevailing cavitation regime within the oriﬁce for a needle lift of 0.5 mm. Since the
cavitation number value characterising the ﬂow conditions is rather high (CN = 7.7),

Fig. 8.8 XPCI test rig employing synchrotron radiation. The synchrotron beam-pulsation mode
comprises a single pulse of 150 ps in duration, followed by eight short pulses separated by time
intervals of 51 ns. Six of the eight pulses of the bunch was utilised allowing a shutter exposure time
of 347 ns. The spatial resolution in the irradiated characteristic locations (X = 0 − 5 mm) of the
oriﬁce is 5 µm/pixel. The axisymmetric oriﬁce shown was fabricated by a carbon-ﬁbre composite,
which causes lower x-ray absorption compared to metals (Karathanassis 2018)

104

I. K. Karathanassis et al.

Fig. 8.9 a Indicative post-processed time instance of the cavitation development (visualised at
67,200 fps) along the oriﬁce length for Re = 35500, CN = 7.7 and needle lift of 0.5 mm (top
view) (Karathanassis et al. 2018). The cavity interphase is denoted by the white line. Vertical lines
at the edges of each panel signify the extent of the region where high signal-to-noise ratio could
be obtained. Artefacts due to scintillator crystal imperfections have been omitted in grey colour.
The inset of the ﬁgure shows a representative image obtained by backlight illumination for similar
ﬂow conditions. b Mean vapour-presence probability and c standard deviation images produced by
16,000 radiographies for each characteristic location

the entire oriﬁce length is occupied by a pair of well-established strings with highly
unstable interfaces. Attached cavities can also be discerned in the locations closer
to the oriﬁce entrance (X = 0.0 − 1.0 mm), while it should be noted that the two
cavitation regimes can be clearly differentiated in the phase contrast image. A side-
view raw image obtained by backlight illumination is also presented as an inset in
Fig. 8.9a. Juxtaposition of the two images highlights that interfacial perturbations in
the cavity outline, not discernible in the visible-light image, are clearly captured in
the x-ray image. Besides, the large extent of cavitation within the oriﬁce blocks light
completely and, thus no speciﬁc structures can be differentiated in the optical image.

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

105

Phase contrast images can be further utilised to extract temporal information
regarding the in-nozzle cavitation development. For instance, Fig. 8.9b depicts the
mean and standard-deviation images of the vapour extent within the oriﬁce, verifying
that, for the speciﬁc ﬂow conditions, stable string cavities establish in the largest part
of the oriﬁce. It is evident by the close-to-unity probability values obtained that
vapour occupies almost the entire oriﬁce cross-section for X ≥ 2.0, whereas the
low standard deviation values in the core of the vaporous structures denote that the
strings, although present substantial interfacial ﬂuctuations, their coherence is never
disrupted during the manifestation of the phenomenon.

The faithful capture of interfacial ﬂuctuations offered by XPCI can be further
exploited to obtain information on the underlying secondary ﬂow motion responsi-
ble for the cavities onset. It is well established in the literature that string cavities
emanate due to pressures lower than the liquid saturation pressure prevailing in the
core of coherent vortices. Hence, the well established strings shown in Fig. 8.9 can be
correlated to the presence of longitudinal vortices within the oriﬁce. In fact, inspec-
tion of the radiographies has veriﬁed that for CN > 3.0 the cavity interface oscillates
laterally with a frequency that is representative of the intensity of the underlying
recirculating motion. Figure 8.10 depicts the Fast Fourier Transform of the cav-
ity radius waveform at a characteristic location depicted in the inset of the ﬁgure.
By comparing Figures Fig. 8.10a and b, it can be observed that by increase of the
Reynolds and cavitation number, the prevailing oscillation frequency f shifts from
340 to 544 Hz. Also taking advantage of theoretical models correlating the vortical
motion intensity Γ with f (Arndt 2002), for instance Γ ~ f · 4π 2 · r2
c (rc being
the cavity radius) (Franc and Michel 2005), quantitative information regarding the
increase in intensity of the longitudinal vortices can be derive. For instance, since

Fig. 8.10 Frequency spectrum of the string cavity radius normalised by the maximum radius
recorded: a Re = 18000, CN = 3.2 and b Re = 35500, CN = 4.0 (needle lift of 0.5 mm in both
cases). Radius values have been averaged along the white-square area of the inset (Karathanassis
2018)

106

I. K. Karathanassis et al.

Fig. 8.11 a String break-up probability with Strouhal number St = f · L/U, f being the break-
up frequency, L(=5 mm) the nozzle length and U the nominal ﬂow velocity. b String lifetime
probability; the inset depicts an indicative structure under consideration (Karathanassis 2018)

the cavity has been measured equal to 0.306–0.388 mm for the cases correspond-
ing to Fig. 8.10a and b, respectively, the recirculation intensity is calculated to be
approximately 2.5 higher in the second case.

XPCI, owing to its high temporal and spatial resolution, can also be utilised to
obtain quantitative information regarding the dynamics of highly-transient vaporous
structure arising for moderately cavitating ﬂows. For instance, referring to the ﬂow
layout depicted in Fig. 8.8, Fig. 8.11a shows the probability of a string cavity to break
up into to two (or more). As Re and CN increase, the cavities become more coherent,
since the break-up prevailing frequency decreases. Besides, Fig. 8.11b demonstrates
that string cavities (an indicative example is shown in the inset of the ﬁgure) are
expected to live longer prior to their collapse for increased Re and CN. Transient
cavitation structures have considerable after-effects regarding injector shot-to-shot
fuel delivery variability and induced erosion; hence, identiﬁcation of their dynamics
in a consistent manner is highly valuable for industrial-scale applications, as well.

8.2.2.2 Fuel Effects

Fuel additives exhibiting a viscoelastic behaviour added to base Diesel blends in
ppm concentrations have been demonstrated to reduce injector deposits but also to
have an effect on the topology of the two-phase ﬂow arising in the injector nozzle
(Naseri et al. 2018). XPCI data, although produced through a line of sight method, in
essence contain information regarding the 3-dimensional extent of vapour within the
oriﬁce and, hence, constitute an ideal method for pinpointing differences between
different diesel blends. Figure 8.12a presents mean vapour-probability images of the
ﬂow arising within the single oriﬁce injector (refer to Fig. 8.8) for a base and an
additised compound, where viscoelastic polymers have been added in a concentra-
tion of 500 ppm w/w. The bulk thermophysical properties of the two compounds

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

107

Fig. 8.12 a Top-view contour plots of the in-nozzle mean vapour-presence probability for different
diesel-fuel compounds. b Mean surface of the cavity projection along the oriﬁce length (Needle lift
of 1.0 mm, Re = 35500, CN = 6.0) (Karathanassis et al. 2018)

are considered to be the same. The contours plots depict a considerably different
cavitation topology compared to Fig. 8.9, as cloud cavitation is now prevalent in the
major part of the oriﬁce. This different ﬂow behaviour is attributed to the different
value of the needle lift, 1.0 mm instead of 0.5 mm, which modiﬁes the recirculation
pattern that arises downstream the geometrical constriction. Comparison of the upper
and lower panels of Fig. 8.12a makes clear that the presence of additives reduces
the extent of cloud cavitation (X ≤ 2.0 mm), while on the contrary enhances string
cavitation setting in towards the nozzle outlet (X ≥ 2.0 mm). The differences in the
vapour extent present in the nozzle for the two diesel compounds are quantiﬁed by
the vapour mean projected area along the oriﬁce length, shown in Fig. 8.12b. The
extent of the cloud cavity in the additised diesel case is reduced by approximately
18.5%, whereas the volume occupied by string cavities is increased by about 69%
compared to the base diesel fuel. A mechanism for this distinct ﬂow behaviour of
viscoelastic diesel fuel, as proposed in (Karathanassis et al. 2018; Naseri 2018), lies

108

I. K. Karathanassis et al.

in the interaction of viscoelastic micelles (Dreiss 2007) with coherent vortical motion
in the macroscale, as well as with turbulence generating vortices in the microscale
(Tsukahara et al. 2013).

Additional information on the effects of viscoelastic additives on string-cavitation

dynamics can be obtained with an analysis similar to that presented in Fig. 8.11.

Figure 8.13a comparatively presents the lifetime probability for the two blends of
the string cavities arising within the oriﬁce for a needle lift of 0.5; refer to Fig. 8.9
depicting the prevailing cavitation topology for the speciﬁc ﬂow conditions. The
string lifetime for the additised fuel obtains relatively even probabilities for val-
ues up to 0.2 ms, whereas the two prevailing frequencies for the base blend are
below 0.05 ms. Besides, similar to Fig. 8.10, Fig. 8.13b illustrates the string radius
ﬂuctuation in the frequency domain. It is clear that the string ﬂuctuation is more
violent regarding the base fuel with at least three prevailing frequencies. On the
contrary, only one clear prevailing frequency of 409 Hz is evident for the additised
fuel. Once again, the single peak observed and, in fact, at a lower frequency value
compared to the base sample, is indicative of a less-perturbed ﬂow. In other words,
viscoelastic additives reduce the level of turbulence in the oriﬁce, i.e. the magni-
tude of the small-scale vortices that would interact and lead to the eventual decay of

Fig. 8.13 String Cavitation dynamics for needle lift of 0.5 mm Re = 35500, CN = 7.7: a string-life
probability for the two diesel blends. The control window is located in the vicinity of the needle tip,
as denoted by the white line. b Fast Fourier Transform of the string radius ﬂuctuation with time.
The radius has been averaged in the control window shown as an inset (Naseri 2018)

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

109

the string coherence, thus increasing the string lifetime and reducing its interfacial
ﬂuctuations. The turbulence-reducing effect of viscoelastic additives has been well
documented with reference to single-phase ﬂow (Dimitropoulos et al. 1998; Pereira
et al. 2017). Control of cavitation dynamics and, in a second step spray atomisation
process in a consistent manner, with the addition of viscoelastic polymers in Diesel
fuel is expected to have a tremendous positive impact on the fuel efﬁciency of diesel
engines.

8.2.2.3 Velocimetry Employing XPCI

A technique bearing resemblance to Particle Tracking Velocimetry (PTV) (Kitagawa
et al. 2005; Sathe et al. 2010) can be employed in combination with XPCI to provide
an estimate of the planar velocity ﬁeld in the vapour region. The high temporal
resolution offered by synchrotron x-ray imaging allows the tracking of distinct ﬂow
features, such as vaporous structures or interfacial perturbations, refer indicatively to
Fig. 8.14a. Besides, the small exposure time (of the order of nanoseconds) due to the
x-ray beam pulsation mode facilitates the accurate capture of the ﬂow ﬁne features
without unwanted blurriness. The method enables instantaneous measurements of
the local velocity ﬁeld to be made in regions of the oriﬁce, where the cavitation
topology exhibits extensive transient features. As made evident by Fig. 8.14b, point
velocity measurements, in both low- and high-CN cases, were made possible in the
regions of the ﬂow ﬁeld exhibiting high vapour presence standard deviation. It has
to be emphasised that PTV does not require the addition of seeding particles in
the ﬂow that would possibly inﬂuence the cavitation formation in the oriﬁce and
it is therefore a preferable method for cavitating ﬂows compared to Particle Image
Velocimetry (PIV) (Mueller et al. 2013). Nevertheless, it must also be noted that
ﬁltering of a large number of raw radiographies is required to obtain an adequate
dataset of point-velocity measurements, since only structures of small size that remain
mainly unaltered during consecutive frames are deemed as suitable for velocimetry.
An extensive dataset of point-velocity measurements enables the calculation of
local planar-velocity ﬂuctuations, indicative of the in-nozzle level of turbulence.
Figure 8.15 illustrates the ﬂuctuations of axial velocity u0 normalised by the average
ﬂow velocity. The average level of turbulence (denoted by the black line) is reduced
as CN increases, although the Reynolds number increases as well, from 18,000
(Fig. 8.15a) to 35,500 (Fig. 8.15a). Hence, the presence of coherent, compressible
vaporous structures seems to counteract the motion of small-scale vortices and has
an overall stabilising effect on the ﬂow ﬁeld within the nozzle. A similar conclusion
regarding the interaction of turbulence and cavitation has been reached through the
numerical simulations reported in (Koukouvinis et al. 2017).

110

I. K. Karathanassis et al.

Fig. 8.14 a Concept of the PTV method: M and M’ is the mass-centre of the identiﬁed structure
over consecutive frames, with (cid:9)t = 1/frame-rate (=67890). From the 16,000 raw images obtained at
each location less than 1% was suitable for velocimetry. The maximum dimension of the structures
that have been tracked is less than 700 µm and the mean deviation in their projected area over
successive frames is ~8% (Karathanassis 2018). b Velocity vectors over standard deviation contour
plots highlighting indicative locations at which estimates of the local velocity ﬁeld have been
obtained

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

111

Fig. 8.15 Axial velocity ﬂuctuations (Y ≈ 0.620 ± 0.04 mm based on the coordinates system
shown in Fig. 8.14), a Re = 18000/CN = 3.2, b Re = 35500/CN = 7.7; ((cid:2)) X = 1.0 mm, (◯) X
= 2.0 mm, ((cid:9)) X = 3.0 mm, (♦) X = 4.0 mm (Karathanassis 2018)

8.2.3 X-Ray Computed Tomography (CT) Imaging

A shortcoming of optical high-speed imaging is the extensive light-beam scattering
due to cavitation presence, which prevents the accurate and volumetric observation
of the vaporous structures. Further to that point, the vast majority of optical methods
are not capable of correlating the presence of cavitation to the local density of the
ﬂow. An alternative to such methods is the utilization of X-ray beams, as has been
discussed in the previous paragraphs, which due to their much weaker interaction
with matter penetrate the vaporous structures and carry accumulated interaction data
through their line of sight. Consequently, their attenuation can be related to the
integrated mixture composition along the beam path.

As has been already mentioned in the paragraph discussing XPCI, interaction of
an X-ray beam with matter leads to both amplitude decrease and a phase shift of the
irradiation wave, as reﬂected in the complex refractive index through the β and δ
coefﬁcients irradiation. Absorption imaging takes advantage especially of the x-ray
wave amplitude attenuation and can be employed to derive the vapour mean-path
length along the beam line of sight through the Beer-Lambert law (Duke et al. 2013):

I = I0e−μl d

where I and I0 are the attenuated and initial beam intensity, µl is the liquid fuel
attenuation coefﬁcient and d is the material thickness. Hence, in order to derive the
vapour mean path in a cavitating oriﬁce, a normalisation experiment is also required
under conditions where cavitation is absent to acquire a reference attenuated beam
intensity considering that d is equal to the liquid path length. The characteristic
thickness d in an irradiation event of a cavitating ﬂow will be equal to the difference
between the liquid and vapour path lengths.

Computed tomography (CT) imaging can be combined with x-ray imaging to col-
lect radiographies of the attenuated x-ray beam from several angles. Reconstruction

112

I. K. Karathanassis et al.

Fig. 8.16 The micro-CT
facility employed in
(Mitroglou et al. 2016).
Projections were obtained at
an angular step 0.6° (600
projections in total), with an
acquisition time of 1 s per
projection

of the obtained data, referred to as sinograms, can produce a 3D topology image of the
irradiated sample. In the case of highly-transient cavitating ﬂows, each projection is
acquired over a time scale much larger than the manifestation of the ﬂow phenomena
and hence the reconstructed image represents the average vapour topology within the
oriﬁce. The ﬁrst work utilizing X-ray CT for studying cavitation was in an enlarged
oriﬁce with a diameter of 1 cm, operating with water at pressures of ~0–2 bar (Bauer
et al. 2012). The cavitating oriﬁce was examined using a medical scanner, providing
volumetric distributions of density inside the oriﬁce. A more recent investigation
has been performed at higher pressures (20–40 bar) employing an enlarged injector
oriﬁce with internal dimensions identical to the optical part depicted in Fig. 8.5, never-
theless fabricated by a PolyEther-Ether-Ketone (PEEK) plastic polymer (Mitroglou
et al. 2016). The experiments were conducted at the prototype micro-CT facility
available at the University of Bergamo consisting of a 160 kV @ 400 µA open type
cone-beam X-ray source (Lorenzi et al. 2017). A schematic of the experimental lay-
out comprising the x-ray source, irradiated specimen, scintillator plate and rotary
base is illustrated in Fig. 8.16.

Figure 8.17 depicts contours plots of the average liquid fraction for different values
of the needle lift. It is evident from the plots at the centre plane of the oriﬁce (left
panels of Fig. 8.17a and b) that a lower needle lift (0.5 mm instead of 1.0 mm) leads
to the formation of a more extensive vapour pocket within the oriﬁce, occupying the
entire cross section, as illustrated by the front view also shown in Fig. 8.17a. The
increased blockage ratio, as the needle lift decreases, leads to a more violent ﬂow
separation downstream the constriction, giving rise to a more pronounced cavity.
It is interesting to notice in the front view of Fig. 8.17b that a ‘halo’ of vapour
forms at the periphery of the nozzle yet vapour is absent in the upper part of the
channel core. This distinctive cavitation behaviour underlines the shortcomings of
optical methods, since visible light would be scattered even by this thin ﬁlm (refer
indicatively to Fig. 8.6) thus giving an overestimating impression of the vapour
content in the region.

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

113

Fig. 8.17 Averaged liquid volume fraction contour plot for CN = 2.1: a needle lift of 0.5 mm, Re
= 36500 and b needle lift of 1 mm, Re = 55500. Left-hand side panels correspond to side-view
plots, while right-hand side panels to front-view plots, respectively. Flow is from left to right

8.3 Erosion

A well known ability of cavitation is its property to focus energy to small scales.
Indeed, whereas large cavities (characteristic size of 1 mm) have a potential energy
in the order of ~0.1–10 mJ, the mechanism of bubble collapse can lead to a concen-
tration of this energy content to sub-micrometer scales, leading to energy density of
more than 10 kJ/cm3 enough to cause damage to metals (erosion). The process of
erosion development is a complex topic, depending on material properties, such as
its yield strength, ultimate strength or fatigue limit, and on ﬂow mechanics aspects.
An additional complexity is the temporal scale disparity between ﬂow development,
which may have a characteristic time scale of 10−3 s and the actual erosion develop-
ment which can happen in the course of hours.

In general, the process of erosion is considered to be a work-hardening process
and to occur in four successive stages. The ﬁrst stage is the incubation stage, during
which cavitation collapses introduce plastic deformation to the solid material, without
exceeding the ultimate strength, thus there is no material removal. The next stage
occurs once the ultimate strength is exceeded and the material can no longer sustain
more plastic strain, hence material loss occurs; often this happens in an accelerating
manner, thus it is termed acceleration stage. The next stage is the steady state stage
where material removal rate remains constant over time and ﬁnally removal rate may

114

I. K. Karathanassis et al.

decrease in the attenuation stage. The aforementioned erosion procedure is found in
any erosion-prone device; in injectors speciﬁcally even the start of material loss is
undesired, since it may be associated with:

– strong reduction of performance (Som et al. 2010): alteration of the injector geom-
etry due to erosion may lead to undesired effects on the jet direction and spray
characteristics, thus increasing emissions.

– reliability issues: as material is removed from the injector body, stress concentra-
tion may occur. This is especially problematic with fuel injectors, as their operating
conditions imply very high pressures, potentially leading to catastrophic failure of
the injector tip.
The multi-scale nature of cavitation and erosion renders the derivation of cavi-
tation erosion models difﬁcult and there are ongoing efforts for the formulation
of generally applicable models. A well accepted scaling law (Franc and Michel
2005) is that mass loss is proportional to the n-th power of ﬂow velocity, where
n is case dependent and varies between 4 and 9. This demonstrates the signiﬁ-
cance of erosion nuisance in diesel systems, as ﬂow velocity is in the order of
several 100 m/s. Identiﬁed physical mechanisms of erosion can be separated in
the following categories (van Terwisga et al. 2009; Leighton 1994):

– collapse of a single bubble: at the end of the collapse of a spherical bubble high
temperatures and pressures have been detected, resulting to a high intensity pres-
sure wave, with pressures levels of the order of 100 MPa.

– microjetting: the existence of pressure gradient around a bubble can lead to an
asymmetrical collapse. In that case, part of the bubble collapses faster than the rest
of the bubble, forming a characteristic jet with direction opposite to the pressure
gradient. This jet may reach velocities up to several 100 m/s, producing water
hammer pressures in the order of 1000 bar.

– collective bubble collapse: the collapse of a bubble within a bubble cloud triggers
a cascade of implosions, which tends to enhance the collapse velocities of neigh-
bouring bubbles and to increase the intensity and duration of the resulting pressure
wave.

– cavitating vortices: such vortices appear in shear ﬂows and at the rear of attached
cavities. Cavitating vortices are considered to be the main cause of severe cavitation
erosion in hydraulic machinery. Collapse velocities may be higher than 100 m/s and
the duration of the stress time is rather long, comparing with the rest mechanisms.

Studies on cavitation erosion span from material science, concerning the resis-
tance of various metals and alloys to cavitation (Franc et al. 2012), to combined
studies coupling ﬂuid dynamic observations with material pitting (Petkovšek and
Dular 2013). In terms of erosion prediction many models rely on energy transfer
mechanisms (Fortes Patella et al. 2013), micro-jet formation (Dular and Coutier-
Delgosha 2009), work-hardening process etc. In more recent works (Schmidt et al.
2014; Mihatsch et al. 2015), erosion has been correlated to the localized ﬂow pres-
sure due to the collapse of cavitation structures and scaling laws have been derived
to remove the dependency of collapse events from the numerical resolution.

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

115

Fig. 8.18 Experimentally observed erosion (top) and numerically obtained locations of high pres-
sures due to cavitation collapse (bottom). Erosion from experiments was obtained by the CT recon-
struction of the oriﬁce wall before and after exposure to cavitation. Progression of erosion is shown
after a period of 44 h of operation. The oriﬁce operation was at 55 bar (upstream) to 17.4 bar
(downstream), CN = 2.2 and Re = 77000. Flow moves from left to right

When considering fuel systems, among the most pioneering works is the sys-
tematic investigation of square oriﬁces tested in the Prevero project. In the frame of
this project, the cavitation pattern and resulting erosion has been examined in sharp
and rounded entrance square oriﬁces operated at pressures of 100–300 bar, using
diesel-like test oil (Skoda 2011). The oriﬁces tested were made in a “sandwich” con-
ﬁguration, as a machined metal part placed between two sapphire windows. Depth
averaged cavitation probability from high speed imaging and erosion over time were
obtained and compared against simulations.

The LES study complemented by an X-ray CT investigation reported by
Koukouvinis et al. (Koukouvinis et al. 2017) aimed at the development of validated
cavitation models capable of replicating the density distribution and the erosion loca-
tions. Indicatively, in Fig. 8.18 the comparison between the experimentally obtained
erosion and locations of high pressures from the simulations are shown, demon-
strating a good agreement. An important observation of that study was the strong
geometrical effects, especially at the oriﬁce entrance, on the cavitating ﬂow.

Moving towards more realistic conﬁgurations, relevant to diesel injectors, among
the ﬁrst works aiming to link cavitation and erosion (Gavaises 2008; Gavaises et al.
2007) relied on bubble dynamic sub-models relating damage to radiated acoustic
pressure. Investigations based on pure Reynolds-Averaged-Navier-Stokes (RANS)
turbulence closures performed in the past, showed situational applicability (Edel-
bauer et al. 2016; Koukouvinis et al. 2016). Since then, signiﬁcant advances have
been performed, by employing high resolution, compressible simulations capable of
resolving large cavitation structures and turbulent scales. Notable contributions in
the ﬁeld involve investigations of rectangular oriﬁces during injection to air or liquid

116

I. K. Karathanassis et al.

Fig. 8.19 Cavitating ﬂow through a square oriﬁce (cross sections 0.3 mm × 0.3 mm, length
1 mm) (Franc and Michel 2005), upstream pressure 100 bar, downstream pressure 40 bar (CN
= 1.5, Re = 20000). a Instantaneous vortical structures, represented using the q-criterion (value
1012 1/s2), coloured according to the velocity magnitude; four longitudinal vortex tubes are visible
b Instantaneous pressure ﬁeld (background) and cavitation clouds (grey iso-surface vapour volume
fraction 50%); note the two cavitation types (attached cavities on the wall and vortex, or string,
cavitation at the location of longitudinal vortices). c Pressure peaks due to the collapse of vapour
structures; local maximum in the order of 1000 bar. The ﬂow moves from left to right

(Egerer et al. 2014; Örley et al. 2017; Koukouvinis and Gavaises 2015) (an indica-
tive illustration of the ﬂow in such oriﬁces is provided in Figs. 8.18, 8.19 and 8.20,
derived using computational ﬂuid dynamics and showing the prediction of vortical
structures, their interaction with turbulence and the resulting pressure peaks leading
to erosion).

Whereas studying ﬂows in oriﬁces can provide a better understanding of cavita-
tion and erosion mechanisms, the operation of an actual diesel injector is deﬁnitely
challenging, involving more complicated, moving geometry. Such investigations are
limited due to the high complexity and computational cost. Indicatively, the ﬁrst
work (Örley et al. 2017) to examine computationally diesel injection to air, tak-
ing into account compressibility effects, cavitation formation, interaction with non-
condensable gas and tracking locations of cavitation collapse required an immense
computational cost, with meshes consisting of 35–80 million cells. With the cur-
rent state of computers, such a simulation is prohibitive from an industrial point of
view, due to the computational resources and time scales required. Investigations
using simpler models (Koukouvinis et al. 2016) exploiting symmetry planes thus
reducing the mesh count and computational cost have also been performed. While
such models indeed have inherent limitations in terms of describing turbulence or
capturing eccentric needle motion, are more tractable from an industrial perspective

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

117

Fig. 8.20 Cavitating ﬂow through a rectangular oriﬁce (cross section: 0.2 mm width × 0.3 mm
depth, length 1 mm) (Bauer et al. 2004), under supercavitating conditions; upstream pressure 400 bar
downstream pressure 24 bar (CN = 15.6, Re = 40000). Here a target is placed at 2.95 mm from the
oriﬁce exit. a Instantaneous vortical structures, represented using the q-criterion (value 1012 1/s2),
coloured according to the velocity magnitude; note that within the oriﬁce turbulence is suppressed
due to the formation of stable cavities. Strong turbulence develops at the shear layer of the formed jet.
b Instantaneous pressure ﬁeld (background) and cavitation clouds (grey iso-surface vapour volume
fraction 10%); cavitation at the shear layer is highly transient, c root-mean-square of vapour fraction
ﬂuctuation; areas of high ﬂuctuations are regions of erosion d pressure peaks due to the collapse of
vapour structures; local maximum in the order of 3000 bar

and have shown good replication of erosive patterns on affected injector designs (see
Fig. 8.21).

The aforementioned discussion indicates that cavitation erosion effects can be
predicted using numerical models. Erosion locations can be determined by tracking
locations of cavitation collapse; moreover their erosive potential can be evaluated in
terms of the emitted pressure magnitude. Whereas that magnitude itself is resolution
dependent, scaling laws can be deﬁned to predict actual material loss, though cali-
bration is required. In general, erosion prediction necessitates reﬁned models such as
scale resolving simulations, which are inherently transient, though the computational
cost is still tractable from an industrial perspective.

118

I. K. Karathanassis et al.

Fig. 8.21 Left: maximum pressures from cavitation collapse on the surfaces of a diesel injector
obtained from simulation (Koukouvinis et al. 2016); note that in the simulation only 1/5th of the
complete injector is simulated. Right: Indicative erosion patterns obtained from X-ray tomography
of diesel injector. The letters in the cycles correspond to “O” for “oriﬁce”, “S” for “Sac” and “N” for
“needle”. The injector operates at a pressure difference of 1800 bar upstream and 50 bar downstream
(CN ~ 35 and maximum Re ~ 90000)

8.4 Real-Fluid Thermodynamic Effects

An additional complexity especially relevant to modern engine operation is the large
variations of pressures/temperatures that the fuel undergoes. Inarguably, the most
extreme variations appear in modern diesel engines; the fuel may undergo pressure
variations from effectively 0 bar in cavitating regions up to 2750 bar in the common
rail (Egler et al. 2010), and temperatures variations from ambient, 298 K, up to
1000 K when exposed to the hot gases inside the cylinder. These variations imply
considerable changes in the properties of diesel fuel, such as density and viscosity;
indicatively dynamic viscosity may change up to 86% and density up to 15% (Kolev
2007), see Fig. 8.22.

Variation of properties poses additional challenges in the understanding of fuel
systems. A notable effect is the temperature change induced by pressure changes. For
incompressible ﬂuids it is known that an ideal, adiabatic (isentropic) process implies
constant temperature (Borgnakke and Sonntag 2008). This statement does not hold
for real ﬂuids, where pressure affects density and other thermodynamic properties.
Indeed, ideal pressurization of a real-liquid in a diesel fuel pump can result to heating
up to 20–30 K and fuel expansion during injection can result to localized temperature
drop up to 50 K, depending on the discharge coefﬁcient (Strotos et al. 2015), see
Fig. 8.23. Similar effects appear in gasoline injection equipment as well, but are less
pronounced due to lower pressure ratios in comparison to diesel systems.

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

119

Fig. 8.22 Diesel property variation based on published data (Kolev 2007); density and dynamic
viscosity for a range of pressures and temperatures

Fig. 8.23 a Temperature increase during isentropic diesel fuel compression in pump, for different
pump inlet temperatures. Note that the temperature increase applies for ideal compression; actual,
non-ideal compression will result to higher temperature increase. b Temperature change during
fuel passage through a diesel injector, varying the discharge coefﬁcient, cd , assuming initial fuel
temperature of 373 K and downstream pressure of 50 bar. Derivation of thermodynamic properties
is based on published data (Kolev 2007)

It must be highlighted that fuel properties are not easy to deﬁne and measure,
given the fact that fuels are blends of many different components. Also, fuel compo-
sition varies depending on the crude oil source and reﬁnery processing. Hence, there
has been increasing effort in measuring properties of fuel components and deﬁning
surrogates and models that can approximate the behaviour of actual fuels (Vidal et al.
2018). For deﬁning adequate models for fuels and fuel components, it is necessary
to describe phase change and transitions around the critical point (see indicatively

120

I. K. Karathanassis et al.

Fig. 8.24 Density (left) and heat capacity (right) variation for different p-T conditions for dodecane,
according to NIST Refprop (Lemmon et al. 2018). Note the sharp transition of density along the
saturation curve, the smooth variation of density beyond the critical point and the anomalies of heat
capacity near the critical point

Fig. 8.24, for dodecane), beyond which there is no distinction between liquid and
vapour phases and the latent heat of vaporization is zero.

Traditionally, models that are capable of describing such phenomena are cubic
Equations of State (EoS), with perhaps the earliest example being the Van-der-Waals
EoS (Borgnakke and Sonntag 2008). Nowadays this formulation has been super-
seded by more accurate variants, such as the Peng-Robinson or the Redlich-Kwong
EoS (Borgnakke and Sonntag 2008), which can give an overall good representa-
tion of thermodynamic property variation, with minimum input (practically three
parameters, critical temperature, critical pressure and acentric factor). A common
shortcoming of such cubic models is the under-prediction of saturated liquid density
and the over-prediction of liquid speed of sound. This deﬁciency of classical cubic
EoS models can have an impact on the accurate prediction of mass ﬂow rate for
given pressure difference through an injector (Matheis and Hickel 2018). The recent
years improvements have been made, capable of much more accurate predictions in
relation to traditional cubic models, such as the generalized cubic EoS (Kim et al.
2012) and Perturbed Chain Statistical Association Fluid Theory (PC-SAFT) (Gross
and Sadowski 2001) model, however these advanced models have not been explored
yet widely in studies. Especially the PC-SAFT model is capable of describing the
behaviour of mixtures with input based on the molecular structure of the compo-
nents and their interaction parameters, to provide detailed and accurate predictions
of thermodynamic and transport properties.

When moving towards the critical point, the mixing of fuel and surrounding gas
departs from the classical atomization. At conditions below the critical point (sub-
critical) there is a clear distinction of liquid and gaseous phases and surface tension
effects are observable (Crua et al. 2017). As temperature and pressure conditions
move towards, or beyond, the critical point, surface tension effects diminish and
there is no longer a clear interface between liquid and gas; instead turbulent mix-
ing prevails (see Figs. 8.25 and 8.26). Such effects are especially relevant to diesel

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

121

Fig. 8.25 Planar jet of dodecane (363 K, 600 m/s) to nitrogen (973K, 110bar); the jet has a width of
100 µm. Properties based on NIST Refprop (Lemmon et al. 2018). Top row shows mass fraction of
dodecane, bottom row shows the temperature distribution. Black shades indicate the formed shock
waves from the jet interaction with the stagnant air

Fig. 8.26 Start-up of ECN Spray-A (non-reacting) conﬁguration; dodecane injection to nitrogen
(900 K, 60 bar). Injection mass ﬂow rate based on the online tool available from ECN (http://
www.cmt.upv.es/ECN03.aspx) for injection pressure of 1500 bar. Geometry based on published
stereolithography (STL) surface. a temperature ﬁeld b mass fraction of dodecane c pressure ﬁeld,
scaled to min/max at the external of the injector d turbulent structures (q-criterion value 1012 s−2),
coloured according to velocity magnitude. Time 30 µs. Properties based on NIST Refprop (Lemmon
et al. 2018)

122

I. K. Karathanassis et al.

Table 8.1 Critical point properties for indicative fuel/fuel-surrogate components (Anitescu et al.
2012)

Gasoline

Diesel

Components

Hexane

Heptane

Iso-octane

Dodecane

Hexadecane

Docosane

T c (K)

507.82

540.13

544

658.1

722.1

792.2

Pc (bar)

30.34

27.36

25.72

18.17

14.799

11.74

injection (Dahms and Oefelein 2013); this can be understood when considering the
critical point properties of common hydrocarbons (see Table 8.1), that are compo-
nents of gasoline and diesel. The trend indicates that as the number of carbon atoms
increase in the hydrocarbon molecule, the critical temperature increases and the crit-
ical pressure decreases. Considering that gasoline injection happens at relatively low
pressure and temperature conditions, the operation regime is more towards classical
atomization at subcritical conditions. On the other hand, diesel injection occurs at
much higher cylinder conditions, at pressures/temperatures well above the critical
point of diesel fuel components.

It is highlighted that the aforementioned discussion is a rough approximation,
given that it is only applicable to single, pure components. Indeed, mixing of dif-
ferent components, such as diesel and nitrogen, alters the critical conditions of the
mixture, so that liquid and vapour can exist even if local pressure/temperature con-
ditions exceed the critical conditions of the pure components involved in the mixing.
Figure 8.27 illustrates this effect, showing the pressure-composition lines of nitro-
gen/dodecane at different temperatures.

Apart from the complex thermodynamic effects taking place, the ﬂow of fuel and
its interaction with gases in the cylinder, also poses complexities. The progressive
break-up of fuel to smaller scales, ﬁnally vaporizing and mixing with the surrounding
air, termed as atomization (Tryggvason et al. 2011), is a multi-scale process, strongly
affected by turbulence and surface tension. Different levels of approximation are
commonly employed depending on the level of accuracy and the computational cost
that can be afforded, ranging from interface capturing (Ghiji et al. 2016) (Volume of
Fluid or Level-Set) in primary atomization and Eulerian-Eulerian (Vujanovi´c et al.
2015) or Eulerian-Lagrangian (Anez et al. 2019) models for secondary atomiza-
tion, or dense-ﬂuid (Müller et al. 2016) spray models for supercritical/transcritical
regimes.

8 Multiphase Phenomena in Diesel Fuel Injection Systems

123

Fig. 8.27 Liquid/vapour saturation lines for different molar compositions of nitrogen/dodecane
mixture; comparison between experiments (García-Córdova et al. 2011) and PC-SAFT model pre-
dictions (Rodriguez et al. 2018); note that the mixture critical pressure is well above the critical
pressure of the individual pure components

8.5 Conclusions

The aforementioned discussion aims to provide a brief overview of multiphase ﬂow
phenomena that occur in modern fuel injection systems, with main emphasis in Diesel
applications, since those pose the most extreme conditions. Indeed, despite their
relative small scale compared to more traditional applications of ﬂuid dynamics (e.g.
external aerodynamics), a wealth of phenomena appear combining complex aspects
of physics of ﬂuids, such as turbulence, phase transition/vaporization and interfacial
ﬂows.

Concerning experimental methods, perhaps one of the most promising and recent
developments is the investigation of ﬂow using X-rays. The use of X-rays allows to
avoid common drawbacks of optical methods, such as optical scattering at ﬂuid inter-
faces. Further developments of the method involve temporally resolved densitometry,
which can provide quantitative information on transient multiphase ﬂows.

Concerning computational techniques, the advancement of computing power has
allowed to incorporation of more elaborate and detailed information to be captured in
multiphase, cavitating ﬂows, or ﬂows of sprays and fuel jets, offering unprecedented
resolution of turbulence and interfacial dynamics. Unfortunately, the computational
cost of such investigations is quite prohibitive from a general perspective, requiring
thousands CPU-hours of computing power and often necessitating High Performance
Computing (HPC).
Improvement of Flame Kernel Growth
by Microwave-Assisted Plasma Ignition
Abstract Due to the depletion of petroleum resources and environmental concerns,
automobile industry has been developing new engine technologies with acceptable
cost range to consumers. Among many new technologies, application of non-thermal
plasma ignition system is considered as a promising path to achieve high-efﬁciency
clean gasoline vehicles. In this study, we developed a microwave-assisted plasma
ignition using 3 kW, 2.45 GHz magnetron with customized electric components and
ignitor. This system was tested in a constant volume combustion vessel to investigate
the effects of microwave ejection on ignition kernel growth. High-speed shadow-
graph imaging and hydroxyl (OH) radical imaging were carried out under various
air-fuel ratio, ambient pressure, and ignition strategy conditions. The in-cylinder pres-
sure measurement was also performed to compare combustion phase between con-
ventional spark and microwave-assisted plasma ignition system. The experimental
result showed that the microwave ejection on the thermal plasma created by conven-
tional discharge had a signiﬁcant improvement on initial ﬂame development. The
microwave-assisted plasma ignition system indicated advanced combustion phase
with extended lean limit where conventional spark ignition failed to achieve ﬂame
propagation. The OH imaging on propagating ﬂame presented much higher inten-
sity with microwave-assisted plasma ignition case. The analysis on light emission
spectrum showed 7,000 K higher electron temperature in the plasma created with
microwave ejection. This implies that chemical reactions which could not be pro-
gressed with conventional spark ignition was enabled with additional non-thermal
plasma induced by electro-magnetic wave. On the other hand, however, the enhance-
ment in ﬂame development was decreased under high pressure condition due to lower
reduced electric ﬁeld.
Keywords Microwave · Non-thermal plasma · Constant volume combustion
vessel · Flame kernel · Ignition
Continuously growing environmental concerns and stringent regulations on fuel
economy are driving automobile industry to develop high-efﬁciency clean vehi-
cles. Spark-ignition engines are known to have greater controllability in terms of
combustion phase than compression-ignition engines. However, knocking under
advanced ignition timing or higher compression conditions has limited its poten-
tial. In response, automobile industry has been adopting gasoline direct injection
(GDI) engines. GDI engines are different from conventional port fuel injection (PFI)
engines in fuel-air mixing process. GDI engines inject the fuel directly into the com-
bustion chamber so knocking could be mitigated by charge cooling effect during fuel
evaporation. Many other advanced engine technologies such as high pressure injec-
tion, exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), and multiple injection have been employed to
achieve lean burn in GDI engines (Szwaja et al. 2013; Wei et al. 2013; Tang et al.
2015; Oh and Bae 2013). However, improvement in combustion and emission char-
acteristics with those technologies has turned out as minor level. Completely new
approaches using new ignition system or combustion concept are required to achieve
the required rate of innovation at this moment. Among many new technologies,
plasma-assisted combustion has shown great promise for combustion enhancement
(Shiraishi and Urushihara 2011; Hampe et al. 2013; Genzale et al. 2011; DeFilippo
et al. 2011; Wang et al. 2015; Starikovskii 2005; Starilovskaia 2006). Ignition con-
cepts utilizing thermal plasma as well as non-thermal plasma have been considered
as an alternative for conventional spark ignition system. The thermal plasma igni-
tion originated more than one hundred years ago with internal combustion engines
and spark ignition systems. However, corrosion and erosion problems are inevitable
because of higher charge temperature and thermal quenching to electrodes. Thus
in these days, many research facilities are paying attention in application of non-
thermal plasma for ignition and combustion. It provides new possibilities for ignition
and ﬂame stabilization in more efﬁcient way than thermal plasma system (Fridman
2008).

A number of researchers have examined the potential of microwave ejection on
ﬂame enhancement (Wang et al. 2015; Wolk et al. 2013; Luo et al. 2019). Electro-
magnetic wave from magnetron can heat up free electrons in the discharge stream
or ﬂame surface. Two main mechanisms of ﬂame enhancement depending on the
wave frequency of applied electro-magnetic wave have been discussed. At ﬁrst,
direct momentum transfers by relatively big ions called ionic wind can promote
chemical reactions by low frequency electro-magnetic wave. Ionic wind and ion
drift according to the wave frequency could dramatically alter pathways in terms of
chemical reactions and be used for soot emission control. Meanwhile, ﬂame coupling
was through the collision of free electrons with neutrals under the high frequency
regime. The effect of alternating electric ﬁeld with high frequency has been studied by
a number of groups. The measurements showed global increases in ﬂame speed, ﬂame
temperatures, and corresponding enhancement in concentrations such as hydroxyl
radical. Despite many efforts of previous studies, the effects of microwave ejection

9 Improvement of Flame Kernel Growth by Microwave-Assisted …

131

under engine-like condition has not been investigated. The measurements have been
carried out relatively low pressure under uncontrolled ambient condition. In this
study, microwave-assisted plasma ignition system was applied in a constant volume
combustion vessel. The effect of microwave ejection on ﬂame kernel will be discussed
based on experimental investigations.

9.2 Experimental Setup

9.2.1 Constant Volume Combustion Chamber System

For a series of combustion test, a vessel which has a volume of 1.4 l was utilized.
The combustion vessel was fabricated with carbon steel to withstand maximum in-
chamber pressure and temperature of 15 MPa and 2,000 K, respectively. A schematic
diagram of the vessel system is presented in Fig. 9.1. The chamber has 6 ports so either
quartz window or metal dummy window can be installed according to experimental
setup. In this study three quartz windows with a diameter of 9.6 cm were places in two
parallel sides for shadowgraph imaging and in the front side for OH radical imaging.
In both side windows, only the region of a square (3 cm by 3 cm) around the igniter
was uncovered by aluminum plates to minimize microwave leakage to outside of the
chamber. As shown in the schematic, premixed mixture of Acetylene (C2H2) and air
was delivered to the vessel through the intake valve. The equivalence ratio of prepared
mixture was calculated using partial pressures of each gas with uncertainty range of

Fig. 9.1 Schematic diagram of experimental setup

132

J. Hwang et al.

±10−4 MPa. The initial ambient pressure was also controlled by adjusting the initial
mixture quantity. Then, the combustible mixture was ignited by the conventional
ignition system and the microwave-assisted plasma ignition system. The pressure
rise in the chamber after the ignition was monitored using a piezo-electric pressure
transducer (Kistler, 6141B) and a charge ampliﬁer (Kistler, 5011) with a resolution of
50 kHz. At the same time, the ignition process was visualized by a high-speed camera
and intensiﬁed camera. A tungsten lamp, pin hole, and two identical concave mirrors
were utilized for the high-speed shadowgraph imaging. A high-speed digital video
camera (MIRO, M 110) equipped with a zoom lens (Nikkor, 80–200 mm f/2.8D) was
employed to ignition event and early ﬂame development in the vessel. An electric
trigger for the ignition system was also used to trigger the high speed camera for
recording. The high-speed camera was set to have a shutter speed of 38,000 frames
per second (fps) with image resolution of 192 by 192. The aperture of lens and the
exposure time of the high-speed camera were set to 2.8 and 2 μs respectively. This
setting was kept through entire experiment. An in-house Matlab code was utilized
for ﬂame kernel size measurement. The OH radicals on the ﬂame surface captured
utilizing a 310 nm band pass ﬁlter (Edmund Optics, 67886 (V097-25)) and intensiﬁed
charge coupled device (CCD) camera (Princeton Instruments, PI-MAX2) in the front
side.

9.2.2 Microwave-Assisted Plasma Ignition System

For a microwave source, 3.0 kW, 2.45 GHz magnetron (National, NL 10250-1) was
used. The magnetron was triggered by an insulated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT)
which delivered 5 kV. The 100% of duty cycle for the magnetron was utilized by
on/off power control. The generated microwave was delivered through a waveg-
uide which has a dimension of 72 mm by 34 mm cross section. The energy loss of
microwave was minimized by keeping all the propagating wave in the waveguide.
This waveguide was designed to have transverse electric 010 (TE010) mode thus the
peak power was occurring in the centerline of the waveguide. The TE010 mode is
known as the simplest mode in a cavity which has symmetrical electric ﬁeld dis-
tribution along the propagating direction. Impedance matching was performed by
3-stub tuners (ASTeX, AX3041) installed in the middle of the waveguide to mini-
mize power reﬂection in the waveguide. An antenna was installed at about 30 mm
(λmicrowave/4) from the end of the waveguide wall to extract the microwave energy
from the waveguide. A N-type coaxial cable was selected as a transmission line
which connects waveguide to mixing unit and mixing unit to igniter. In the mix-
ing unit, direct current (DC) voltage and microwave were mixed and transferred to
the igniter. The microwave-assisted plasma ignition concept uses not only conven-
tional spark discharge but also microwave ejection so the mixing unit was necessary.
The mixing unit was composed of a coil which blocks microwave and a capacitor
which minimize the interference caused by DC. The mixing unit was manufactured
as a type of micro-strip circuit. It has a dimensions of 50 mm (width) by 75 mm

9 Improvement of Flame Kernel Growth by Microwave-Assisted …

133

(length) by 1 mm (height). Measurement of transmitting microwave power was per-
formed using a directional coupler and a power meter (Agilent, E4417A). These
units were installed between the mixer and the igniter to measure the forwarded
and reﬂected microwave power. It is known that the absorption of electromagnetic
energy by a material is depending on their dielectric properties (Thostenson and
Chou 1999). Thus, microwave power on the combustion system was calculated by
considering reﬂected power and forwarded power. Two identical attenuators with
−55 dB were installed in the directional coupler to protect the power meter from
excessive microwave power that could damage the device. Internal resistor in the
spark plug block most of the microwave thus non-resistor spark plug was designed
and manufactured. The N-type connector was placed at the end of ignitor so it can be
connected with mixing unit directly. The high DC was delivered through the central
electrode in the ignitor whereas the microwave was transferred through a space in
the electrode shell.

9.2.3 Experimental Conditions

The combustion test conditions are summarized in Table 9.1. The equivalence ratio
and initial in-chamber pressure were varied from 0.4 to 1.6 and 0.1 Mpa to 0.7 MPa,
respectively. Again, the mixture composition and initial pressure were set by control-
ling partial pressure of C2H2 and Air. The chamber was not heated by external heating
source but kept at room temperature around 300 K. Electric durations of 2 and 2.5 ms
were used for microwave ejection and coil charging time. The corresponding spark
and microwave energies were 135 and 125 mJ per event. The microwave ejection
timing was changed between 500 μs before and after the spark event to investi-
gate the effect of microwave ejection timing on combustion. An ensemble averaged
combustion results from ﬁve different ignition cases were compared between the
conventional spark ignition system and the microwave-assisted plasma ignition sys-
tem. An error analysis on in-chamber pressure analysis showed ±0.09 MPa range in

Table 9.1 Test conditions

Level

0.4–1.6

0.1–0.7

300

2

2.5

Item

Equivalence ratio

In-chamber pressure (MPa)

In-chamber temperature (K)

Spark energizing time (ms)

Applied microwave duration
(ms)

Microwave energy (mJ)

Microwave ejection timing
according to spark signal (μs)

125
−500 to 500 (250 μs step)

134

J. Hwang et al.

the peak of in-chamber pressure. The base line data using conventional spark igni-
tion was carried out with all ignition components but microwave was not applied by
turning off during the test.

9.3 Results and Discussions

9.3.1 Comparison of Discharge Characteristics

Figure 9.2 presents averaged OH radical intensity by the ignition itself under the
initial ambient pressure of 0.3 and 0.5 MPa at 0.5 ms after the spark event. Microwave

Fig. 9.2 Comparison of OH radicals generated by a conventional spark ignition and b microwave-
assisted plasma ignition. The image shows ensemble averaged OH intensity of ﬁve different dis-
charge events. White outline in the discharge differentiate discharge area

9 Improvement of Flame Kernel Growth by Microwave-Assisted …

135

ejection timing was 250 μs prior to the spark event. The intensity as well as covered
area by OH radial with microwave ejection is greater than the conventional spark
ignition. This implies that even though the ignition itself was initiated by a thermal
plasma by the conventional discharge, the expansion of plasma was governed by non-
thermal process (Sun et al. 2016). It is possible that both electrons and ions interacted
with the microwave and ﬁnally turned into high energy state (Bittencourt 2004). The
electrons in plasma can easily be accelerated because of small mass. They can absorb
much energy from the external electric ﬁeld produced by 2.45 GHz microwave. Ju
et al., elucidated that the temperature of electrons in microwave-assisted ignition was
higher than conventional coil ignition case (Ju and Sun 2015). The highly energized
electrons then transfer their energy through collisions to relatively heavy molecules
and ﬁnally cause ionization and dissociation of the molecules. Therefore, the reactive
radicals such as OH were produced more efﬁciently with microwave ejection than
the conventional spark ignition.

Emission spectrum of microwave-assisted plasma ignition and conventional spark
ignition was compared in Fig. 9.3. The discharge repeated 5 Hz and the data acqui-
sition time for conventional spark and microwave-assisted ignition cases were 4 s
and 0.4 s, respectively to avoid saturation. Typical vibrational structure of molecular
emission spectra of N2 and N+
2 can be seen in the conventional spark ignition case.
Meanwhile, a number of emission lines from monoatomic and the nitrogen molec-
ular remains almost at background level with microwave-assisted plasma ignition

Fig. 9.3 Optical emission spectroscopy using a conventional spark ignition and b microwave-
assisted plasma ignition under 1 bar ambient pressure condition

136

J. Hwang et al.

case. Our analysis on electron temperature using SPARTAN revealed that the elec-
tron temperatures under microwave ejection and conventional spark ignition were
23,500 K and 17,300 K respectively (Hwang et al. 2017). This result explains that the
microwave ejection can effectively increase the T e, or correspondingly the kinetic
energy of free electrons than conventional spark discharge.

The intensity of OH radicals on the ﬂame surface is shown in Fig. 9.4. The image
shows the ensemble averaged OH intensities from ﬁve different events. The images
were captured at 6 ms and 4 ms for lambda of 1.67 and 1.25, respectively. It is clear
that the OH radicals on the ﬂame surface was larger with microwave ejection case
than conventional spark ignition. This result clearly indicates that the combustion
occurred more vigorously due to higher electron temperature and rich reactive radi-
cals. Electrons in the surface of ﬂame front can be activated by oscillating microwave

Fig. 9.4 OH radical intensity on the ﬂame front upper ﬁgures present conventional spark ignition,
bottom ﬁgures show microwave-assisted plasma ignition under ambient pressure of 0.3 MPa

9 Improvement of Flame Kernel Growth by Microwave-Assisted …

137

and this is an effective source for enhancement on chemical kinetics because the elec-
tron density is high (1018/m3) which is two to three orders of magnitude higher than
in the burnt downstream gases (MacLatchy 1979). The high electron density in the
ﬂame front implies that the electric conductivity of the ﬂame front is high and thus
ohmic heating occurs due to the ﬁeld (Maclatchy et al. 1982). The excited electrons
are considered as a catalyst in the chemical reaction as they promote reaction rate.
Stockman et al., measured OH radicals by planar laser induced ﬂuorescence (PLIF)
and the result showed that the peak OH-number density increased by 6.5% with the
microwave application (Stockman et al. 2009). The temperature increase in the post-
ﬂame gases was corresponded to 20–40 W and this was estimated approximately
2.3% of magnetron power.

9.3.2 Effect of Microwave Ejection on Combustion Phase

and Lean Limit

Flame development time (FDT) deﬁned as a timing when 10% of total net heat
release depending equivalence ratio is presented in Fig. 9.5. The initial ambient
pressure and microwave ejection timing was ﬁxed at 0.1 MPa and 250 μs before the
spark event. Under the equivalence ratio of 0.4, both ignition system had misﬁres,
however, microwave-assisted plasma ignition extended lean limit up to 0.5. The
possible reason for the extended lean limit is larger initial ﬂame kernel due to higher
electron temperature and enhanced chemical kinetics as we discussed above. The
extended lean limit can provide many advantages to internal combustion engines
in terms of fuel efﬁciency as well as emission characteristics (Zhao et al. 1999;
Ceviz et al. 2012; Zhuang and Hong 2014). The lean-burn concept can be especially
applied to reduce the fuel consumption when the engine is under idling condition and

Fig. 9.5 Comparison of
ﬂame development time
using conventional spark
ignition and
microwave-assisted plasma
ignition under 0.1 MPa
ambient condition

138

J. Hwang et al.

to avoid the lean limit ﬂame out. The reduction of nitrogen oxides (NOx) is also able
to achieve by applying this lean-burn concept. In terms of the combustion phase, the
microwave-assisted plasma ignition showed advanced FDT, especially under lean
fuel-air mixture conditions. Meanwhile, the difference between the conventional
spark ignition and microwave-assisted plasma ignition seemed negligible under rich
mixture where the ﬂame propagation speed is already high enough. In this aspect,
the newly developed system can provide an option of on/off function depending on
the engine operating conditions.

The representative shadowgraph images which are closest to the mean value of
the ﬂame is shown in Fig. 9.6. The averaged ﬂame kernel size is also presented in
Fig. 9.6b. The ﬂames from both ignition systems are laminar ﬂame showing spherical
smooth ﬂame front. As conﬁrmed in the combustion phase result, we can expect larger
ﬂame kernel with microwave-assisted plasma ignition than using conventional spark
ignition. The ﬂame kernel size was deﬁned as a largest distance in width direction
from the shadowgraph images. Based on our measurement, the ﬂame speed was
increased up to 20% under lean condition, the equivalence ratio of 0.6. It is known
that the faster ﬂame growth is beneﬁcial to mitigate knock tendency in spark ignition
engines (Heywood 1988). Thus the fuel economy can be enhanced by advancing
the spark timing thanks to the faster ﬂame propagation. However, as it conﬁrmed in
combustion phase result, the enhancement in the ﬂame speed was disappeared under
fuel rich condition. On possible reason is that the time for energy deposition on the
ﬂame front got shorter due to the higher ﬂame propagation speed under rich condition.
From the previous study, it is known that the microwave power was attenuated by
the third power of distance from the electrode (Ikeda et al. 2009). Thus if the ﬂame
front is out of spark plug region, microwave ejection is no longer effective.

9.3.3 Effect of Ambient Pressure on Combustion
Enhancement by Microwave Ejection

The effect of initial pressure on enhancement by microwave ejection was compared
under equivalence ratio of 0.6. The microwave ejection timing was varied from 500
μs before the spark event to 500 μs after the spark event. The index of combustion (Ic)
was deﬁned to evaluate the performance of a plasma igniter under various ambient
pressure conditions (Hwnag et al. 2016). The Ic was calculated based on in-cylinder
pressure measurement. It is presented by an Eq. (9.1) below.

Index of combustion (Ic) = (Pmax, p/Pmax,con)/(t p/tcon)

(9.1)

where Pmax, p is the maximum in-chamber pressure with microwave ejection, t p is
the time of the peak pressure with the microwave ejection, Pmax,con is the maximum
in-chamber pressure with the conventional spark, and tcon is the time of the peak

9 Improvement of Flame Kernel Growth by Microwave-Assisted …

139

Fig. 9.6 a Consecutive ﬂame images under three different equivalence ratio and b comparison of
ﬂame kernel size according to time after spark started

140

J. Hwang et al.

Fig. 9.7 Combustion index calculated at the equivalence ratio of 0.6 and various initial ambient
pressure and microwave ejection timing

pressure with the conventional spark. The microwave-assisted plasma ignition system
was effective when the index of combustion was greater than 1.

The index of combustion at the equivalence ratio of 0.6 is shown in Fig. 9.7. The
black circle represents the performance of conventional spark ignitor, and the cross
circles are from microwave-assisted plasma ignition. If the cross circle is bigger
than black circle, it means the effectiveness of microwave ejection is larger. The
color bar on the right side indicates absolute value of the combustion index. The
measurement showed that the enhancement by microwave ejection is noticeable
under low initial in-chamber pressure conditions. On the other hands, the effect of
the microwave-assisted plasma ignition system was getting smaller under higher
initial ambient pressure especially with the retarded microwave timing conditions.
There was no noticeable difference over 0.5 MPa with microwave ejection timings
of +0, +250 μs, and +500 μs cases. Meanwhile, the early microwave ejection case
maintained the combustion index of approximately 1.1 even 0.5 MPa conditions.
The reason is that the microwave energy was being able to be transferred not only to
the fuel-air mixture but also to the ﬂame front by the early microwave ejection.

9.4 Conclusions

The inﬂuence of microwave-assisted plasma ignition on ﬂame development was
investigated in a constant volume combustion chamber. The new system using
2.45 GHz magnetron with 3 kW power, mixing unit and a non-resistor sparkplug
was developed to apply high voltage DC as well as microwave simultaneously.

9 Improvement of Flame Kernel Growth by Microwave-Assisted …

141

High-speed shadowgraph imagine and OH radical imaging were carried out with
in-cylinder pressure analysis. The major ﬁndings of this study are summarized as
below.

(1) The initial ﬂame kernel growth could be enhanced with microwave ejection
because of the larger plasma region which contained abundant radical pool and
hotter electrons. The OH imaging for the ﬂame front indicated higher OH inten-
sity with microwave ejection than conventional spark ignition. This explains that
the enhancement mechanism is driven by non-thermal plasma.

(3)

(2) The ﬂame propagation speed with microwave ejection was increased 20% under
fuel lean condition showing larger initial kernel growth by shadowgraph imag-
ing. However, enhancement of ﬂame kernel was reduced under fuel rich condi-
tion where the ﬂame propagation speed was fast enough.
Index of combustion analysis showed that the effect of microwave ejection under
high ambient condition was decreased. The possible reason is that the energy
loss due to more frequent collisions between the electrons and gas molecules
got larger under dense ambient conditions. This implies that energy deposition
by microwave got lower. However, at this situation, earlier microwave ejection
strategy kept the index of combustion larger than 1.
Laser Ignition Technology for Gaseous
Fuelled Automotive Engines
Abstract Most SI engine globally use conventional electric spark plug as an igni-
tion source. Electric spark plugs have limitations in achieving higher efﬁciency and
reducing emissions from gaseous fuelled automotive engine. In contrast to conven-
tional electrical spark plugs, laser spark plugs are apt for use at higher in-cylinder
pressures. Laser Ignition technology is capable of igniting leaner fuel-air mixture,
which cannot be successfully ignited by conventional spark plugs. Laser ignition
has proven its worth in defence and rocketry industry by replacing traditional spark
ignition systems globally. Laser ignited combustion can be controlled by only few
critical parameters, which makes it useful for implementation in variety of practical
applications. Controlled combustion using laser plasma which requires minor engine
hardware modiﬁcations is the key to implement it for variety of applications. Laser
pulse generated plasma at the focal point, which is much more intense than conven-
tional electrical spark plasma, can successfully ignite lean fuel-air mixtures. Main
advantages of laser ignition technology include the possibility of igniting leaner fuel-
air mixtures and ﬂexibility to freely choose location of the igniting plasma. These
interventions lead to lower NOx emissions, increased efﬁciency while avoids quench-
ing effects due to electrodes, reduced electrode wear and consequently increased the
lifetime of the electrodes. Laser ignition can be used for multi-cylinder engine by
employing ﬁber optics and a single laser source. This chapter reviews laser ignition
of gaseous fuel-air mixture as well as technology adaptation for implementation of
laser ignition in automotive sector.
Keywords Laser ignition · Alternate ignition system · Gaseous fuelled engine ·
Conventional spark ignition
In recent years, laser ignition systems have attracted attention as an alternative to
conventional electrical spark plugs in lean-burn gas engines because of their ability to
improve engine performance and reduce exhaust emissions simultaneously. In late
1960s, the ﬁrst laser spark assisted ignition of combustible mixture was achieved
(Knystautas and Lee 1969). Dale et al. (1978) demonstrated the laser ignition on the
engine using a CO2 laser for the ﬁrst time. Today, various researchers (Weinrotter
et al. 2005; Yalin et al. 2006; Dearden and Shenton 2013; Agarwal et al. 2017; Pavel
et al. 2018) are working on conducting feasibility studies for implementation of
laser ignition in automotive engines. Studies have shown that laser ignition can be a
potential candidate for operations in lean limits (Kopecek et al. 2005; Phuoc 2006).
A conventional electric spark plug has various disadvantages such as corrosion of
electrodes, and increased voltage requirements with increasing in-cylinder pressure,
and electrode acting as a heat-sink to plasma generated heat inside the cylinder
(Phuoc 2000). On another side, the laser ignition system provides ﬂexibility to freely
choose the plasma location anywhere inside the combustion chamber by selecting
optimized focus. One major challenge for implementing laser ignition system for
practical applications is the need for a robust delivery system for laser beam from
the laser head to the cylinder; and ﬁber-optics delivery is emerging as an appropriate
choice for this application. The open beam path approach that is generally followed
at the laboratory scale cannot be considered for practical ﬁeld applications because
of safety, maintenance, and vibration issues of the engine.

Gases have relatively high breakdown intensity nearly 100–1000 GW/cm2 (Turcu
et al. 1997; Phuoc 2000) hence ﬁber delivery of laser remains challenging as of
now (Stakhiv et al. 2004). For gaseous fuel operated multi-cylinder engines, various
approaches were investigated (McMillian et al. 2003; Weinrotter et al. 2004–2005;
Yalin et al. 2006) for successful implementation of laser ignition system. In the ﬁrst
approach, use of a single laser per cylinder (McMillian et al. 2003), and in another
approach, use of a single laser to multiple cylinders with multiplexing was suggested
(Yalin et al. 2006). A third and intermediate approach was also explored, in which
gain element (ampliﬁers) was mounted on each cylinder, where pump light was deliv-
ered through optical ﬁber (Weinrotter et al. 2004–2005). All these approaches are
discussed in detail in the following section. Laser ignition seems to be more promis-
ing to the gaseous fuels such as hydrogen, compressed natural gas (CNG), Hydrogen
enriched compressed natural gas (HCNG), and liqueﬁed petroleum gas (LPG), since
it allows extended lean limit operation having numerous advantages. Pal and Agar-
wal (2015) performed experiments on a laser ignited hydrogen engine and reported
higher peak cylinder pressure, higher heat release rate (HRR) and shorter combustion
duration compared to hydrogen fueled conventional electrical spark ignition engine.
Recent studies showed that laser ignition of HCNG-air mixture was more promising
than laser ignition of CNG and hydrogen individually.

10 Laser Ignition Technology for Gaseous Fuelled …

145

10.2 Laser Ignition: Opportunities and Challenges

for the Development of Gaseous Fuelled Engines

Engine with a laser ignition system offers several advantages over the conventional
electric spark ignition system. For gaseous fuelled engine equipped with laser ignition
system, initial ﬂame propagation was much faster than electrical spark plug, since
ﬂame kernel growth was protected by focusing the laser plasma away from the
cylinder walls, leading to lower possibility of ﬂame kernel quenching. Consequently,
mass burn duration and ignition delay were shorter, and in-cylinder peak pressure
was higher, leading to superior fuel efﬁciency and lower NOx emissions. Yalin et al.
(2005a, b) studied laser ignition performance by performing experiments on a six-
cylinder engine, in which they ignited one cylinder using laser. They reported that
the in-cylinder pressure increased faster, and peak in-cylinder pressure was relatively
higher compared to other cylinders also mass burned fraction is quicker compared
to the electric spark plug.

Herdin et al. (2005) investigated ignition delay and rate of burning using natural
gas and concluded that ignition delay was shorter for laser ignition compared to
conventional spark ignition. A higher air-fuel ratio can be employed using laser
ignition for extending lean limits, which can ensure lower combustion temperature
and hence lower NOx emissions along with higher fuel efﬁciency. Other beneﬁts
include more precise spark timings, and opportunity for multi-point ignition, wherein
multiple sparks can be generated in the cylinder concurrently. Advantages of gaseous
fuel engine equipped with laser ignition system are shown in Fig. 10.1.

Laser ignitions faces many challenges in order to commercialize e.g. laser ignition
systems are expensive, hence there is a need for development of compact, economical

Fig. 10.1 Advantages of laser ignition system (LIS)

146

D. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

laser having robust beam delivery system. Yalin et al. (2006) studied the feasibility of
different types of optical ﬁber cables used for transmission of high power laser pulses.
LIS must be robust enough to withstand engine vibrations, mechanical and thermal
stresses. Performance of solid-state laser is inﬂuenced by ambient temperature of the
engine environment since the laser system gives the best performance at temperature
up to 100 °C (Wintner and Koﬂer 2015). External cooling system may be coupled
with the engine cooling for better performance. Windows contamination may also
be a problem, since it affects the laser performance by creating hurdles in forming
the plasma.

10.3 Laser Ignition of Combustible Charge: Modes

of Ignition

There are primarily four different means (Phuoc 2006) by which a laser beam can
interact with the ignitable mixture to initiate ignition, as shown in Fig. 10.2.

(a) Photochemical ignition: Photochemical ignition entails a close match between
laser wavelength and absorption wavelength of the molecules. Photochemical
ignition does not involve breakdown of gaseous molecules since laser photon
absorption takes place in the combustible mixture molecules, which dissociate
into atoms and radicals. Dissociation of photons and production of radicals lead
to a branched chain reaction, and if the production rate of radicals is higher than
their recombination rate, then this reaction leads to the ignition of combustible
charge.

(b) Thermal ignition: Similar to photochemical ignition, thermal ignition does
not involve an electrical breakdown of molecules. Here the kinetic energy of
mixture molecules is increased in rotational, translational or vibrational modes
by absorbing laser beam energy, which leads to breaking of molecular bonds
of combustible mixture molecules and chemical reactions start. In the thermal
ignition, mixture must absorb the laser beam energy resonantly. For this, com-
bustible charge must have the resonant species, which match with the laser
wavelength.

Fig. 10.2 Laser ignition mechanisms

10 Laser Ignition Technology for Gaseous Fuelled …

147

(c) Resonant ignition: Laser-induced resonant ignition involves multi-photon non-
resonant photochemical dissociation of combustible mixture molecules and res-
onant multi-photon ionization of atoms produced by photo-dissociation. Hence-
forth, free electrons are generated, which absorb the laser energy through Inverse
Bremsstrahlung effect, leading to an avalanche of electrons, thus causing the
breakdown of gases.

(d) Non-resonant ignition: Non-resonant breakdown is the most appropriate igni-
tion mechanism since it does not require the mixture molecule should resonate
with the laser wavelength (Kopecek et al. 2003). Laser-induced non-resonant
breakdown of gaseous particles is generally achieved by multi-photon ionization
and cascade ionization. Simultaneous absorption of laser photon by target mate-
rial takes place in multi-photon ionization, and if absorbed energy is more than
ionization potential of the target molecules, then liberated electrons may ionize
a particle, leading to production of two electrons of lesser energy. This process
is repeated consistently leading to electron avalanche and hence breakdown of
combustible charge molecules. Cascade ionization entails two essential environ-
ments for the breakdown of gaseous molecules which require that free electron
must be available in the focal volume, and free electron must gain the energy
from the laser radiation which should be higher than the potential energy of the
gas molecules (Radziemski and Cremers 1989). Cascade ionization is generally
preferred at elevated pressures and for long pulse laser because the threshold
energy required for the breakdown of gases decrease with increasing pressure
at speciﬁc limits and then increase (Gili and Dougal 1965). Multi-photon ion-
ization mechanism is preferred over cascade ionization at lower pressure and
appropriately short laser pulses are required (Phuoc 2000).

It is notable that short and intensiﬁed laser pulses can deliver an “optical break-
down” of air. Required intensity for this breakdown is about 100–1000 GW/cm2
(Turcu et al. 1997; Phuoc 2000). Under such an intense environment, dissociation
and ionization of gaseous fuel-air mixture, and molecules take place. Consequently,
hot plasma is generated in the vicinity of the focal spot of the laser beam. Focal spot
diameter (d) of tightly focused laser light depends on unfocused beam diameter (D)
and corresponding wavelength and directing optics (Koechner 1999).

d = 4M 2λF
π D

(10.1)

where,
M2 beam quality factor
D initial beam diameter
d
λ
F

focused beam diameter
wavelength at initial beam diameter D
focal length of the optical element.

A sensible diameter is in the range of 200 μm, and within a spherical volume (V)
the number of particles depends on the temperature (T) and pressure (P) according
to the ideal gas law equation (Liedl et al. 2005):

148

where,

N = PV
KT

D. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

(10.2)

N number of particles present in the focal spot volume
K Boltzmann’s constant (1.38 × 10−23)

Ionization and dissociation of gaseous particles entail certain extent of energy,
which has to be supplied by the laser beam. Figure 10.3 (Pavel et al. 2018) explains

Fig. 10.3 Temporal progress of non-resonant laser ignition process (Pavel et al. 2018)

10 Laser Ignition Technology for Gaseous Fuelled …

149

different stages of laser ignition interaction through non-resonant breakdown mech-
anism. The mechanism requires multiphoton ionization, which generates free elec-
trons. Figure 10.3a shows plasma breakdown and propagation within 0-9 ns. After
few 10th to 100th of a nanosecond, a shockwave is released because of rapid increase
in temperature and pressure (Bradley et al. 2004; Phuoc 2006) and propagates towards
colder ambient gas with supersonic speed (Gregorˇciˇc et al. 2013). Residual hot gases
formed a spherical shape (Fig. 10.3c), which collapsed after a few microseconds and
then a donut-like structure was observed (Fig. 10.3d). Interaction of second kernel
ﬂame with the ﬁrst one is shown in Fig. 10.3e and is formed in the center of the
ﬁrst kernel. The shockwave propagation of the second kernel is faster inside the
ﬁrst kernel, which may be because of relatively inferior concentration of hot gases.
For successful ignition, persistent ﬂame propagation (Fig. 10.3e) leads to complete
combustion of a charged particle.

10.4 Methods of Laser Beam Delivery for Engine Ignition

One of the signiﬁcant concerns for the application of laser ignition in the automotive
industry is the delivery of laser beam from the source to the engine cylinders. For
implementation of laser delivery in an engine conditions, several challenges are
required to be overcome such as vibrations, dirt, heat, and vapors. Concerns related
to high costs, ease of use and maintenance, and safety have also prohibited this
technology from being used extensively. Researcher have various proposed solutions
over time about the beneﬁts and challenges of using laser ignition. Some of the
approaches are discussed in the following section.

10.4.1 Open Path Beam Delivery Approach

This approach is widely used in the lab scale experiment. In this approach, a laser is
employed near the engine along with a set of mirror and lenses, which direct the laser
beam to the engine combustion chamber. Various studies (Herdin et al. 2005; Ahrens
et al. 2005; Srivastava et al. 2014; Singh et al. 2017) have been performed using open
beam path approach. The advantage of this approach includes ease of developing the
experimental setup in the lab and freedom to measure various parameters during the
engine operation. Hence, it is a right approach for lab scale testing and demonstra-
tion, where various controls are preferred however for the use at Industrial scale,
this approach will not be a right choice. For successful plasma generation, precise
alignment of laser beam with appropriate focusing optics is essential. Engine vibra-
tions relative to laser source may lead to beam misalignment, and the system may
not work. Engine environment is often full of vapors, dust, and particulates and may
contaminate the mirror and lenses, leading to transmission losses, poor beam quality,

150

D. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

and eventually damage to the optics. Due to these factors, open path approach is not
appropriate for the industry use.

10.4.2 Single Laser per Cylinder

An alternative to open beam approach may be placing a compact laser directly on top
of each cylinder (Fig. 10.4). This approach will ensure that there is no exposure to
the laser light near the engine, hence avoiding creation of hazardous situation for the
personnel, and avoiding the challenge of misalignment of laser beam simultaneously.
In this strategy, lasers have to pass through a limited number of optics, and hence
problems accompanying energy and transparency loss are avoided. The challenges
involved here is to develop a compact laser that could be ﬁtted on the engine cylinder
head and would provide sufﬁcient power for the breakdown of gaseous molecules in
the engine combustion chamber. Several probable systems have been demonstrated
by the researchers.

A miniature diode pumped laser was designed by Kroupa et al. (2009). They used
Cr: YAG saturable absorbing agent as Q-switch. This miniature laser yields 25 mJ
energy at a frequency of up to 100 Hz. Breakdown in the air was easily attainable
at focal lengths up to 80 mm by utilizing appropriate focusing elements. Kroupa
et al. (2009) successfully tested it on the engine and found it to be reliable. They fur-
ther extended the lean limit ignition compared to conventional spark plugs. Another
similar Q-switch diode pumped laser was designed and patented by Inohara et al.
(2009). The laser emitted a sequence of pulses with a total energy of approx. 7 mJ and
temporal spacing between pulses of 10 to 300 μs. A slight extension of lean limit
was also achieved by this laser when tested on the engine. While results of these

Fig. 10.4 Schematic
showing single laser per
cylinder

10 Laser Ignition Technology for Gaseous Fuelled …

151

improvements demonstrate the capability of the ignition system for a multi-cylinder
engine, many factors limit their pragmatism in real applications. This was because
the laser unit was directly installed on the cylinder head therefore a separate dedi-
cated cooling system was required to prevent wavelength drifting. Engine undergoes
constant vibrations that may misalign the laser cavity. Finally, the cost issues do not
support this approach for practical usage, especially in multi-cylinder engines.

10.4.3 Use of Optical Fibers for Laser Beam Delivery

The above approach has practical limitations and is not economically viable due
to requirement of multiple laser sources for multi-cylinder engines. Optical ﬁber
provides an edge to overcome the engine vibrations and ensures safety from the high-
intensity laser beam. In the following section, different types of ﬁbers are explained
along with their suitability for laser spark formation.

10.4.3.1 Fiber Delivered Diode Pump/Laser Pulse

One economical alternative to placing one laser per-cylinder can be direct installation
of the gain medium on each cylinder head and utilizing the pumping light from a
single source through ﬁber optics using a suitable multiplexer system. This requires
one laser gain crystal for each cylinder that makes it is costly but less costly compared
to installing one laser per cylinder. Adequate cooling system will be required since
the gain medium is situated very close to the combustion chamber. This type of laser
was built by Koﬂer et al. (2007) which produced 6 mJ pulse energy with <1.5 ns
pulse duration at a pump power of 300 W. They also concluded that pump geometry
was a very sensitive parameter for the laser performance. However, no on-engine
investigation was implemented. The researchers acknowledged that further study
was required to determine the inﬂuence of temperature and mechanical vibrations
from the engine on this system.

Another practical approach may be direct delivery of laser pulses through optic
ﬁbers. This way, one can install the laser source far from the combustion chamber,
and will be able to overcome challenges due to vibrations and heating of the gain
medium. In this approach, only one laser source is required, which will help to make
this technology cost-effective. Laser beam is multiplexed into optical ﬁber cable,
whose one end is connected to the optical spark plug containing collimating and
focusing elements, which form the spark inside the cylinder. A simple schematic of
this concept is shown in Fig. 10.5. The main challenges include limitations of utilizing
optical ﬁber cable for beam delivery. For multi-cylinder engine, multiplexing laser
into multiple ﬁbers accurately is a challenging task. Optical ﬁber faces generally
have a diameter less than 1 mm, and beam has to be align accurately at rates up to
240 Hz, which requires precise optical components.

152

D. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

Fig. 10.5 Schematic of laser beam delivery through optical ﬁber

10.4.3.2 Hollow Core Fibers Delivery

Now-a-days, use of hollow core ﬁber is emerging as promising solution for deliv-
ering of high energy pulses. Hollow glass ﬁber and dielectric capillaries with oleﬁn
polymer-coated silver have been tested for laser ignition applications for the engine.
The dielectric capillary type hollow ﬁber uses a simple glass conduit that guides
the beam by total internal reﬂection at a glass-air interface. It is not considered for
the practical use though because it encounters high transmission loss and the ﬁbers
are not very ﬂexible, thus dampening the main advantage sought from the optical
ﬁber laser beam delivery. On the other hand, cyclic oleﬁn polymer-coated silver hol-
low ﬁbers are capable of providing better transmission efﬁciency and they are much
more ﬂexible hence they are preferred for laser pulse delivery. These ﬁbers use much
thinner glass conduit having polymer and silver layers inside to direct the light.

The ﬁrst use of hollow core ﬁber to deliver nanosecond laser was claimed by Yalin
et al. (2005a, b) in which they successfully generated plasma in the atmospheric air.
They used 700 μm core diameter, 1 m long ﬁber having a transmission efﬁciency of
~80% at lower power and ~70% at a peak power of 47 mJ. Beam quality factor M2
was reported to be in the range of 11–26 for different launch condition; lower M2
value was found for smaller launch divergence angle. They observed ~97% success
in spark formation rate with tight focusing of the ﬁber. Slightly longer ﬁber of 2 m
having 1 μm core diameter was tested by Reynolds (2011) which delivered similar
results and slight improvement in M2 at best launch conditions. A term, ﬁgure of
merit (FOM) was used by Joshi et al. (2007) to compare different type of optical
ﬁbers and they reported that hollow core ﬁber exhibited the highest FOM as shown
in Table 10.1.

10 Laser Ignition Technology for Gaseous Fuelled …

153

Table 10.1 Calculated FOM
values for different ﬁbers
(Joshi et al. 2007)

Iexit (GW/cm2)
3

Fiber type

Solid core silica ﬁber
(base NA)

Coated hollow ﬁber

Photonic crystal ﬁber

Fiber laser

2

12

8

θexit
0.05

0.01

0.04

0.02

FOM

0.34

5.6

2.8

4.9

where,

Iexit
Intensity of laser pulse at ﬁber exit
θexit Angular divergence of light at ﬁber exit.

10.4.3.3 Solid Core Fibers

These ﬁber types have long been used widely for communication purposes in telecom
industry. These are conventionally thought to be incapable of high energy laser beam
delivery. Solid core ﬁbers are not very frequently used for engine application because
of difﬁculties in mode coupling and deprivation of laser quality. A couple of engine
test were conducted to study the feasibility of solid core ﬁbers for laser pulse delivery.
Mullet et al. (2009) performed an experiment with ﬁbers of 400 and 600 μm core
and ignited one of four-cylinder using the laser system; however, they observed
signiﬁcant misﬁre in the cylinder, which was ignited by the laser. They compared
the successful ignition rates to be 13% and 44% out of 300 consecutive combustion
cycles for 400 μm and 600 μm core optical ﬁbers respectively. Biruduganti et al.
(2004) performed an experiment using 1 mm core ﬁber, and they could ignite the
engine without any misﬁre; however, they were not able to initiate the ambient air
breakdown.

10.4.3.4 Photonic Crystal Fibers (PCFS) and Hollow Core Photonic

Bandgap (PBG) Fibers

Photonic crystal ﬁbers (PCFs) and Photonic bandgap (PBG) ﬁbers have periodic hole
structures inside the ﬁber material, which can guide the laser light in an effective
manner, including single mode operation. These are new class of optical ﬁbers, which
offer several unique properties such as they take advantage of crystal structures.
Matsuura et al. (1998) successfully demonstrated PBG ﬁbers with a laser pulse
energy of 0.37 mJ at 1064 nm having 65 ns pulse duration. Joshi et al. (2007)
investigated PCF with a core 25 μm and ﬁber length of 2 m. M2 ~ 1.4 was observed
when a spatial ﬁlter was used. They found the maximum achievable output of 0.55 mJ
with energy input of 1.3 mJ. Hence this ﬁber has not shown signiﬁcant real potential
for laser beam delivery for the engine application; however, in future, there is quite

154

D. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

high chance of developments in the laser energy carrying capacity of such ﬁbers,
which will make it potentially useful for engine application.

10.5 Multiplexing

An impending advantage of ﬁber delivery approach is to utilize a single laser source
to a number of cylinders via multiplexing. Multiplexing is a process of utilizing a
single laser for multiple cylinders of an engine using appropriate sequential laser
beam delivery system.

10.5.1 Why Multiplexing?

For laser ignition in IC engines, the approach generally followed is that of a
direct-mounted laser source for each cylinder. This approach is quite expensive for
multi-cylinder engines due to high cost of laser system, even in batch production.
Researchers therefore prefer open beam path system for transferring the beam to
the engine combustion chamber; however optical ﬁber delivery system coupled with
multiplexer is preferred over the open beam path beam delivery systems for numerous
reasons, as summarized:

(a) Alignment Issues: In open beam path system, required optical components in-
between the laser source and the engine cylinder must be held accurately aligned
despite momentous vibrations in the engine. Further, this alignment should be
sustained over a long operational period. On the other hand, optical ﬁbers give
the ﬂexibility of not getting affected by engine vibrations hence signiﬁcantly
reduce the beam misalignment issues.

(b) Safety Issues: In open laser beam path approach, safety is a big concern since
both infrared and visible light lasers are invisible when they propagate through
the ambient space. Hence there are high chances of laser beam to get interrupted
by some reﬂective objects and deviate from its original path and move around the
open space near the engine. This leads to a potential threat to personnel operating
in the vicinity of the engine. On the other hand, safety increases with the use
of optical ﬁbers since they contain the entire beam between the multiplexer and
the engine. Hence this system offers enhanced safety compared to open beam
path approach.

10 Laser Ignition Technology for Gaseous Fuelled …

155

Methods of Multiplexing

Solid-state 

Mechanical 

Electro-optic modulators (EOMs)

Continuous rotation method

Acousto-optic modulator (AOMs)

Step-and-hold method

Fig. 10.6 Different multiplexing types

10.5.2 Methods of Multiplexing

There are two main types of multiplexing method, namely (i) Solid-state, and (ii)
Mechanical. Further classiﬁcation are shown in Fig. 10.6.

10.5.2.1 Solid-State Multiplexing

Solid-State Multiplexing can be utilized in high-speed multiplexing without any
moving parts, however these systems are relatively expensive since they require N-1
number of an optical modulator, where N is the number of ﬁbers. Optical modulators
are expensive.

Electro-optic modulators consist of non-linear optical crystal, which utilizes the
electric ﬁeld for changing the optical properties (Paschotta 2008). To achieve the
objective of multiplexing, electro-optic modulator, for instance, Pockels cells which
rotate the beam polarization, can be used alongside polarizers and polarization depen-
dent glasses (Early and Lester 1999). This method relies on polarity, and hence laser
polarity is achieved ﬁrst using a polarizer. Thereafter the beam passes through an
optical modulator, which rotates the polarization of the beam through 90°, when
active otherwise not. The laser beam then goes through a polarizing splitter, which
permits the beam to pass through unaffected in one particular polarized direction, but
reﬂects the beam by 90° in the opposite direction for another polarized beam. The
arrangement of beam-splitter has to be in such a way that the beam will pass without
reﬂection, when optical modulator, which is installed just before it, is passive, but
when optical modulator is active, the beam will be reﬂected by 90° and focused
into an optical ﬁber, which is connected to one of the engine cylinders. This way,
multiplexing is achieved by electro-optic modulators.

In acousto-optic modulator, light diffracts along a different path, when the acoustic
effect is utilized. To induce the acoustic waves in the material and hence to change the
optical properties, a piezoelectric transducer is used (Paschotta 2008). Acousto-optic
modulators can be utilized similar to an electro-optic modulator.

156

Fig. 10.7 Continuous
rotation method for
multiplexing

D. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

10.5.2.2 Mechanical Multiplexing

Mechanical multiplexing method utilizes a set of mirrors, which physically rotate in
the direction of an incoming laser beam, and direct it into the desired ﬁber. Mechanical
multiplexing can be classiﬁed further into two categories viz. continuous rotation
method and step-and-hold method. In continuous rotation approach, multiplexing is
achieved by ﬁxing a mirror on the motor shaft at 45°, in such a way that laser beam
encountering the mirror get reﬂected to an angular direction, depending on the speed
of the motor. Optical ﬁber is installed radially in such a manner that with positional
feedback, laser beam can be coupled to each ﬁber in a proper sequence. Schematic
of this approach is shown in Fig. 10.7.

Continuous rotation approach is relatively simple in design and cost-effective
since it utilizes set of a mirrors and a motor however on another hand, this method
does not give ﬂexibility for instant timing alterations, and it entails a very high
sensitivity positional feedback from the motor to focus the beam into each ﬁber.

Another method of mechanical multiplexing is step and hold approach. In this
approach, a mirror is focused at a particular ﬁber and seized there for some time, and
then the laser is ﬁred. Thereafter the mirror is centered to the next ﬁber for ignition
in the next engine cylinder. A schematic of this step-and-hold multiplexing system
is shown in Fig. 10.8.

High precision piezoelectric stacks can be utilized for switching by ﬁxing the
mirror with them in such a way that expansion or contraction of one (or two) stack(s)
cause the mirror to rotate along the ﬁber direction. Even with high precision stacks,

10 Laser Ignition Technology for Gaseous Fuelled …

157

Fig. 10.8 Schematic of
step-and-hold multiplexing
approach

this system does not have enough range for multi-cylinder engine application (Thor-
lab catalog). Use of galvanometer can be alternative to switching the mirror in step-
and-hold approach. Galvanometer has a magnetic coil that can rotate the attached
part (mirror in this case) in any direction in its range.

10.6 Case Studies of Successful Laser Ignited Engine

For preliminary studies of the laser ignition system, several researchers have per-
formed experiments on a constant volume combustion chamber for simulating engine
like conditions before moving to a real engine experiments. Some case-studies are
discussed in the following section, which incorporate successful laser ignition system
demonstrations.

Case Study 1: Constant volume combustion chamber studies

Understanding of ﬂame kernel growth is essential when it comes to gaseous fuel
operated vehicles since this is the point where combustion gets initiated. For SI
engines, compressed natural gas (CNG) can be used as an alternative fuel because it
possesses high octane number and the laser ignited engines can be operated at higher
compression ratios (Srivastava and Agarwal 2014) which will offer superior thermal
efﬁciency and reduced emissions compared to conventional spark ignited engines.
CNG has relatively slower ﬂame speed (Srivastava and Agarwal 2014; Karim et al.
1996), and this problem can be overcome by enriching the mixture with hydrogen or
by creating higher in-cylinder turbulence. However, there will be more heat losses
when turbulence is increased (Karim et al. 1996); hence it is not a suitable technique
to be used in a practical engine.

158

D. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

Fig. 10.9 Flame propagation of HCNG-air mixture in CVCC using laser ignition. (Prasad et al.
2017)

Prasad et al. (2017) used a constant volume combustion chamber (CVCC) to
study the ﬂame kernel evolution when ignited with laser plasma. They simulated
the compression stroke engine condition in cylindrical shape CVCC of diameter
72 mm and length 220 mm. A Q-switched Nd: YAG laser (Litron; Nano L series)
was employed at the fundamental wavelength (1064 mm) to ignite the combustible
mixture with suitable optical arrangement. Shadowgraphy was done for analysing
the ﬂame kernel evolution, and temporal ﬂame kernel growth was analyzed using
the image analysis. Flame evolution was studied in two directions opposite to laser
propagation and orthogonal to the laser beam, as shown in Fig. 10.9.

They captured images using shadowgraphy technique by employing a high-speed
CCD camera operating at 54,000 fps, taking pictures at an interval of 18.5 μs with
three different fuel-air equivalence ratio (λ = 1.1, 1.3, 1.5) and compared different
mixtures of hydrogen enriched CNG mixtures ﬁlled at 5 bar and 10 bar initial cham-
ber ﬁlling pressures (Fig. 10.10). Prasad et al. (2017) reported that instantly after the
breakdown, asymmetric expansion of laser plasma with movement towards the opti-
cal element was faster than alongside the laser beam propagation path. Further, they
reported that combustion duration increased with increasing λ for HCNG-air mix-
ture and ﬂame kernel evolution was faster for H2 enriched mixtures for a particular λ
and initial chamber condition, which led to reduced combustion duration. However,
ﬂame kernel evolution retarded when the initial chamber ﬁlling pressure increased
to 10 bar while maintaining all other parameters identical. They also concluded that
ﬂame evolution speed decreased with increasing equivalence ratio.

10 Laser Ignition Technology for Gaseous Fuelled …

159

Fig. 10.10 Flame kernel evolution of HCNG air mixture using laser ignition (Prasad et al. 2017)

160

D. Kumar and A. K. Agarwal

Case Study 2: On engine test with laser ignition

Mullet et al. (2009) performed a comparative analysis of LI system and electric SI sys-
tem using gasoline for a multi-cylinder engine. They claimed that it was the ﬁrst time,
when all engine cylinders were ignited using laser spark (open beam path approach).
They used two Nd: YAG solid state lasers operated at a fundamental wavelength of
1064 nm. They reported with LI, there is a reduction in coefﬁcient of cyclic varia-
tions (CCV) and faster combustion for a range of loads, speeds and ignition timings
and they were also able to ignite leaner fuel-air mixture more consistently compared
to conventional SI system. Srivastava and Agarwal (2014) performed experiments
using a single cylinder engine and reported higher peak cylinder pressure for LI com-
pared to SI system. They varied the λ from 1.35 to 0.9 by keeping the ignition timing
ﬁxed at 25° bTDC for both LI and SI. They reported the highest ﬂame speed for the
slightly richer mixture (λ ~ 0.9), which decreased with further enrichment or leaning
of the mixture. It can be observed from Fig. 10.11 that as λ decreased, differences
in peak cylinder pressure between LI and SI decreased. At λ = 1.2 peak cylinder
pressure for SI was 37.9 bar while for LI, it was 41.5 bar, as shown in Fig. 10.11.
Hence they reported higher peak cylinder pressure for LI compared to conventional
SI system.

10.7 Closure

In this chapter, potential of laser ignition system has been discussed. Furthermore,
different ignition mechanisms by which the laser interacts with fuel-air mixture are
explained brieﬂy. Non-resonant breakdown mechanism was found to be the most
suitable candidate for engine application since it does not require charge species
characteristic wavelengths to resonate with laser wavelength. With the laser ignition
system, one can ignite leaner charge, which is not possible to be ignited by conven-
tional SI systems. This simultaneously enhances the engine efﬁciency and reduces
engine-out NOx emissions. However for application of LI system in commercial
engines, there is a need for further development of cheaper and compact solid-state
lasers in addition to robust delivery system for laser beams. Different approaches
have been discussed for laser beam delivery. Different type of multiplexer designs
have also been discussed. At the end, couple of case studies of LI in CVCC and
engine are also discussed.