Introduction

Wheels and tires have evolved rapidly in recent years. In the realm of tires, the
evolution of the Mercedes S-Class shows this impressively. While the S-Class in
1972 (W116) was developed with a tire width of 185 mm on 14-inch wheels,
today’s S-Class (W222) has a 245-mm tire width and a 17-inch rim as entry-level
sizes. Figure 2 shows the evolution of tire outside diameters. Development of the
rim diameter, tire sidewall height, and tire width are shown in Figs. 3, 4, and 5,
respectively.

Wheels have evolved as rapidly as tires. Many concepts have come and gone,
having been placed in series production after proving themselves, or having simply
disappeared from the market. Figure 6 shows some of the milestones of wheel
development at Mercedes-Benz over the last 45 years. For perspective, consider
that the Mercedes-Benz W108 from the late 1960s was offered with a single 14-inch
steel wheel. In comparison, the current S-Class has a plethora of attractive wheel
offerings for customers, Fig. 7. On one hand, these choices represent an enormous
design challenge for automobile manufacturers. On the other hand, it’s a large

Fig. 2 History of tire dimensions for the Mercedes S-Class
Fig. 3 History of tire outside diameter for the Mercedes S-Class

Fig. 4 Rim diameter and development of sidewall height for the Mercedes S-Class

business opportunity for vehicle and wheel manufacturers. These wheels are not
only offered as original equipment tires, but also as spare parts in the workshops of
original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) and as independently advertised items
cf. Fig. 8.
Fig. 5 History of tire width for the Mercedes S-Class

Fig. 6 Milestones in the development of Mercedes-Benz aluminum wheels
Fig. 7 An example of wheel variants for the Mercedes S-Class (W222) at market launch in 2012

Fig. 8 Aftersales advertisement for original equipment tires

Chapter 1
Tires

A tire is a composite material which has rotational symmetry, is non-isotropic, and
is comprised of several rubber components which are bound together, and whose
strength characteristics are determined by textile or other steel reinforcement
materials. This is the formal deﬁnition of a tire as given by an encyclopedia.

A tire is tasked with far more than just supporting the weight of a vehicle. It
should be able to apply lateral forces to guide the vehicle safely along curves and
apply longitudinal forces to transfer engine power and brake forces onto the road. It
should offer maximum possible adhesion to road surfaces under all weather con-
ditions, have spring and damping properties, be able to support steering inputs
through suitable response characteristics, and have a minimal amount of rolling
resistance and road noise. With regard to longevity and durability, a tire should be
able to endure considerable amounts of mileage, be as air-tight as possible, and be
suitably robust against external inﬂuences. Lastly and most importantly, a tire must
be safe: it should retain its speciﬁed dimensions over its lifecycle and should not
become detached from the wheel rim while the vehicle is in motion.

Unfortunately, the properties listed above are not exactly free from conﬂict.
Therefore, an optimal compromise must be reached during the development of new
tires. Determining this optimal compromise becomes the task of vehicle manu-
facturers, while the technical implementation becomes the task of tire manufac-
turers [1, 2].

Modern passenger cars use steel-belted radial

tires almost exclusively.
Steel-belted radial tires from different tire manufacturers have few signiﬁcant dif-
ferences from one another, Fig. 1.1.

The core proﬁle is located above the tire bead cable and is made of synthetic
rubber. The core proﬁle inﬂuences the vertical spring stiffness and hence the
comfort aspect of a tire. The core proﬁle, like the bead reinforcement, which is
made of nylon or aramid, also ensures the precision of steering and dynamic
stability while driving.

The sidewall rubber is made of natural or synthetic rubber and protects the tire
lateral damage and weathering. The rubberized polyester- or

carcass against
Tires

2 Plies steel belt

Belt bandage

Rayon carcass

Tread compound 

Aramid bead reinforcement

Rimprotection rib 

Nylonflipper

Bead filler

Fig. 1.1 History of tire outside diameter for the Mercedes S-Class

rayon-ﬁnished textile cord carcass is essentially the reinforcing material against the
tire’s internal air pressure.

The steel cord-belt inserts are made of rubberized steel cord and help to ensure
stability while driving, help to reduce rolling resistance, and increase tire mileage.
The joint-less bandage made of nylon improves high-speed capabilities.

A steel-belted radial tire can be made from more than twenty different rubber
mixtures. One important descriptive parameter for rubber mixtures, especially for
the tire tread, is the shore hardness. Shore hardness can vary depending on the type
of carbon black used and its proportion to the softening agent (plasticizer) as well as
the dosing of the vulcanizing agent.

The belt from which a steel-belted radial tire earns its name consists of at least
two steel cord-belt inserts. These are laid one above the other, are made of drilled or
twisted steel wires, and are partly coated with brass. The belt is located below the
tread and is covered by the nylon bandages. The steel wires do not run in the
direction of the tread, but rather at a deﬁned angle relative to the tread. On the sides,
the belt inserts are either folded or cut.

The tire carcass consists of one or more radial layers of synthetic ﬁbers or rayon.
The sidewall serves as protection against damage to the carcass yarns (e.g. while
driving over curbstones) and has a major impact on driving properties as well as
passenger comfort. The properties of the sidewall vary depending on the nature of
the material used as well as the geometry of the tire.

The tire carcass is surrounded by the tire’s shoulders and is largely responsible
for driving characteristics. It consists of a mixture of elastomers, ﬁller materials,
oils, anti-aging materials, and vulcanizing agents. A large percentage of natural
rubber in this mixture helps to reduce heat generation in the tread region. Synthetic

1 Tires

3

rubbers, on the other hand, offer increased wear resistance (mileage) and grip.
Carbon black and silica are the main ﬁller materials used for a tire’s tread and help
to increase wear resistance while at the same time stiffening the tread. Diluting oils
serve to increase the workability of the mixtures. Anti-aging materials aim to
prevent damage due to ozone. Vulcanizing agents—largely sulfur, but also stearic
acid and zinc oxide—promote the binding activities during the vulcanization pro-
cess. Another important feature of the tread is the tread proﬁle, which largely
determines noise properties as well as tire responsiveness under winter conditions,
including aquaplaning and wet grip performance.

A variety of information is available on the sidewall, Fig. 1.2. This information
includes the width of the tire, its cross-section measurement, tire design type, and
rim size. The width is measured in millimeters, whereas the tire cross-section
denotes the ratio of the height of the sidewall to the width of the tread. Modern
passenger cars use tires with an R designation, for “radial,” meaning that the cord
inserts run radially from tire bead to tire bead. In other words, they lie at an angle of
90° relative to the running direction of the tire. Rim diameter is described in inches.
The United States Department of Transportation (DOT) demands that details
regarding a tire’s structure be written on the sidewall in the form of numerical
codes. Normally, the term “DOT Number” refers to a tire’s date of manufacture,
which is written in code form on the sidewall. For tires manufactured after 2000, the
week of manufacture and the tire model appear as the last four digits of the code
number.

The Uniform Tire Quality Grading (UTQG) classiﬁcation is a sidewall marking
prescribed by consumer ordinances in the United States which contains details
and
about
temperature.

the operational performance

(mileage or

treadwear),

traction,

Fig. 1.2 Tire markings (Source Michelin)

4

1 Tires

Tires should have proﬁle grooves around the entire tread periphery. Proﬁle depth
should be measured in the main grooves, which is additionally marked with tread
wear indicators (TWI) in the case of modern tires.

A comprehensive overview of tire markings is given, for instance, in [3, 4] and
on the websites of tire manufacturers. The most important information is also
usually found in the user manual provided with new vehicles.

1.1 Tire Manufacturing

Tire manufacturers are independently responsible for the manufacturing of tires;
however, automobile manufacturers must be familiar with tire manufacturers’
processes, techniques, and facilities [2]. In fact, tire manufacturing plants should be
audited and approved by vehicle manufacturers. The basic processes of tire man-
ufacturing are depicted in Figs. 1.3 and 1.4.

1.1.1 Mixing

One of the most basic materials used in tire manufacturing is the rubber mixture.
These rubber mixtures are mixed, sprayed, rolled, and cut with special machinery.
The basic rolled material is called a sheet. The ingredients are illustrated in Fig. 1.5.
Before a ﬁnished sheet can leave the mixing department, a multiple-phase
mixing procedure must
take place. The mixture will differ depending on the
intended purpose of the tire. In particular, the tread will require ﬁller materials such
as carbon black and silica to help increase abrasion resistance, and materials such as

Fig. 1.3 Fabrication of a tire at a tire factory (Source Michelin)

1.1 Tire Manufacturing

5

Fig. 1.4 Schematic of the tire manufacturing process at a tire factory (Source Continental)

Fig. 1.5 Components of a mixture (Source Continental)

6

1 Tires

Fig. 1.6 The rolling process, which will later yield a rubber sheet (Source Continental)

silica to help ensure high-quality compounding which thereby improves braking
distances, especially on wet surfaces.

Natural and synthetic rubbers are the basic materials. Chemical additives such as
antioxidants are responsible for a tire’s longevity. During the mixing process, other
substances such as chalk, oil, resins, catalysts, and sulfur are also added. Depending
on the type of tire or tire component, the process and additivity are varied until the
desired material characteristics are obtained. The ﬁnished sheet can then be pro-
cessed further (Fig. 1.6).

1.1.2

Inner Liner

The sheet for the inner liner is shaped, cut, and wound onto a transportation roller
during the rolling process, Fig. 1.7. The inner layer is a thin layer of butyl rubber
which is—as much as possible—impermeable to air, and forms the ﬁrst layer of a
tire. Normally, two different sheets provide the ﬁnished mixture for the inner layer.
With the help of a calender, the mixture is formed into mixed sheets. Afterwards,
the sheets are cut into dimensions appropriate for the respective tire dimension.

This layer fulﬁlls the task of retaining the tire’s internal air pressure.

1.1.3 Carcass

The carcass of the ﬁnal tire is formed using the textile cord insert. The insert is
coated with a mixed layer using a calender, Fig. 1.8.

1.1 Tire Manufacturing

7

Fig. 1.7 An inner liner after extrusion (Source Continental)

Fig. 1.8 Manufacturing of the carcass (Source Continental)

The insert is then cut in such a way that the threads are oriented laterally to the
tire’s eventual direction of travel. In this way, the threads are radially positioned.
After the cut, yarns are then inserted laterally to the direction of the thread. The
resulting product is then wound up for further processing. The textile fabric which
is embedded in a mixed layer is positioned directly above the inner liner and acts as
a reinforcing material. The strength properties of the insert are further improved by
the radial orientation of the yarns.

8

1 Tires

All in all, the textile cord insert essentially determines the load capacity of the

tire as well as comfort properties such as spring stiffness.

1.1.4 Bead Cable and Apex

The bead cable ﬁxes the tire to the rim. It consists of rubber-encased steel wire
which is wound to form a ring, Figs. 1.9 and 1.10.

The bead is covered by the extruded apex. The apex acts as a protective shell for
the bead cable, and is also sometimes called the ﬁller. The apex is produced
simultaneously to the production of the bead cable, albeit on another manufacturing
line. After the extrusion process, the apex is fed through rollers and then fastened to
the tire bead.

In a ﬁnished tire, the apex has a strong inﬂuence on dynamic stability, steering,

and comfort characteristics.

1.1.5 Belt

To make the belt, many steel wires are joined together from the rollers in the spool
chamber to create a ﬁne steel ply, Fig. 1.11.

Fig. 1.9 Structure of the bead cable (Wulstkabel) (Source Continental)

1.1 Tire Manufacturing

9

Fig. 1.10 Rubberized bead cable (Wulstkabel) (Source Continental)

Fig. 1.11 Individual wires in the coil chamber (Source Continental)

This resulting ply is then encapsulated in a rubber mixture by passing it through

a calender.

After this step, according to speciﬁcations, the steel cord will be cut individually
into acute angles, Fig. 1.12. Then, the belt is joined to the cut edges perpendicu-
larly, and then wound for further processing.

The steel cord belt ensures the stiffness of the tread in longitudinal and lateral
directions. Because of this, improvements are seen in longitudinal force transmis-
sion, directional control, and wear resistance.

10

Fig. 1.12 Calendered steel
cord (Source Continental)

1 Tires

1.1.6 Tread Rubber

After the extrusion process, the tread is cut into the required length, Fig. 1.13. The
tread is the part of a tire which has contact with the road surface, and therefore must
meet correspondingly stringent requirements for its properties. Up to four different
mixtures are generally processed. This layer of the tire is marked with a color code.
Later, this layer will be added to the tire proﬁle.

A tire’s tread is responsible for good grip, wear resistance, and optimal rolling

The ﬁrst step of ﬁnal tire assembly is the trimming of the tire carcass. The core and
the apex are bound to the inner layer using a construction drum. Once the sidewall

resistance.

1.1.7 Assembly

Fig. 1.13 Tread extrusion
(Source Continental)

11

1.1 Tire Manufacturing

Fig. 1.14 Including the
material of the carcass in the
construction machines
(Source Continental)

Fig. 1.15 “Green” tires
before the vulcanization
(Source Continental)

is fastened, the carcass package is complete, Fig. 1.14. The belt package consists of
the belt plies, bandages for high-speed tires, and the tread. It is assembled inde-
pendently from the carcass package. In the last step, the carcass and belt packages
are ﬁnally pushed together and are “married” to one another with the help of
pressurized air in the assembly station. The uniﬁed, non-vulcanized assembly,
colloquially called a green tire, is now ready for vulcanization, Fig. 1.15.

1.1.8 Vulcanization

Vulcanization is the last step to the tire production process. First, the green tire is
placed into a “baking mold” which is then sealed. The mold is then heated to a
temperature of more than 170 °C, and a set of bellows inﬂates inside the tire,

12

Fig. 1.16 Tire heating mold
(Source Continental)

1 Tires

Fig. 1.17 Final “baked” tire
(Source Continental)

pressing the green tire against the mold at a pressure of up to 22 bar. This is where
the tire receives its proﬁle, Fig. 1.16. This process is known as vulcanization in a
technical context and as baking in an informal context. After vulcanization, all tire
components are joined together in an undetachable manner, Fig. 1.17.

1.1.9 Quality Check

A visual and sensory check is the last step to the production process. The visual
inspection is carried out by a worker and is followed by machine-conducted sensory
checks, Fig. 1.18. Sensory checks include measurements of diameter and width,
checks for true-run properties such as balance and run-out force, as well as random
X-ray checks to ensure that tire components are positioned correctly within the
completed tire. It is only after these ﬁnal checks that a tire can be cleared and
prepared for transportation, Fig. 1.19.

1.2 Tire Development Process

13

Fig. 1.18 100% ﬁnal
checking (Source
Continental)

Fig. 1.19 “Pretzel-storage”
for transportation (Source
Continental)

1.2 Tire Development Process

The tire development process is an extremely complex one. For a new vehicle
model, it begins with tire design. At this stage, tire speciﬁcations are deﬁned based
on criteria such as the vehicle axle load, axle design, maximum speed, brake
installation space, and market positioning of the vehicle.

14

1 Tires

Fig. 1.20 Performance trends of passenger car tires in the last 25 years (Source Continental)

General tire performance has improved drastically over the last several decades
with respect to all characteristics, Fig. 1.20. A minimum of three to four years
before market introduction of a new vehicle, intensive studies are carried out using
prototype tires with the support of development partners in the tire industry. At this
stage, tires are tested by both tire and vehicle manufacturers. Normally, several
development cycles are necessary before the required speciﬁcations are fulﬁlled.

Every vehicle manufacturer has its own set of priorities when it comes to the
technical speciﬁcations of tires. For example, tires for Mercedes-Benz vehicles are
developed with the highest standards for vehicle safety. These standards include
excellent driving stability and exceptional comfort without disregarding rolling
resistance. Safety-speciﬁc requirements include, for instance, high-speed tests on a
rolling test rig with maximum wheel load, maximum possible wheel camber, and
reduced air pressure. Additionally, the maximum speed index of the tire is exceeded
by up to two levels. Tests such as this ensure that the structural strength of approved
tires have far greater safety reserves than is required by international standards.

1.2.1 Geometry and Load Capacity

At ﬁrst glance, the geometric shape of a tire is approximately that of a torus, a shape
which is characterized by an internal diameter, outer diameter, and width. The
internal diameter is give in inches and the width in millimeters, while the outer
diameter is described indirectly as the ratio of height to width as a percentage. The
actual dimensions, including the corresponding tolerances, are clearly described in
the standards of the European Tyre and Rim Technical Organisation (ETRTO).
These dimensions are also important for the certiﬁcation of vehicles, in that they
must be appropriate so as not to interfere with the vehicle bodywork while the
vehicle is in motion.

1.2 Tire Development Process

15

Fig. 1.21 Inﬂuential parameters of wheel geometry offset and rim width (Source Continental)

After the tire is mounted to the rim, properties such as rim width and offset gain a
special signiﬁcance, Fig. 1.21. The offset denotes the distance between the middle
of the tire and the inner contact area of the rim, that is, the part of the rim which
attaches to the wheel hub. The offset changes the width of the track for the entire
vehicle but does not change the tire properties. Rim width affects tire contour in
such a way that every half inch of rim width accounts for approximately 5 mm of
tire width. Through varying the rim offset and rim width, comfort and handling
properties can be changed.

The previously referenced ETRTO is a group comprised of tire, wheel, and tire
valve manufacturers whose goal is to promote the harmonization of European
national standards to achieve interchangeability of tires, wheels, and tire valves
throughout Europe. Dimensions, load and air pressure tolerances, and guidelines for
usage are also deﬁned jointly through the ETRTO. International equivalents to the
Inc.
ETRTO are the Japanese Automobile Tyre Manufacturers Association,
(JATMA), the Tire and Rim Association, Inc. (TRA, USA), and the Australian
Design Rules (ADR). Recommendations and speciﬁcations are agreed upon
between these various national organizations and are ultimately adopted as standard
design guidelines in the International Standards Organization (ISO). The ISO
guidelines deﬁne standard tire dimensions along with the corresponding load, air
pressure, and test conditions.

The ETRTO deﬁnes the speciﬁc diameter and width tolerances for standardized
tire dimensions. These tolerances are relatively large, and the speciﬁcation manuals
of vehicle manufacturers often prescribe narrower tolerances. These narrower tol-
erances act as a safety margin and are calculated for tires on an individual basis
based on deformations while in motion, air pressure, and residual deformation. This
ensures that ETRTO standard dimensions are not exceeded while a vehicle is in
motion and over the lifetime of the vehicle. New tires should be as close as possible
to standard ETRTO contour deﬁnitions to achieve visually appealing wheel arches,
Fig. 1.22.

16

1 Tires

Fig. 1.22 Tire dimensions

The ETRTO restrictions also help to ensure accuracy among systems which
depend on wheel rotational speed as an input signal, such as an anti-lock braking
system (ABS), Electronic stability control (ESC), and indirect tire pressure warning
system. In the case of all-wheel-drive vehicles, it is especially important to know
the differences between front and rear axle wheel rotational speeds to ensure that
stresses at the differentials do not become too large.

With regard to vehicle design, tire dimensions are used for packaging studies and
to determine wheel envelope, wheel arc, and axle free space requirements of a new
vehicle. Centrifugal force can result in a radial widening of up to 8 mm, something
which should be taken into consideration separately during accessibility tests.
Typical production and rubber tolerances should be taken into consideration when
specifying tire diameter for a new vehicle. This normally covers the design phi-
tire engineering and design
losophy of
(one-layered, two-layered, various types of carcass reinforcements, etc.). Along
with the pure standard tire contour as deﬁned by ETRTO, other contours should
also be taken into consideration when designing vehicles: tires with additional
tolerance allowances, tires with snow chains, and tires with both snow chains and
additional tolerance allowances. Consideration should also be had for the theoret-
ical maximum-size standard tire in addition to the series-ﬁtted tires. Individual
allowances should also be deﬁned for different load cases, Fig. 1.23.

tire manufacturers

individual

for

The fact that tire diameter is calculated indirectly from the tire width and
sidewall height makes it not possible to determine a unique tire outer diameter for a
vehicle. Different widths can only be compensated for through wheel offset vari-
ations. Vehicle manufacturers are interested in tire scenarios which permit at least
three different rim diameters for a corresponding tire width. In addition to being
ﬂush with the outer edge of the vehicle, which ultimately requires different wheel
offsets due to varying tire widths, the outer diameter of a tire should be comparable
so that odometers can work reliably and so that the tachometer does not read too

1.2 Tire Development Process

17

Fig. 1.23 Clearance of a tire

low. Therefore, the rolling circumference which the tachometer reads should always
be based off the tire circumference of the largest possible tire scenario. In any case,
the entire tire scenario should be approved and independently tested, Fig. 1.24. This
ﬁgure shows ﬁve tire dimensions which can be used on a vehicle and the corre-
sponding clearance contours. It is necessary to keep in mind the overall envelope,
even when snow chains, for instance, are used.

One major criterion for vehicle manufacturers while dimensioning tires is the tire
load capacity. Vehicles are essentially supported by the air in their tires. The ﬁbers
of the carcass are stretched due to the internal pressure of the tire, and the carcass is
then deﬂected depending on the load of the vehicle and the amount of air pressure
of the tire. The tensile stresses, which begin uniformly, change in a cyclic manner at
the contact surface as the tire rolls. In addition to these tensile stresses, cyclic
bending stresses also take place. Percentage of contact area also changes due to
bending torque, which is transmitted through the lower part of the sidewall to the
bead area.

Physical strain arises due to spring deﬂection. In the case of cyclic deformation,
part of the work which is done is converted into heat through the process of
hysteresis. If the heat cannot be dissipated, the tire will fail. The level of heat itself
depends on the frequency of deformation due to vehicle velocity and on the
amplitude caused by spring deﬂection and camber. Ultimately, spring deﬂection
plays a key role in the standardization of tires.

Besides analytical considerations, certain empirical factors also come into play.
In its ﬁrst approximation, nominal load capacity of a tire is proportional to the
supporting air volume, wherein the ETRTO rule set works with simple volume
formulas of a torus with a rectangular cross-section. With these formulas, there is

18

1 Tires

Fig. 1.24 Tire scenario

one degree of freedom: the k-factor. The k-factor depends on the technology and
materials used to build the tire, and should be standardized between tire and vehicle
manufacturers. For standard passenger car tires, the WdK-Guideline 99 provides a
compilation of the applicable deﬁnitions as the basis for the agreements between
tire manufacturers and vehicle manufacturers.

Another important tire parameter is the speed index, which indicates the speed at
which a tire can be operated. This value is veriﬁed through test cycles. In practice,
tires are optimized until the target speed (including reserves) required by the tire
and vehicle manufacturer are reached. The basic rule for all tire dimensioning is as
follows: the load should never exceed the load capacity. In concrete terms, this
means that wheel
load, speed, camber, and usage requirements should be
over-fulﬁlled through tire size, design, and air pressure. Figure 1.25 shows the
maximum utilization of various tires as a function of vehicle speed and speed index.
In addition to the basic rule, the boundary line for the 88% rule is shown. This rule
is speciﬁed by the ETRTO and states that a vehicle with a “typical” load should
never use more than 88% of the maximum load capacity.

1.2 Tire Development Process

19

Permitted tire utilization 
(Load capacity on tire as fuction of max. velocity and tire speed index)

Vmax self -limitation 250 km/h

T rated tire 100%
H rated tire 100%
V rated tire 100%
W rated tire 100%
Y rated tire100%
T rated tire 88%
H rated tire 88%
V rated tire 88%
W rated tire 88%
Y rated tire 88%

]
I
L
 
f
o
 
%
 
n
i
[
 
n
o
i
r
t
a
z

i
l
i
t
u
 
e
r
i
t
 
d
e
t
t
i

m
r
e
P

Valid range for criterion partial load 88% 

Max. velocity [km/h]

Fig. 1.25 Load reduction

1.2.2 Tire Requirements Book

For an exact listing of tire speciﬁcations for a new vehicle series, a manual of tire
requirements is necessary. All requirements which are applicable to tires should be
deﬁned in this tire speciﬁcations book. The requirements can be classiﬁed sys-
tematically into the categories of safety, comfort, handling, and economy, Fig. 1.26.
The safety aspects include braking distances on wet and dry surfaces as well as
properties at high speeds. With regard to comfort, a distinction is made between the
mechanical and acoustic performance of tires. Where handling is concerned, tire
properties such as cornering stiffness and lateral stiffness play decisive roles; safe
vehicle dynamics at high speeds also plays a key role.

Often, tire requirements must be varied to account for market or seasonal
weather conditions, Fig. 1.27 [7]. With all-season tires, comfort properties are
particularly important while in the case of winter tires, excellent traction properties
in winter conditions are essential. Not as critical in the case of winter tires is
high-speed performance, since winter tires fall under a statutory speed limit due to
their “mud and snow” classiﬁcation.

The creation of a requirements book is a challenging task since it is generally not
known how different
trade-offs of the individual tire characteristics are to be
evaluated. For example, it is very difﬁcult to estimate whether improvements in
rolling resistance at the expense of handling properties in wet conditions is a better
compromise than others. It is important to remember that the target criteria are a
general goal, and that compromises will exist where one criterion is able to be
improved only at the expense of another.

20

1 Tires

Fig. 1.26 General requirements for a tire

Fig. 1.27 Different target values of summer, winter, and all-season tires (Source Continental)

A speciﬁcations book for tires cannot be created independently. The require-
tires must be speciﬁed together with the vehicle’s requirements.
ments for
Figure 1.28 shows the typical disciplines considered in a speciﬁcations manual.
Development processes are dynamic; therefore, the weighting factors for individual
criteria should be evaluated afresh for each new development. Over time, these
inﬂuences. During the
factors are subject
development period of a vehicle project, framework constraints could change due to
factors such as new regulations or trends. These constraints could necessitate
“improvements” to tires, meaning wider tires, larger rims, or even larger outside
diameters. These improvements can prove to be extremely expensive to implement
during an ongoing development process.

to marked changes due to external

1.2 Tire Development Process

21

Fig. 1.28 Speciﬁcation manual for a tire dimension

Therefore, tire and wheel speciﬁcations should be meticulously and holistically
deﬁned in the speciﬁcations book, so that the deﬁnitions are maintained until the
start of series production. For this to happen, it is necessary to deﬁne tire and wheel
requirements at an early stage in a concurrent process with all stakeholders
involved: the design, purchasing, sales, marketing, and engineering departments as
well as the tire and wheel manufacturers. This is the only way that deadlines and
quality gates can be met.

The basic rules for “healthy dimensioning” are relatively simple:

tire load
capacities should never be utilized at 100%, except in the case of station wagons.
Low tire utilization or load factor is the only means of bridging the conﬂicting goals
of handling and comfort. Thus, the permitted total weight of the vehicle should be
less than 90% of the load capacity of the tires with a target of 85%. When loaded

22

1 Tires

with 5 passengers, total vehicle weight should be less than 80% of the tire load
capacity. The statistically most frequent load conﬁguration should only utilize up to
65% of the load capacity. It is important to recognize that additional weight for the
same tire scenario always lead to higher air pressures and therefore loss of comfort.
For already-produced vehicles, air pressure can only be reduced through the usage
of wider tires, larger outer diameters, or smaller wheel rims.

Using reinforced or extra-load tires as a basis for deﬁning basic parameters and
dimensions should be avoided since comfort and driving characteristics are not
optimal with these kinds of tires. Usage of reinforced tires is often unavoidable for
extremely sporty dimensions, since the width of the vehicle and outer diameter of
the tire tend to be very speciﬁc. Furthermore, the usage of reinforced tires does not
require higher air pressures but rather the higher overall vehicle weights.

Attractive-looking vehicles often have large wheel rims, and consequently rel-
atively small sidewall heights. Manufacturer-speciﬁc minimum values exist for
sidewall height, which are intended to reduce tire punctures in the ﬁeld. Sidewall
height in the case of comfort-oriented vehicles should be greater than 130 mm, and
for sporty vehicles it should be greater than 95 mm. In the sportiest of vehicles, it
should be assumed that the customer will handle the wheels and tires carefully. In
this instance, sidewall heights as low as 85 mm are possible.

The tire outside diameter is determined by the sidewall height and ultimately from
the target speciﬁcation of the tire properties. With larger outside diameters comes
more comfort at the expense of additional rolling resistance, outside noise, and
decreased mileage. The width of the tires improves the driving properties and the
operational performance (mileage) and should be matched to suit the engine power.
In the case of front-wheel-drive vehicles, the following applies as dimensional

guidelines for width:

KW
Width

40
145

50
155

65
165

80
175

100
185

130
195

155
205

For standard or all-wheel-drive vehicles, the following applies:

KW
Width

130
185

150
195

165
205

185
215

200
225

220
235

240
245

260
255

Tires are often dimensionally restricted on the lower end due to front axle brake
space requirements. In these cases, disadvantages could include reduced comfort
properties owing to reduced tire stiffness potential. Therefore, it should be ensured
that brakes are as small and compact as possible, so that brake installation space
does not necessitate larger rim sizes. This dimensional restriction makes it clear
that, in the case of heavier and faster vehicles, a concept of using larger tires with
higher load indexes is to be preferred over a concept using higher air pressure.
Furthermore, the greater the variety of motors within a vehicle platform, the greater

1.2 Tire Development Process

23

the compulsion towards having a wider variety of usable tire dimensions to suit
varying weight, mass distribution, and engine torque characteristics.

Having tire lifespans which are consistent with vehicle quality is extremely
important to customers. Tire lifespans above 30,000 km are considered appropriate
in European markets. A useful formula for calculating tire lifespan, assuming equal
tire technology across all manufacturers, can be made based on the amount of wear
tread/proﬁle depth (cid:1) width (cid:1) circumference. A consistent
material on a tire:
strategy for tire deﬁnition which complies with maximum rolling circumference
gives the following systematic relationship between an automobile’s base tire
conﬁguration and optional tire conﬁgurations (SA).

Basictire X
SA1
SA2
SA3
SA4

Width

H/B
Y

Diameter Udyn Result
c
Z
*c
x + 20 mm y − 5 mm
Z
z + 1 in. *c
y − 5 mm
X
x + 20 mm y − 10 mm z + 1 in. *c
x + 20 mm y − 15 mm z + 2 in. *c

Appearance rear
Side appearance
Side and rear appearance + sporty
Appearance + sporty character

Regarding brake installation space considerations, one key factor is the rim
width. The ETRTO allows up to four rim widths for a given tire dimension. From a
standardization perspective, the nominal width is an important value. The nominal
width is where a tire is seated “optimally” on a rim. According to the ETRTO
standard, rim width changes will not result in different air pressure but will modify
comfort characteristics. For example, smaller rim widths provide more comfort
while sacriﬁcing stability. When vehicle weights, top speeds, and maximum camber
values are ﬁxed for all engine conﬁgurations through the time of model phase-out, it
is ideal to follow the following tire stipulations:
(cid:129) Determination of maximum rim sizes
(cid:129) Determination of minimum tire outside diameter based on necessary puncture

(cid:129) Deﬁnition of tire outside diameter based on the vehicle speciﬁcations manual

(cid:129) Deﬁnition of rim width and inset based on the guidelines from the vehicle

(cid:129) Determination of minimum wheel diameter based on brake installation space

strength

and tire load capacity

speciﬁcations manual

requirements

(cid:129) Matching of rim diameter to brake size as a function of engine conﬁguration
(cid:129) Derivation of minimum tire widths based on load capacities and engine torque
(cid:129) Comparison of different tire scenarios, for example, same outer diameters and

rolling circumferences

To secure the concept and installation space of the tire/wheel scenario of a
vehicle, the ﬁrst constraints to be considered should be the relationships between
regulations, design, and wheel envelope packaging. In terms of regulations, the

24

1 Tires

different wheel covering speciﬁcations between Europe and Japan at a minimum
should be considered. From a design point of view, the mudguard overhang, wheel
sickles, ratio of front axle wheel sickle to rear axle wheel sickle, and view of the tire
from behind are important criteria.

With regard to packaging, a realistic tire installation space which considers all
approved tire/wheel combinations along with driven axles, sometimes with snow
chains, together with all of the relevant customer driving maneuvers, is necessary.
This installation space should allow for tolerances, spring paths, steering move-
ments, and the elasto-kinematic movements of the axles and tires. Packaging is
based on corresponding digital tire contours, which simulate the real installation
space as closely as possible. It is useful and necessary to verify the tire/wheel
scenario as early as possible in the development cycle to avoid time- and
cost-intensive changes to the hardware, Fig. 1.29. It is relatively tedious to create a
tire envelope. First, a rotating body is generated based on the tire’s shape. This is
subsequently moved in the computer-aided design (CAD) system in a way which
corresponds with the vehicle’s steering kinematics, wheel kinematics, and
elasto-kinematics. The result is a “tire mountain” contour. This process should be

Fig. 1.29 Wheel envelope (“tire mountain”)

1.2 Tire Development Process

25

automated, so that the installation space requirements can be coordinated with the
vehicle packaging, Figs. 1.30.

Additionally, designs should be veriﬁed through real on-vehicle testing as early
as possible. For this purpose, a vehicle can be clad with foam blocks or wax plates
in the region of the wheel housing. The tire can be then exercised to the extremes
allowed by the vehicle’s suspension, thereby collapsing the foam blocks or inter-
fering with the wax plates. A 3D measurement machine can then be used to record
the engineering design can be
the area of free travel. Through this process,

Fig. 1.30 Wheel envelope package in the overall vehicle

Fig. 1.31 Tire clearance measurement in the vehicle with a 3D measurement machine

26

1 Tires

Fig. 1.32 Tire clearance measurement in the vehicle with wax plates

validated, Fig. 1.31. Snow chain ﬁtment is veriﬁed through noise tests, visual
inspection tests, or wax sheet analysis with measurements of the residual thickness
at bottlenecks, Fig. 1.32.

1.3 Project Management

Project management is necessary during tire development to bring the technical
speciﬁcations as deﬁned by the speciﬁcations book to fruition. In addition, cost and
weight considerations as well as project reviews are an integral part of project
communications between vehicle and tire manufacturers. Quality gates are used to
ensure that projects run on schedule and that appropriate intermediate targets are
deﬁned. Monitoring of the project timeline and targets is an essential part of the
sampling communications between tire development partners.

The function of the “Technical Key Account Manager” at the tire manufacturer’s
end is to serve as the interface between the vehicle manufacturer and the tire
development team. Its task is to moderate and be responsible for the processes
taking place at the tire manufacturer’s end. The purchasing department communi-
cates mainly with the Commercial Key Account Manager of the tire manufacturer,
who usually supervises the Technical Key Account Manager.

Tires are released from testing once all relevant tests have been completed.
Figure 1.33 describes a basic tire development process along with typical iteration
loops.

The development partners of tire companies offer little support

to vehicle
manufacturers regarding the topic of weight, and almost no support with costs.
Project plans and schedules are no doubt available, but these often do not ﬁt with
in the tire
the development processes of a vehicle manufacturer. Therefore,

1.3 Project Management

27

Fig. 1.33 Tire development process

development process, uniform competencies and controls are necessary on both the
vehicle and tire manufacturer’s side in terms of project work, driving assessment,
and testing, Fig. 1.34.

At the vehicle manufacturer’s end, project work includes the creation of various
decision committees and preparation of speciﬁcation books and overviews. Also
important is determining camber-dependent tire inﬂation pressures, vehicle weight,
as well as the schedule tracking. Furthermore, a database must be maintained,
discussions regarding tire samples must be organized, and regular driving evalua-
tion dates must be agreed upon.

The main task of vehicle manufacturers, however, is testing. For tires to be
tested, appointments must be made with the tire manufacturers, testing materials
must be transported, and vehicles must be arranged and ready for use. Subjective
driving evaluations, where the goals are understood by all parties, must be planned
and executed. Furthermore, wear and noise must be evaluated and test bench
measurements (rolling resistance, high-speed uniformity, ﬂat spots) must also be
carried out.

28

1 Tires

Fig. 1.34 Holistic approach to tire development

Cooperation between development partners must be friendly and congenial. In the

most trusting relationships, development partners can also self-certify evaluations.

1.3.1 Costs

Realistic cost evaluations (transparent calculations) are seldom available from tire
manufacturers [5]. This is largely because the original equipment segment is only a
small part of a tire manufacturer’s proﬁt margin when compared to the replacement
tire market. The extent
to which the replacement market business subsidizes
original equipment (OE) business depends on the repurchase rate of the car owners.
Normally, customers of premium automobile manufacturers have a higher repur-
chase rate for tires when compared to customers who buy vehicles in lower-price
segments. For vehicle manufacturers, this point is important since more exotic tires
(including run-ﬂat tires and folding spares) are comparatively more expensive.
Additionally, exotic tires tend to be more complex in their construction. This isn’t
just a material consideration, but rather an overall consideration which includes a
special production process which requires increased energy consumption.

The cost drivers in the development of new tires are the chassis and performance
requirements which are deﬁned in the speciﬁcations manual. This includes rolling
resistance, behavior in wet conditions, tire dimensions, load capacity, and speed
reserve. From an engineering and design perspective, the number and quality of tire
plies as well as tread/proﬁle depth and rubber mixtures are relevant to costs.

Major cost drivers in the manufacturing process are the requirements for the
tire’s radial and lateral uniformity, its conicity, and balance. Tire manufacturing
equipment, quantity produced, and construction complexity also inﬂuence cost.

1.3 Project Management

29

The price of a tire is more important to vehicle manufacturers than the cost.
Prices are derived from costs with due consideration for constraints such as com-
petition, image, and exchange rates. Markups are appended on basic production
costs. These markups arise from the overall business environment as well as brand
positioning. Transport costs, technology surcharges, and overall price increases due
to proﬁle styling and general appearance are also common.

As long as actual tire costs are not transparent, tire price must be taken as the

basis of calculations.

1.3.2 Weight

An analytical approach is useful in the case of tire weight. Representative tires can
be divided into three parts when using this approach: the treading package inclusive
of the steel belt, the sidewall without the bead package, and the bead package itself.
Using a simple calculation where the surface area of a torus is determined, speciﬁc
weights related to each tire dimension can be determined for each component, with
weights calculated from neighboring parameters using a similarity approach. The
calculation of weights from individual parts with the corresponding geometric
formulas then becomes rather simple, Fig. 1.35.

Fig. 1.35 Weight analysis for determining speciﬁc part weights

30

1.3.3 Schedules

1 Tires

In the tire development process, an agreed-upon schedule is of decisive importance.
The sequencing of the processes which are based on vehicle development schedules
and time tables must be agreed upon. For this, it is necessary to calculate schedules
backwards from the target completion date.

Prototype development
(Vehicle prototype will be built)
Planning supplier
Consensus on development order
Delivery 0. Test sample
Feedback 0. Test sample
Series development
(First vehicles planned from series parts)
Planning supplier
Consensus on development order
Delivery 1. Test sample
Feedback 1. Test sample
Order 2. Test sample
Delivery 2. Test sample
Feedback 2. Test sample
Release
Production
(Zero-series starts)
Production test order
Order for production test delivery
Re-delivery for production testing

Pre-run (months)

10
9
3
1
Pre-run (months)

20
19
13
11
11
8
6
5
Pre-run (months)

2.5
5
0.5

1.3.4 Tire Database and Documentation

Tire drawings also contain a speciﬁcations manual which describes the require-
ments for the tire manufacturer. The drawing is speciﬁc to each vehicle manufac-
turer, Fig. 1.36. The development goals are described in the speciﬁcations manual
relative to a reference vehicle and reference tires. The speciﬁcations manual itself
contains requirements regarding measures such as ﬂat spots, high speeds, wear,
noise, rolling resistance, braking distance, and grip on wet surfaces. Once a tire is
prototyped and tested,
the various development versions are documented.
A comparative diagram—the so called spider graph—is important in this respect. It
is generated automatically from the database and provides a quick overview of
various tire properties, Fig. 1.37.

1.3 Project Management

31

g
n
i
w
a
r
d

e
r
i
T

6
3
.
1

.
g
i
F

32

1 Tires

Fig. 1.37 Spider graph, generated from development database

Development overviews are necessary for documenting results, which are also
saved into a development database. This development database should also contain
release documentation and results, Fig. 1.38. Of decisive importance is the uni-
formity and consistency of the development process. It should be possible to
generate workshop orders, test driving lists, overviews, and release documentations
(even graphical representations) from the development database. The operating
instructions should also be able to be produced from this database for all tire/wheel
combinations and air pressures [5]. This capability should be executed with extreme
care, since it is relevant to product liability.

1.4 Mobility Strategy

Tires are wear items which face extremely high stresses. Tires routinely encounter
foreign objects such as nails, glass, and metal, not to mention the rest of the outside
world. Furthermore, tires are frequently subjected to misuse where tire failure is a
possibility such as driving over curbstones.

If a vehicle has no other damage, its mobility ultimately depends on its tires.
Hence, it is highly desirable from a customer standpoint to minimize the possibility
tire-related breakdowns, even though such breakdowns are relatively rare from a

1.4 Mobility Strategy

33

Fig. 1.38 Release document, generated from the development database

34

Fig. 1.39 Frequency of tire
failures (Source Dunlop)

1 Tires

statistical perspective. Such statistics have always led to discussions regarding the
usefulness of spare tires. According to one set of statistics shown in Fig. 1.39,
foreign object penetration is the cause of about 80% of tire-related breakdowns in
Europe. Valve and wheel defects are responsible for 10% of cases, with valve
defects usually being attributed to poor assembly and wheel defects being traced
back to misuse such as rigorous bumping into curbstones.

For several years, one of the main aims of the tire and automobile industry was
to develop wheel-tire systems capable of covering an adequate distance safely while
in a pressure-free state, even when the tire itself is damaged. The advantage of this
concept is that it eliminates the necessity to leave the vehicle to assemble the spare
tire, especially during inclement weather or on dangerous roads. One can instead
continue driving, depending on the severity of the damage and the system in place,
and reach the nearest service station or safe place. With such wheel-tire systems, it
would be possible to retain control of the vehicle even in the event of sudden
pressure loss.

The advantages of these systems do not end at safety. Such systems reduce
weight and costs when a spare wheel can be eliminated. Cars are left with larger
trunk spaces since space is “gained” through the omission of a full-ﬂedged spare
wheel.

Statistics about leakage rates in breakdown situations shows that more than 70%
of the air loss cases were creeping in nature, Fig. 1.40. This statistic suggests that an
in-car notiﬁcation in the form of tire pressure monitoring or ﬂat warnings could
allow customers to react early to such issues before facing the possibility of
complete tire failure.

In practice, it’s necessary to employ psychological considerations together with
probability considerations when deﬁning a spare wheel strategy. A customer who
has already experienced one or more tire-related breakdowns would have a different
opinion on spare wheels when compared to customers who haven’t experienced a
breakdown, or those who have been able to survive a breakdown situation with the
help of a repair kit such as TireFit. Also important to consider is whether a
breakdown is “innocent,” meaning that was caused by an unnoticeable foreign

1.4 Mobility Strategy

35

Fig. 1.40 Leakage statistics (Source Michelin)

object on the road, or by ignorance. If the failure is precipitated through a fault of
the driver, customers are usually more tolerant of breakdowns.

Fail-safe systems which allow for continued operation, albeit with restrictions
and without repair, are allowed by statue only in conjunction with an air pressure
monitoring system for safety reasons, since customers might not be able to notice
the loss of pressure without such a warning device. Furthermore, since a tire
without pressure transmits smaller longitudinal and lateral forces than a properly
ﬁlled tire, it makes sense to equip such vehicles with run-ﬂat tires and electronic
stability control. With such equipment, the necessary level of safety can be ensured
in unexpected situations such as sudden over- or understeering due to a ﬂat tire.
Driving with reduced air pressure is especially dangerous at highway speeds
since deﬂated tires experience signiﬁcantly greater stresses above 80 km/h. In this
case, the danger of a sudden tire burst increases vastly. Direct tire pressure moni-
toring systems work with the help of a sensor which is mounted on the wheel,
which is then used to display tire pressure to the driver. With such a system,
potential tire damage resulting from creeping air pressure loss can be avoided.
Indirect tire pressure monitoring makes use of the existing ABS and offers a
non-speciﬁc warning of low tire pressure for deviations in ﬁll pressure greater than
about 30%. This deviation is calculated by comparing wheel rotational speeds with
due consideration for lateral acceleration, yaw rate, engine torque, engine rotational
speed, brake pressure, and other control interventions. This calculation is possible
because the rolling circumference of a tire experiencing a lack of air pressure is
reduced slightly, leading to the affected wheel turning slightly faster than the other
wheels.

36

1 Tires

1.4.1 Full-Fledged Spare Tires

Solutions featuring full-ﬂedged tires do not have any restrictions whatsoever with
regard to wheel load and vehicle velocity. However, they do have disadvantages in
terms of weight and space requirements. Moreover, there is always the risk of
extremely old tires. With a full-ﬂedged solution, the customer theoretically has 25%
more operational performance (mileage) and the vehicle manufacturer incurs no
additional development costs. In practice, however, customers are often challenged
beyond their ability when it comes to changing a damaged tire, especially in the
case of medium- and upper-class segments with larger wheels. This conventional
solution is the most preferred among customers, provided no additional costs are
incurred.

1.4.2 Emergency Minispare and Folding Tires

space savings

from a smaller

Specially designed tires intended only for emergency uses have overall lower
weights and offer
spare tire depression.
Emergency-only tires are limited to a maximum of 80 km/h and driving behavior is
also restricted. From a testing and development standpoint, full functionality of
vehicle control systems when using these tires must be veriﬁed. Another issue with
special emergency tires is space accommodation for the damaged wheel in the event
of a breakdown. Minispare tires (narrow, high-pressure tires), Fig. 1.41, and
foldable tires, Fig. 1.42, fall into the category of special emergency tires. Minispare
tires are 60–70% of the width of a normal tire, and their functionality must be
veriﬁed through driving tests. The most important thing to consider in these tests is
the stability of the rear axle and the asymmetry of the self-steering properties.
Folding tires are also 60–70% of the width of a normal tire, and offer even more

Fig. 1.41 Minispare tires

1.4 Mobility Strategy

Fig. 1.42 Foldable spare tire

37

space savings by being packed uninﬂated and collapsed. The downside of this
solution is the requirement of a compressor and assembly prior to use. Foldable tires
are always a relatively expensive solution.

1.4.3 Tireﬁt and Self-sealing Tires

Solutions without replacement tires come with an increased risk of immobility. The
use of tire sealing kits such as Tireﬁt in conjunction with an air compressor not only
saves space and weight, but also leaves the vehicle’s dynamic properties largely
unaffected, Fig. 1.43. Such systems are cost-effective and there is no need to
physically change a tire. However, there are disadvantages of using tire sealing
chemicals as well as a greater residual risk of mobility over time. If a customer is
familiar with operating the system, repair times are relatively small (less than
30 min). During fail-safe operation, driving speed is restricted since an imbalance
can be experienced and the system should only be used until
the nearest
workshop. Statistics describing the location of common tire damage indicate that
Tireﬁt is an adequate solution in about 80% of cases.

Self-sealing tires have tire sealant pre-distributed in the tread region. Here, a
thick layer of highly elastic polymers is applied. If a nail or thick screw pierces the
tire, this layer envelopes the objects and prevents air pressure loss. Even if the
object is removed from the tire proﬁle, a self-sealing tire will continue to retain air
pressure. From a technical standpoint, such tires have vast potential. However, the
face one major issue in the marketplace: users will most often never know if the
self-sealing properties have availed themselves. Therefore, it is not necessarily

38

1 Tires

Fig. 1.43 Tireﬁt

likely that a customer will go out of their way to re-purchase such a tire.
Furthermore, like Tireﬁt, this system does not help in the case of sidewall damage.

1.4.4 Series-Manufactured Special Tires, Special Rims,

and Supporting Elements

These systems normally have high fail-safe properties and comparatively high load
capacity, making them especially well-suited for specialized safety and security
vehicles. In the event of a breakdown, there is no need to change the tire and the
possibility of a tire becoming forcibly dismounted is largely ruled out. Currently,
such systems are only available with integrated supporting elements. In these
systems, it is important to ﬁrst have reliable lubrication in the fail-safe mode and
second, that there is no contact with the supporting ring during regular driving
operations. The lubrication is necessary because the rolling circumference of the
rim or of the supporting ring differs from that of the steel belt. As a result, shear
forces are built up steadily which could lead to a thermal overload without lubri-
cation. During regular driving operations, even with twice the stationary wheel
load, there should be no contact with the rim or the supporting ring. Dynamic
shocks such as driving quickly over a curbstone should not damage the tire. Tire
pressure monitoring is a useful advantage for all systems, since tires lose their
lateral stiffness and sidewalls are deﬂected outwards during low-pressure situations.
This dimensional change should be reﬂected in the vehicle design through instal-
lation spaces which provide adequate room for tires without air.

1.4 Mobility Strategy

39

Fig. 1.44 Michelin PAX

The Michelin PAX system, Fig. 1.44, is the only system currently available in
the market for high-speed applications. The system has excellent potential as it
offers plenty of brake installation space, excellent stability under extremely high
loads, and excellent fail-safe properties. This technology was introduced in 1998
and makes it possible to continue driving up to 200 km at 80 km/h in the event of a
tire failure thanks to a rim-mounted supporting ring which bears the weight of the
vehicle in the event of total pressure loss.

The system, of course, needs a special wheel. To accommodate the supporting
inner ring, the wheel is broader and features a larger diameter than a comparable
standard wheel. Besides this, the rim is asymmetric in nature, that is, the diameter of
the rim on the inner side is larger than on the outer side. Thus, the supporting ring
can be pushed onto the rim relatively easily during assembly and more space is
offered for the brake and axle. Although it was probably the best and safest system
for special vehicles, the PAX system failed to catch on. The primary reasons for this
were the immense added weight of the supporting ring, the costs, and above all,
incompatibility with normal tires.

All in all, tires with supporting elements and two-part wheels often have good
fail-safe properties at the price of signiﬁcant added weight and tedious mounting
procedure. Thus, their usage in automobile applications is limited, and is seen
almost exclusively in military or low-speed applications.

1.4.5 Run-Flat Tires

The principle behind the run-ﬂat or “self-supporting” tire is based on reinforced tire
sidewalls which are generally 4–9 mm thick depending on the tire design.

40

1 Tires

Fig. 1.45 Self-supporting tire

Figure 1.45 illustrates this difference. The reinforcements are made of special
rubber compounds which remain stable under changing temperatures in order to
improve heat resistance. This is necessary because tires, particularly the sidewall,
can face temperature extremes of over 180 °C in the fail-safe mode.

Self-supporting tires with reinforced sidewalls have a great deal of charm at ﬁrst
glance: there is no need to change wheels in the event of a breakdown, no need for a
spare tire cavity, and the fail-safe distance remains large despite the usage of
conventional rims and wheel assembly techniques. Driving properties in the
fail-safe mode are also acceptable.

Disadvantages, however, include signiﬁcant reductions in spring comfort and
rolling resistance [8, 9]. There are presently a number of run-ﬂat tire designs
available which differ essentially only in their fail-safe distance. The smaller the
fail-safe distance, the fewer comfort-related disadvantages of a tire. First generation
run-ﬂat tires are able to be operated for 80 km in their fully utilized state, while
second-generation run-ﬂat tires can be operated 30 km in the fully loaded state and
over 80 km under average load conditions. In a Mercedes-Benz context, these tires
are known as Mercedes Original Extended or MOE tires. Such tires are nearly
equivalent to conventional tires with regard to their usage properties.

Self-supporting tires are not sensible in every aspect. The goal of such tires is to
minimize chaﬁng against the bead by the inner liner at the tread region during
fail-safe operation. Thus, the sidewall must be designed in such a way that the tire
doesn’t collapse upon itself when faced with zero air pressure. Figure 1.46 shows
the optimal dimensional combinations for run-ﬂat tires. From this diagram, it is
evident that tires which use larger rims, which are therefore more expensive, make
for better run-ﬂat tires. This is due to smaller sidewall heights; it is easier for an
airless tire to be supported by a smaller sidewall than a larger sidewall. This also

1.4 Mobility Strategy

41

Fig. 1.46 Meaningful dimensions for run-ﬂat tires

Fig. 1.47 EH2+ rim

demonstrates that
decreases as the size of the rim increases (for the same outer diameter).

the size differences between run-ﬂat

tires and normal

tires

Furthermore, this demonstrates that normal tires which have a sidewall height of
less than 90 mm will always have some fail-safe properties similar to that of run-ﬂat
tires.

One potential problem which exists during operation of tires without air is a
potential for the tire to dismount from the wheel. This issue can be tackled with a
special EH2+ rim, which must be used in conjunction with a tire which features
good uniformity and tire assembly pressure characteristics, Fig. 1.47.

42

1 Tires

The EH2+ concept does face some disadvantages: higher weight (about 2 kg/
wheel), higher costs, more tedious assembly, and reduced brake installation space
(brake disc diameter must often be reduced depending on brake design). Thus, EH2
+ rims are rarely seen. Another solution, which features none of the disadvantages
of the EH2+ rim, is simply increasing the force with which the tire bead is pressed
against the rim, that is, the bead pressure preload force.
When comparing standard tires with run-ﬂat
tires,

the fail-safe properties,
resistance to tire–wheel separation, and improved vehicle dynamic properties are
clearly advantageous in favor of run-ﬂat tires. However, there are some disad-
vantages: In the area of wear characteristics, the wear pattern, operational perfor-
mance, and noise levels are affected due to the slightly different rolling mechanics
of a run-ﬂat tire. Comfort characteristics such as tire uniformity, ﬂat-spotting, and
vertical comfort are affected due to additional sidewall spring stiffness. Rolling
resistance and weight are affected by the additional material
requirements.
Furthermore, accessibility in terms of groove wandering is also poorer owing to
increased camber stiffness. The potential for tire optimization on the chassis
developer side is limited when it comes to run-ﬂat tires.

With the introduction of self-supporting tires, it has become clear that the effects
of thickened sidewalls on operational stability must be evaluated afresh [10]. For
example, there is a signiﬁcant relationship between achievable fail-safe distance and
effects on operational stability. Figure 1.48 shows the impacts that a run-ﬂat tire can
have on component durability. Similar relationships are seen when wheel size
changes, or when tire pressure is increased.

Fig. 1.48 Standard tires and
run-ﬂat tires in comparison

1.4 Mobility Strategy

43

One component which must be designed with consideration for the constraints
imposed by self-supporting run-ﬂat tires is the wheel, whose inner rim ﬂanges are
usually reinforced for run-ﬂat tires. This trend of reinforcement continues all the
way from the wheel, through the chassis, and into the car body. Because of this
need for reinforcement, it is also necessary to ﬁnd an easily measurable parameter
which can correlate to potential component damage.

Cleat drum tests are a promising approach at describing the inﬂuence of energy
transfer characteristics in relation to operational stability [11]. In this approach,
small cleats with deﬁned heights and shapes are mounted on a drum test rig. Then,
system responses are evaluated after being measured by multi-component mea-
surement hubs, Fig. 1.103. This approach is attractive because it can measure both
vertical as well as longitudinal tire deﬂection properties. However, it is not a simple
evaluation method due to the complexity of the test setup.

Quasi-static vertical stiffness has the greatest impact on dynamic transfer char-
acteristics. Tires with high spring stiffness are more susceptible to spring action,
thus transferring shocks from the ground more forcefully than a vertically “soft”
tire. Such interrelationships have been documented for a long time, and vertical
stiffness has been therefore incorporated as a design constraint for the load col-
lectives in vehicles with low-cross-section tires. Vertical spring stiffness has always
been a tire property which correlates positively across the various premium tire
manufacturers. Tire spring rate is a physical parameter which depends on the tire
pressure, taken as a quotient of force and distance.

In any case, it is still important to review the dynamic vertical spring stiffness in
addition to the static vertical spring stiffness while examining the properties of
extended-mobility tires. Dynamic spring stiffness of run-ﬂat tires is not overpro-
portioned when compared to standard tires.

One parameter does increase signiﬁcantly (by up to 40%) in run-ﬂat tires is the
lateral stiffness. Since this also causes up to a 20% reduction in response time over
the relaxation length, it also impacts the entire chassis response (e.g. through higher
yaw damping). It is important to know the relationship between the fail-safe dis-
tance and the remaining properties. For this, the weight, spring stiffness, rolling
resistance, and ﬂat-spotting properties are shown with respect to the fail-safe dis-
tances achievable with the speciﬁed tires, Fig. 1.49.

Fail-safe distances in a deﬂated state are achieved with the help of sidewall
reinforcements. The aim of these reinforcements is to achieve a smaller spring
deﬂection in a deﬂated state, so that the sidewall and tread come into contact only
for higher wheel loads if at all. Through this, thermal and mechanical loads can be
reduced. The most conspicuous relation exists between static spring stiffness
(comfort) and the fail-safe distance. Since fail-safe distance depends on sidewall
thickness, the spring deﬂection characteristic curve for tires with fail-safe properties
in the deﬂated state carries special signiﬁcance. Due to necessary sidewall and bead
the weight of tires with fail-safe capabilities increases
region reinforcements,
steadily with the achievable fail-safe distance.

Static vertical stiffness, which represents the ratio of the wheel load to the spring
deﬂection for a stationary wheel, also increases as wheel load increases, Fig. 1.50.

44

12

11,5

11

10,5

10

9,5

12,3
12,2
12,1
12,0
11,9
11,8
11,7
11,6
11,5
11,4
11,3

1 Tires

Run - Flat

Weight

[kg]

Vertical stiffness [N/mm]

Run - Flat

Soft- Run - Flat

MOE 

Soft - Run - Flat

MOE 

320

300

280

260

240

220

Standard

Standard

0 

20

40

60
Runflat distance [km]

80

100

120

140

0 

20

100

120

140

40

60
Runflat distance [km]

80

Rolling resistance [‰] 

Flatspot [%]

Soft- Run - Flat

Run - Flat

Run - Flat

Soft - Run - Flat

MOE 

Standard

MOE 

Standard

190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100

0 

20

60

40

80
Runflat distance

[km]

100

120

140

0 

20

40

60

100

120

140

Runflat distance

80
[km]

Fig. 1.49 Tire characteristics versus fail-safe distance

Fig. 1.50 Typical vertical stiffness over the wheel load for standard and run-ﬂat tire

This is due to the substantial sidewall reinforcements along with a higher static
vertical spring stiffness. This means that the tires are compressed less overall, which
means that the sidewalls are pressed together with less force. As a result, greater
fail-safe distances can be achieved as will be explained later in more detail. Rolling
resistance is the result of energy losses that come into play as tires undergo

1.4 Mobility Strategy

45

deformations as tires are run in and run out. This can further be attributed to the
damping properties of rubber.

While measuring for ﬂat-spotting,

the tire excitation potential (variation in
vertical forces) and restitution characteristics (damping of force oscillations) are
measured. Flat spots occur due to thermal “freezing” of deformations, or from
relaxations in the tire at the contact surface. The greater the difference between the
running temperature of a tire and its environment, the more this ﬂat-spotting
behavior occurs. The reason for this is a partially non-elastic behavior of the tire’s
materials. In the case of MOE or run-ﬂat tires, the ﬂat spot intensity increases
(which consists of the excitation potential and restoration characteristics) as
fail-safe distance potential increases. Owing to reinforced sidewalls and the asso-
ciated rise in deformed volume and damping, material deformation recedes more
slowly after the stress is relieved, which means that ﬂat spots are damped at a
slower rate than is seen with standard tires. Besides this, larger force variations can
occur in the vertical direction since the increased vertical spring stiffness of MOE
tires gives rise to a larger force for the same spring deﬂection.

Due to the stiffer sidewall design, an approximately 5% increase in circumfer-
ential stiffness is seen in run-ﬂat tires when compared to standard tires. This leads to
greater circumferential forces which are transferred in large part to the wheel,
chassis, and car body resulting in greater overall stress to the system. This is
especially true in the case of rough terrain driving, which is often slower and where
the tire is often in the progressive range of the spring characteristic. In the case of
run-ﬂat tires which have a very large radial stiffness, this has the potential of
reducing individual component lifespans by more than half. The use of run-ﬂat tires
on vehicles which are not speciﬁcally designed for them is therefore not advisable.
In run-ﬂat tires, attempts are made to reduce the damping characteristics of the
ﬁller as much as possible (sidewall reinforcing material). These characteristics
correlate with the level of heat dissipation of the tire, where increased damping
would cause the tire to heat up too much due to the tumbling effect. Simultaneously,
a reinforced sidewall must have adequate damping properties so as to guarantee
good comfort levels. This compromise between fail-safe mode requirements and
comfort is the main challenge faced by tire manufacturers in the development of
run-ﬂat tires. Stiffer sidewalls and increased circumferential stiffness, as a result,
have proven to increase the coefﬁcient of friction in the case of MOE tires. Besides
this, the lower deformation levels of the tire at the start of brake applications leads
to a higher coefﬁcient of friction for the same slip in comparison with standard tires.
The greater circumferential stiffness of MOE tires means that the oscillations
generated by braking are dampened much faster than standard tires. This means that
ABS regulation can be more stable due to smaller oscillations during the circum-
ferential forces that arise during braking. The results of measuring the coefﬁcients
of friction and the increased gradient in the frictional coefﬁcient-slip curve of an
MOE tire, in combination with more stable ABS regulation, lead to a reduction in
braking distance. Since the coefﬁcient of friction is never utilized at 100% by an
ABS for reasons of stability, a shorter braking distance is possible in the case of
MOE tires for “slip-regulated” ABS braking owing to the higher coefﬁcient of

46

1 Tires

friction in comparison with standard tires. This means that dry braking distances
can be shorter by up to 5%.

The effect of chassis geometry on tires is an important aspect to consider. Under
full load, that is, with axles loaded with the permitted total weight on corresponding
axles, and as a result of existing negative camper, the inner side wall (especially at
the rear axle) bears a signiﬁcantly heavier load than the outer sidewall. The increase
in negative camber due to increasing axle load can be observed mainly at the rear
axle in vehicles with independent rear suspension systems due to the axle kine-
matics. Furthermore, run-ﬂat tires have operational performance (mileage) char-
acteristics which are 10–20% less than that of good standard tires due to their higher
surface compression in the shoulder region and subsequent increased wear of the
shoulder area. Due to negative camber, tire damage (especially under a full load)
cannot be identiﬁed from the outside in most cases, but rather only when the inner
side wall is examined.

In a deﬂated state, that is, the fail-safe mode, the tire sidewall can break and
crack, which ultimately results in noise and vibrations so intense that any “normal
driver” would most certainly stop to investigate. Since the structure of the entire tire
at this point is already very weak, it is no longer possible to continue driving. If the
sidewall breaks down completely (along the entire circumference of the tire),
the vehicle is no longer ﬁt for driving since it will sink onto the rim ﬂange or the
remaining bead.

In the case of vehicles with rear wheel drive, the front axle wheel load is
determined by the larger, changing slip angle. In this case, the entire load in the
fail-safe mode is rendered more innocuous due to the negative camber values than
at the rear axle due to the absence of driving torque. This causes the tires at the front
axle to fail at the outer shoulder or on the outer sides, whereas the rear axle tires can
fail due to damage to the inner sidewall. An additional load for the tires comes from
the drive torque that is to be transmitted. Since the wheels are driven constantly,
tires must overcome greater resistance due to its deﬂated state. This can lead to the
tread “twisting” relative to the bead or the wheel, causing additional stress on the
sidewall.

The relationships between the fail-safe distance and vehicle parameters are also
important. Therefore, one should always ensure comparable environmental inﬂu-
ences (temperature, cloud cover, etc.) during calibration or measurement test drives.
Wheel load is not shown explicitly in this ﬁgure, but it is speciﬁed with the load
index of the tire and expressed as % utilization. The exponential nature of the
approximation curve is evident. This makes it possible to estimate fail-safe dis-
tances which are achievable under various load states. The relationship between
fail-safe distances and wheel load as shown above is similar for all tire dimensions
in terms of the curve shape, Fig. 1.51.

Relatively unknown, however, is the relationship between residual air pressure
and the fail-safe distance which is achievable with it. The essentially higher fail-safe

1.4 Mobility Strategy

47

Fig. 1.51 Relation between fail-safe distance, wheel
(Source Bridgestone)

load, camber, speed, and temperature

Fig. 1.52 Fail-safe distance under residual air pressure

distance for a residual air pressure of 0.2 bar is related to the lower deﬂection path,
since the static spring stiffness is increased only very slightly. This concept is also
applicable to normal tires, Fig. 1.52, which sometimes achieve surprisingly high

48

1 Tires

fail-safe distances with only residual air pressure. The necessary prerequisite for
this kind of performance, however, is a vehicle velocity which does not exceed
80 km/h.

When a tire is operated without air, lateral stiffness changes, and therefore the
outward deﬂection of the sidewall also changes. In vehicles which have been
developed for run-ﬂat tires, the installation space for tires operating in the fail-safe
mode is also reserved. Of course, this is applicable to all fail-safe concepts. To
determine how much space is necessary for a tire in fail-safe mode, measurement of
a tire in such a state is necessary. Tools for this include a line laser, Fig. 1.53, or an
optical measurement system which can record the complete sidewall deformation,
Fig. 1.54. In this case, the measurements at 90° and 180° should be especially
considered since these are the regions in which there are parts of the car chassis and
body with which the tires should never come into contact. Such contact could result
in rapid destruction of the tire or wheel suspension components. These clearances
should, of course, be veriﬁed on real vehicles as well.

Fig. 1.53 Sidewall deformation measurement (Source Bridgestone)

1.5 Testing and Validation

Fig. 1.54 Sidewall
deformation visualization
(Source GOM, Gesellschaft
für optische Messtechnik)

49

1.5 Testing and Validation

Testing the requirements which are outlined in the speciﬁcations book plays a key
role in tire development. These tests should be carried out in subjective as well as
objective manners. Objective tests are carried out in indoor (laboratory) and outdoor
(test track) environments. Here, it is important to test not only whether tires meet
their predeﬁned characteristic data, but also to test for differences between different
samples of the same tires.

Tire properties can be classiﬁed into the categories of driving stability, driving
comfort, steering characteristics, driving safety, longevity, and proﬁtability. These
points can also be further subdivided. Driving stability includes stability in both
straight-forward driving as well as stability in curves. Driving comfort includes
suspension comfort, noise comfort, and operational smoothness. With regard to
steering characteristics, differentiations are made between small angle range, pro-
portional range, and limiting range. Driving safety characteristics include grip
properties as well as how well a tire is seated on a rim, Fig. 1.55.

There are some tire properties which are particularly important, and there are
often conﬂicting targets which are very difﬁcult to resolve [12–14]. Thus, the most
valuable tool in tire development is testing. Particularly important is trust and
cooperation between development partners so that self-certiﬁcation, i.e. measure-
ments conducted at the development partner’s end, can be allowed. However, this is
only possible if the basic testing procedures are known and that testing stands are
calibrated between one another.

50

1 Tires

Fig. 1.55 General tire characteristics (Source Continental)

A typical testing checklist contains a total of about 50 parameters. This includes,
for instance, measurements of wet grip, rolling resistance, and wear, as well as
high-speed, aquaplaning, endurance cycle, uniformity, geometric stability, and
winter tests. Flat-spot behavior is also studied on the vehicle as well as on a test
bench. Driving tests are conducted both on test tracks and public roads, with the
former locale allowing tires to be pushed to their limits, and the latter simulating
operations under real-life conditions.

One must differentiate between the testing procedures and equipment used by
the tire manufacturer and those which are used on the vehicle manufacturer’s end.
Typically, the following testing procedures and equipment are used at the tire
manufacturer’s end:
(cid:129) Longevity of tires per ECE R 30, ECE R 54, DOT 109, DOT 110
(cid:129) Belt and bead endurance
(cid:129) Tire endurance
(cid:129) Plunger test
(cid:129) Determination of the bursting pressure
(cid:129) Hydraulic analysis
(cid:129) Bead seating
(cid:129) Pressing machine
(cid:129) Bead force characteristic
(cid:129) Proﬁle depth measurement
(cid:129) Geometry
(cid:129) Contour measurement
(cid:129) Side wall deformation
(cid:129) Tire characteristics
(cid:129) Force & movement (F&M)
(cid:129) Tire uniformity

1.5 Testing and Validation

51

(cid:129) Rolling circumference
(cid:129) Footprint
(cid:129) Determination of the footprint pressure distribution
(cid:129) Footprint
(cid:129) Resistance to electrical conductivity per WdK 110
(cid:129) Shore hardness
(cid:129) Tomography unit
(cid:129) Wheel measurement machine
(cid:129) Resistance to aging
(cid:129) Aging furnace
(cid:129) Temperature distribution
(cid:129) Thermography
(cid:129) Energy loss
(cid:129) Measuring the rolling resistance
(cid:129) Pressure loss
(cid:129) 30-day air pressure loss
(cid:129) Uneven wear
(cid:129) Noise harshness
(cid:129) Inner drum
(cid:129) Noise measuring test bench
(cid:129) Subjective evaluation, ride, comfort dry, handling
(cid:129) Wet handling
(cid:129) Pass-by noise
(cid:129) Interior noise
(cid:129) Aquaplaning
(cid:129) Coefﬁcients of friction
(cid:129) Tire shooting (for simulate sudden loss of pressure)
(cid:129) Winter test (ice and snow)

Important to the vehicle manufacturer are physical parameters such as the ver-
tical, lateral, and circumferential elasticities as well as the rolling circumference and
rolling resistance. Also important is the natural frequency of the steel belts relative
to the rim and the corresponding damping properties and quality characteristics
such as force variation and imbalance. None of these values are provided with the
tires, and must be determined using measurement systems.

Typical testing procedures at a vehicle manufacturer’s end include:

(cid:129) High speed
(cid:129) New tire dimensions (width and cross-section) and tire contour on deﬁned rim
(cid:129) Tire weight
(cid:129) Proﬁle depth
(cid:129) Rolling resistance 60–120 km/h
(cid:129) Rolling circumference (depending on the tire, up to 250 km/h)
(cid:129) Vertical spring deﬂection curve
(cid:129) Bead characteristic

52

1 Tires

(cid:129) Tread contact area (footprint; imprint of the tread for a deﬁned test load)
(cid:129) Tire characteristics (lateral force, aligning torque, longitudinal force, etc.)
(cid:129) Impact strength (only in the case of low cross-section)
(cid:129) Tire removal (for max lateral acceleration, as long as air pressure is reduced

until the tires are ejected)

(cid:129) Tire noise (tested during drive-by acceleration per EG 92/97)
(cid:129) Tire endurance (wear, longevity, and noise)
(cid:129) Braking distance with ABS under dry conditions
(cid:129) Side wind characteristics
(cid:129) Tire uniformity test (low- and high-speed)
(cid:129) Flat-spot measurement
(cid:129) Ease of assembly (spring pressure)
(cid:129) Subjective evaluation of tires
(cid:129) Benchmark of wet grip on asphalt and concrete
(cid:129) Benchmark of traction/braking on snow and ice (winter testing)
(cid:129) Benchmark of ﬂat-spot behavior (test bench and vehicle)
(cid:129) Benchmark of lateral aquaplaning
(cid:129) Benchmark of wet handling

There are essentially four measurement techniques which play key roles in tire

testing:

Objective absolute value measurements are obtained when it is ensured that
environmental conditions remain constant and that testing machines and equipment
are calibrated regularly, for example, with reference tires—or even better, with
specially designed test specimens. These types of measurements are obtained in the
case of ﬂat spots, rolling resistance, or geometry.

Objective relative value measurements are collected when environmental con-
ditions can have a major effect on test results. Here, measurements must be clas-
siﬁed in relation to reference tires.

This measurement technique is used, for instance, in the case of wet and winter
behavior tests as well as lap times. The measurements of an ideal test run—e.g.
during wet conditions—appears as follows:

For the next measurement, a new reference tire (Ref 3) is used with the Ref 2 tire

used again to enable a continuous comparison.

1
Ref 1

2
Ref 2

1
Ref 2

2
Ref 3

3
A

3
G

4
B

4
H

5
C

5
I

6
Ref 1

6
Ref 2

7
D

7
J

8
E

8
K

9
F

9
L

10
Ref 2

11
Ref 3

10
Ref 1

11
Ref 2

For simple measurements, such as in the case of winter tests, the Ref 2 tire can
be omitted. The result is then saved with a reference scale relative to the reference
tire, tire, e.g.:

1.5 Testing and Validation

53

[%]
−−

−0.6
−−

−4.5
0−

−3.0
0−−

−1.5
0

1.5
0+

3.0
0++

4.5
+

6.0
++

Subjective absolute evaluation permits only an overall evaluation of a param-
eter. This approach can be used when systematic relative evaluation is available and
only a conﬁrmation is necessary, for example, in the case of a replica. This type of
evaluation cannot be used for a release, and has two possible outcomes: OK or not
OK.

Subjective relative evaluation sees a set which is to be evaluated compared with
a reference set. This allows for a differentiated evaluation of tire properties. Ideally,
the evaluation of the reference tire is done at the beginning and end of the mea-
surement series. Blind tests where the driver does not know which tire is being
evaluated are optimal in this case. Even better are double-blind tests were not even
the test manager knows which tire is being evaluated, but this is only done very
rarely. Evaluations with this technique are usually based on a grading scale,
Fig. 1.56. This type of subjective evaluation can be used for subjective tire release.

1.5.1

Indoor Objective Testing

Tests which can be conducted in laboratories are exempted from weather ﬂuctua-
tions such as temperature and atmospheric humidity. Furthermore, these tests are
conducted on test benches and are thus independent of the vehicle. Therefore, the
results are always objective in that the results can be documented in numbers and
values.

Fig. 1.56 Ranking scale for subjective evaluation

54

1 Tires

1.5.1.1 Spring Press Testing

One important characteristic of tires is the “vertical spring stiffness” or “spring
rate.” This property inﬂuences the general vibration characteristics of an automo-
bile. When a tire undergoes spring press testing, the wheel which is set to be tested
is pressed by a linear drive onto a scale, Fig. 1.57. By recording the spring com-
pression distance and the force required to bring it about, a force–distance diagram
can be created. Figure 1.58 shows a spring characteristic curve for various air
pressures. The spring rate of a tire is a physical parameter and is observed as a
quotient of force and distance.

The spring rate depends on the tire pressure. In general, tires with low spring
rates offer better driving comfort because initial acceleration and dynamic wheel
load variation is captured better by the tires rather than being transferred to the
chassis. Tires with higher spring rates have better dynamic response characteristics,
which is particularly desirable in sportier automobiles.

Run-ﬂat tires have static and dynamic properties which differ from those of
normal tires. They are characterized by thicker sidewalls and therefore have addi-
tional spring stiffness. When possible, attempts are made to compare the spring
stiffness of run-ﬂat tries to that of normal tires of the same size, Fig. 1.59.

Fig. 1.57 Vertical tire
stiffness machine (in-house
construction)

1.5 Testing and Validation

55

Fig. 1.58 Spring characteristic curve for various air pressures

Fig. 1.59 Absolute vertical
deﬂection as sum of
exhausted carcass and the
carrying air

56

1 Tires

It is possible to subtract the spring stiffness of a deﬂated carcass from the total
spring stiffness of an inﬂated tire to determine the spring stiffness of the supporting
air. Figure 1.60 shows the actual measurements of normal tires as well as the
measurements for ﬁrst and second-generation run-ﬂat tires.

Since the spring stiffness of the carcass (“structural spring stiffness”) and the
spring stiffness of the air together constitute the total spring stiffness of an inﬂated
tire, it is relatively easy to determine the carcass spring stiffness of a deﬂated tire at
various wheel loads, Fig. 1.61.

This value can be used as a simple criterion for the vibration dampening char-
acteristics of the thickened sidewall. Based on this approach, a group of tire
durability experts from both automobile and tire manufacturers have developed a
procedure which describes a tire stiffness index (TSI). This value consists essen-
tially of the air spring stiffness and the corresponding carcass spring stiffness at 80%
and 130% of load capacity.

The tire stiffness index can be used as a measure for the technological
improvement of tire construction, Fig. 1.62. With the help of the TSI, the force
interface between the tire and chassis can be described and speciﬁed more accu-
rately in the future for tires of every size and design. Thus, vehicle manufacturers
can precisely deﬁne tire spring stiffness speciﬁcations which work harmoniously
with weight-optimized chassis systems.

In addition to the TSI, it is important to transfer spring stiffness to a suitable

model for tires:

Fig. 1.60 Total spring characteristic curve as the sum of deﬂated carcass and the supporting air
for run-ﬂat tires

1.5 Testing and Validation

57

Standard tire vs. runflat tire

10000

8000

6000

4000

2000

]

N

[
 
d
a
o
l
 
l
e
e
h
W

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

RFT_2.2bar

Standard 2.2bar

RFT  0 bar

Standard  0 bar

Deflection [mm]

Fig. 1.61 Basic procedure for determining the stiffness of the carcass at an operating point

Z ¼ K (cid:1) Pa (cid:1) f b

The mathematical spring deﬂection model can be used, for instance, to describe
spring deﬂection characteristics. To calculate the parameters K, a, and b in the
formula the total error across all sub- totals of the squares of the errors of the spring
deﬂection values are minimized.

In the case of run-ﬂat tires, the mathematical approach should be extended by

adding a suitable model for deﬂated tires [10].

The tires can also be deﬂected using a wedge perpendicular to the rolling
direction. This stiffness correlates with bending stiffness of the belt and is a measure
of the rolling comfort.

Other static stiffnesses which can be described around a tire are its circumfer-

ential stiffness, longitudinal stiffness, and lateral stiffness.

To determine circumferential stiffness, a stationary blocked wheel is moved
under load in the direction of travel. The inverse, its longitudinal ﬂexibility, is
deﬁned as the longitudinal shift of the contact area relative to the rim upon
application of a longitudinal force.

Torsional stiffness is deﬁned as the elasticity of expansion around the vertical
axis at rest and under load. The torsional ﬂexibility is deﬁned as the twisting of the
contact surface relative to the rim upon application of a torque about the vertical
axis.

Tangential stiffness is measured by pressing the tire onto a plate with a deﬁned
preliminary load. From here, the plate is moved in a tangential direction, at which
point the distance and corresponding force is measured.

58

1 Tires

Fig. 1.62 Measurement protocol of run-ﬂat tires with equivalent dimensions with different TSI
values

1.5 Testing and Validation

59

Fig. 1.63 Lateral stiffness measurement

Fig. 1.64 Static and dynamic
tire vertical stiffness cz
(Source Michelin)

Lateral stiffness is measured by pressing the tire onto a plate with a deﬁned
preliminary load. Then, the plate is moved in a lateral direction at which point the
path and corresponding force area is measured, Fig. 1.63.

The relaxation length, or the distance required by a tire to build up 63%
(=1 − e−1) of its stationary lateral force value, is often determined from the lateral
stiffness and cornering stiffness. The relaxation length in millimeters is approxi-
mately equal to the quotient of the cornering stiffness in [N/rad] and the lateral
stiffness in [N/mm]. Normally, the value is about 20–30% relative to the rolling
circumference of the tire. Figure 1.64 shows the spring stiffness on a hydro-pulse
test bench.

The stiffness of a tire basically increases with the excitation frequency (dynamic
hardening). If the wheel is rolling, the spring stiffness is signiﬁcantly smaller, but
the ranking is by and large the same.

60

1.5.1.2 Flat Spot Testing

1 Tires

Tire comfort characteristics are crucial. Vehicles are evaluated on test tracks and
conclusions on comfort are drawn with the help of corresponding acceleration
sensors. Vibration characteristics in the range of 4–30 Hz—that is, shuddering,
shimmying, and engine shake—are particularly important to minimize, especially in
luxury vehicles. Tires are most notably responsible for vibrations because of
ﬂat-spotting.

Flat spots can occur, for example, when a tire heats up after a vehicle is driven at
high speed for a period of time and is then parked. The resulting temperature
difference between the parking surface and the tire will cause the bending stiffness
of the tire carcass and tread to increase in a localized area. When the vehicle is once
again driven off, the driver will feel vibrations from the wheels, steering wheel, and
seat. After a few kilometers, the vibrations will subside as the tire heats up again.
Thus, these “parking ﬂat spots” are a deformation phenomenon and decrease over
time. This phenomenon is seen less frequently in the case of carcasses made of
rayon, which are generally more stable in terms of shape.

In addition to the parking ﬂat spot described above, there are two other types of
ﬂat spots: Transit ﬂat spots occur when a vehicle remains in the same place for a
long period under relatively high temperatures, for example, during transport by
ship. Tunnel ﬂat spots can result from vehicles being driven through an oven after
being painted. Tunnel ﬂat spots can be irreversible.

The ﬂat spots described above aren’t the only possible source of tire deformities.
Deformities can also come about during the tire manufacturing process. Variations
in radial and tangential forces on new tires are measured using a measurement hub
and are plotted against one rotation of the tire. Deformities due to manufacturing
manifest themselves as a low point in radial force ﬂuctuation at one point. The
position of the low point of the variation is measured and marked on each tire. The
tire is then brought to temperature by freely rolling under a load and is stopped at its
natural low point for 1 h. The tire already has a slight ﬂattening at this point, which
is compounded by the formation of a parking ﬂat spot at the same point. If the tire
still has a ﬂat spot, the depression is again seen in the radial force variation. The
course of the curves resembles this behavior without ﬂat spots. Upon closer scru-
tiny, however, one can see that the magnitude of the low point variation is now
more than twice the initial value.

The increase in magnitude is responsible for vehicle vibrations, which is why ﬂat
spots are also known as a virtual imbalance of the tire. Deformed tires can be a
source of periodic oscillation from an external source, that is, the frequency of
wheel
one-time
excitation-per-wheel-rotation due to ﬂat spots is assumed. This frequency comes
about due to the fact that, depending on the position of the front axle tires, the
amplitude of the steering wheel can attenuate, ultimately manifesting as a shud-
dering of the vehicle’s front end.

illustrated

Fig. 1.65,

rotations.

case

the

by

In

Flat spot characteristics of a tire can be accurately determined with a deﬁned
measurement procedure. The ﬁrst step is the basic measurement, where the tires

a

1.5 Testing and Validation

61

Fig. 1.65 Flat spot-measurement in the vehicle

have a low level of imbalance and high tire uniformity values with no ﬂat-spotting.
After this, the tire is warmed through approximately 20 min of highway driving and
is then parked for 1 h. After the ﬂat spot has formed, it is measured based on
acceleration at the steering wheel and driver seat console. The measurement is
conducted at the speed where the axles are excited at their natural frequency.
Subsequent testing should be performed on a curved test track, so that swaying can
manifest itself. In the case that a test must be carried out in a straight line, the
pressure of one of the front wheels should be reduced.

Flat spot measurements can also be performed using a high-speed test rig,
Fig. 1.66. In this test, the drum is accelerated to 200 km/h, where the measurements
begin, and then is allowed to slow to 30 km/h. The deformity or uniformity of the
tire is thus measured at high speeds, making for a high-speed uniformity (HSU) test.
After determining the low point, the tire is warmed up by running it once again
(60-km distance at 150 km/h) and is then parked at this point for 1 h. This is the
worst case for radial force variation. At this point, the tire already has a slight
ﬂattening which then becomes more pronounced due to the formation of the ﬂat
spot at the same place.

Figure 1.67 shows a comparison of two very good tires which have different
speed indexes. Typically, the tire with the higher speed index has the poorer results.
This occurs essentially because tire manufacturers must use additional reinforcing
material in order to attain higher resistance to high-speed conditions.

1.5.1.3 Tire Contour

The tire contour is the tire’s outline measuring from the inner rim ﬂange across the
side ﬂange, across the tread, and from the second side ﬂange to the rim ﬂange on the

62

Fig. 1.66 Tire vibration test
bench (Source HaWiTec)

1 Tires

outer side of the rim, Fig. 1.68. The rubber nubs, which are present in the case of
new tires, and the tire grooves are not of importance to the tire contour.

A contact-free test bench is used to measure and evaluate tire contours. Here, a
complete wheel is ﬁxed vertically on the test bench and the tire contour is scanned
with a distance-measuring laser based on the triangulation principle. To remove the
proﬁle grooves from the measured contour and to achieve the required diffuse
reﬂection, the tire is covered with adhesive tape at the measurement point. The laser
is ﬁxed to a robotic arm which can be moved over the contour of the tire in a
controlled manner.

The measurement of the tire contour is generated automatically based on the
scanned data, Fig. 1.69. Tire contour measurements are needed for various areas
within vehicle development and for series manufacturing, and is therefore digitized,
Fig. 1.70. Of particular interest here are the “non-standardized dimensions” of a
tire. That is to say that while the maximum width and diameter of a tire are precisely
speciﬁed, there are either very generic or no standardized speciﬁcations for the
transition regions between the sidewall and tread.

1.5.1.4 Rolling Resistance/Rolling Circumference

The rolling resistance is deﬁned as the longitudinal force in relation to the wheel
load under a free-rolling condition and depends on vehicle velocity and tire air
pressure. The rolling resistance can also be reviewed as the force which opposes the
direction of motion of a loaded, rolling wheel. Rolling resistance is a result of

1.5 Testing and Validation

63

Fig. 1.67 Flat spot measurement on the test bench

energy losses which occur during the permanent displacement of the tire while it
runs over a ground contact surface. This energy loss can be attributed to the
damping properties of a tire [15], where mechanical energy is converted into
thermal energy resulting in an increased tire temperature. Reduction of rolling
resistance has been a particularly important development goal in recent years.
Figure 1.71 shows a trend of decreasing tire resistance since 1980, using the
average rolling resistance values of the Mercedes-Benz S-, E-, and C-Class.

64

1 Tires

Fig. 1.68 Tire contour

Fig. 1.69 Tire contour measurement machine (in-house construction)

Grip and rolling resistance are affected by hysteresis and energy loss; however,
these are manifested in different frequency ranges. In this regard, it is important to
consider the “rolling” process itself. When a tire is rolling while under load, the
contact surface is deformed from the beginning of its contact with the ground until

1.5 Testing and Validation

65

Fig. 1.70 Measured values and speciﬁcation of the min/max tire contour

Fig. 1.71 Rolling resistance trends

66

1 Tires

Fig. 1.72 Ground pressure distribution of a stationary tire and a rolling tire

the end of it. This structural deformation brings about a loss of energy—the rolling
resistance—which acts against the rolling movement of the tire, Fig. 1.72.

Tire surface deformations which generate adhesive potential occur at frequencies
between 100 and 1000 Hz. Deformations of the tire structure occur with each
revolution of the tire, which means about 15 Hz for a passenger car tire at a speed
of 100 km/h.

The rolling resistance of a tire can be described by the coefﬁcient of rolling
resistance (longitudinal force/wheel load). This value is non-dimensional and is
described as a percentage. Sometimes, rolling resistance is expressed in kilograms
and the wheel load in tons. In this case, the same rolling resistance coefﬁcient would
be found.

In modern rubber tire compounds, desired properties can be set through the
speciﬁc distribution of ﬁller materials. The challenge is not so much in creating
mixtures which have low rolling resistance, but rather in making mixtures which
combine low rolling resistance with low abrasion and good grip values. Silica
mixtures make it possible to optimize grip and rolling resistance independent of one
another. As a ﬁller material, silica forms lumps as opposed to strong natural
compounds with polymer chains like carbon black does. Short distances and strong
bonds between particles leads to a highly dissipative material in the region which is
relevant to rolling resistance. Binding additives belonging to the silane family allow
silica and polymer chains to form the desired compound.

Two auxiliary sources of rolling resistance exist: aerodynamic resistance of the
rotating wheel due to air turbulence and the slip movements between both the tire
and road surface and between the tire bead and rim.

As the contact area meets the road, three deformations occur on the tire: bending
of the tire midline, sidewall, and tire bead; compression of the running surface or
tread of tire; shear of the tread and sidewalls. Within the contact surface, the rubber
blocks of the tread are pressed together and compressed under the action of the

1.5 Testing and Validation

67

wheel load. At constant speed, the forces and torques are at equilibrium. This can
happen only if a driving force is acting at the center of a wheel: this force acts in a
direction opposing the force of rolling resistance.

Rolling resistance increases as tire pressure decreases. Low air pressure reduces
the compression of the proﬁle blocks, which normally improves rolling resistance,
while simultaneously increasing bending and shear stresses within deformed tread
areas. The coefﬁcient of rolling resistance drops slightly as wheel load increases,
because viscoelasticity decreases as temperature increases. Simultaneously, the
magnitude of the force of the rolling resistance increases with the load since an
increase in load leads to more bending and shear movements in the tread area. On
the whole, it is found that the force of resistance increases as utilization increases,
but that the coefﬁcient of rolling resistance decreases. As air pressure increases, the
rolling resistance as well as the coefﬁcient of rolling resistance decreases, Fig. 1.73.
Passenger car tire rolling resistance increases moderately up to a speed between 100
and 120 km/h. At higher speeds, it increases markedly. This increase is justiﬁed by
signiﬁcant increase in aerodynamic resistance of the rotating wheels and through an
increase in strong tire oscillations.

To get a reliable picture of the rolling resistance for a passenger car tire, several
methods and devices have been developed for measuring rolling resistance both on
test benches and on roads. One measurement device which is often seen among
automobile and tire manufacturers is the external drum test bench, Fig. 1.74. Test
environment parameters play a key role in testing, particularly the heat exchange

Fig. 1.73 Power dissipation and coefﬁcient of rolling resistance in relation to air pressure and
wheel load

68

1 Tires

Fig. 1.74 Rolling resistance and rolling circumference test bench (Source Schenck)

between the tire and the ambient air as well as the steel drum. Even when the
ambient air temperature is kept constant, local heat ﬁelds are formed around the tire.
These heat ﬁelds dissipate to different extents depending on air turbulences through
the tires and the steel drum. A tire attains an operating temperature of 20–60 °C
only after it has been in motion for about 30 min, with even more time being
required to reach a stable temperature. After the initial half-hour, however, any
change seen in rolling resistance is negligible. For this reason, a minimum run-in
time interval of 20 min is useful when measuring rolling resistance between several
speeds.

Studies show that rolling resistance increases in proportion to the roughness of
the road surface. The “toothing effect” describes that small peaks in the road can
penetrate tread blocks, thereby leading to additional rolling resistance. Such local
deformations lead to the known phenomenon of energy loss.

When measuring deceleration, the drum/tire system is accelerated slowly to a
speed slightly above 80 km/h. The motor is then decoupled from the drum, and the
system rolls independently until it comes to a standstill. This method produces a
measurement of system deceleration from 80 km/h, from which the rolling resis-
tance can be inferred.

While measuring resistance force at the wheel hub, the center of the test rim is
ﬁtted with a vertical load cell (dynamometer). As soon as the tire begins to roll more
slowly than the drum, the drum tries to “pull the tire down,” and this force is
measured with the dynamometer from the center of the wheel.

Similarly, torque is measured at the test drum’s axle. For this, a sensor is
integrated into the test drum which captures the torque which is generated through

1.5 Testing and Validation

69

the force of rolling resistance. The power consumption by the drum motor can also
can also be used to measure rolling resistance. To ensure that the test drum rotates at
a constant speed, the electrical motor should be powerful enough to overcome the
rolling resistance.

The deformation of a rolling tire leads to energy losses and hence rolling
resistance. Using a test drum with a ﬁnite radius, tires are deformed more strongly
than on a road. Therefore, the tire’s curvature radius is taken into consideration by
reducing wheel load.

Conventional determination of rolling resistance values is based on a deﬁned test
process. The tire pressure is checked and documented. Tires are warmed before
every measurement to ensure that the tires have an equivalent thermal equilibrium
for every speed tested, so that the rolling resistance retains a constant value. Since
tire manufacturers determine the rolling resistances of their tires using different test
benches, a benchmark comparison is possible only if the test benches themselves
have been veriﬁed and calibrated.

Actual rolling resistance of a vehicle depends on the air pressure and load
(utilization). Within a family of tires, the following empirical relation stands to
calculate the rolling resistance:

Rollingresistance ¼ K (cid:1) pð(cid:3)0:4Þ (cid:1) Fzð0:85Þ

In addition, camber and toe-in both inﬂuence vehicle rolling resistance. Camber
has a relatively small impact on rolling resistance, with a 1° camber change
resulting in a rolling resistance increase of 1–2%. On the other hand, a 1° total
toe-in (0.5° slip angle) results in about a 10% increase in rolling resistance.

Measurement of the rolling circumference, which is particularly important for
odometer and tachometer design as well as for some types of tire pressure moni-
toring systems, is carried out on the same test bench in a common test cycle,
Fig. 1.75. The rolling circumference is the distance covered for each rotation of the
wheel under slip-free rolling. It is represented as a function of the vehicle velocity.

Fig. 1.75 Rolling
circumference over speed for
various air pressures

70

1 Tires

Rolling circumference depends on various conditions, the greatest of which is the
wheel load, followed by slip, vehicle speed, and ﬁnally, wear.

The dependency of the rolling circumference on the tire’s air pressure makes it
possible to use the rolling circumference to provide input data for tire pressure
monitoring systems. However, this is only possible if all other dependencies are
known and have been eliminated in the ﬂat roll warning algorithm. The most
important thing here is to take the wheel load into account: as load increases, the
rolling circumference decreases. See Chap. 3 for more information regarding tire
pressure monitoring systems.

1.5.1.5 Tire Uniformity

The main quality features of a tire are its balance, its geometry (radial and axial
run-out), tire uniformity, and conicity value. These variables should be tested on an
assembled wheel with a tire uniformity machine, Fig. 1.76. “Wheel wobble” is
primarily due to faulty tire balancing, poor uniformity values, and/or distorted
middle centering due to improper assembly. If tire uniformity improves after being
remounted in the same position, this indicates that the initial assembly was poor due
to improper balancing. Basically,
the overall quality of the complete wheel
assembly tire uniformity should not be worse than the zero rim value. The tire

Fig. 1.76 Tire uniformity machine (Source ZF Passau)

1.5 Testing and Validation

71

uniformity measurement results in Fig. 1.77 show the amplitudes and phase dia-
grams of a tire’s uniformity in radial, lateral, and longitudinal directions over
different velocities.

High-speed tire uniformity (TU)

is increasingly being measured with a
high-speed test rig, Fig. 1.66, as part of the production process. In a test cycle, it is
important to measure the standard uniformity, static and dynamic balance, geometry
(e.g. with a laser light section measurement process), and high-speed uniformity up
to 200 km/h. Collecting these measurements makes it possible to determine the
relationship between uniformity, balance, and high-speed uniformity in one pro-
cess. This ultimately allows for a more secure level of quality assurance.

Fig. 1.77 Tire uniformity measurement

72

1.5.1.6 Tire Balance

1 Tires

For a body that rotates about an axis in its operating state, it is possible to view its
distribution of mass relative to the axis of rotation. The imbalance of the rotating
mass is known as its balance.

Imbalances give rise to rotational centrifugal forces, which result in reaction
forces in the bearings. To determine the magnitude of imbalance from the reaction
of the bearings, signals emitted by vibration dampers and an angular position
encoder are processed by an imbalance measuring device.

A precision balancing machine is a measurement device which can determine the
size and angular position of a tire’s imbalance. Owing to its precise methods
(horizontal attachment), it is considered a “reference test bench,” Fig. 1.78.

When a wheel is balanced, only one balancing weight should be used for each
rim ﬂange or balancing plane. After weights are applied, the complete wheel should
be tested for residual imbalances. In both static and dynamic tests, this imbalance
should not exceed 5 g. During re-testing, this imbalance should not exceed 8 g.
A total balancing weight of 60 g should not be exceeded.

Wheel balance has major impacts on tire uniformity at maximum speed. This
phenomenon is often used for studying chassis robustness. An imbalance of 30 g at
the high point of the ﬁrst wheel harmonic creates an additional longitudinal exci-
tation of a tire due to the Coriolis forces which come into existence through varying
spring deﬂection speeds. The vertical force excitation of the ﬁrst harmonics is even
expunged by the centrifugal forces for a given velocity by preventing the softest
point on the tire from deﬂecting more strongly. In this case, of course, the second
harmonic becomes dominant.

Fig. 1.78 Precision balancing machine (Source Schenck)

1.5 Testing and Validation

73

Fig. 1.79 Effect of imbalance on high-speed TU

The vertical excitation is represented by a 30-g imbalance at the lowest point of
the ﬁrst harmonic of the radial force. The centrifugal force then acts at the softest
part of the tire and changes the local spring deﬂection signiﬁcantly. The variation in
longitudinal force changes only slightly here. Figure 1.79 shows the effect of
additional imbalances at the high point and low point on the ﬁrst harmonic of the
radial force and tangential force.

Using special assembly methods, such as matching and balancing, minor
non-uniformities can be compensated for. Unlike a tire,
is a rigid
structure. Deviations from the ideal round contour occasionally appear nevertheless
but these deviations can be usefully exploited.

the wheel

When a rim is ﬁrst connected with a tire, radial migrations mainly result in force
variations. If radial migrations of the rim and tire are distributed carefully, minor
variations in stiffness can be mutually compensated for. The matching process
during industrial tire and wheel assembly makes it so that the maximum radial force
of the tire is arranged diametrically opposite to the maximum outward radial
migration. Thus, the variation in radial forces of the wheel and tire unit can be
largely minimized.

1.5.1.7 Forces and Torques

The forces and torques created by tires are largely responsible for the dynamic
behavior of a vehicle. In measuring these behaviors, the slip angle characteristic
describes the movement of a tire along a curve whereas the µ-slip characteristic
describes the traction and braking potential.

74

1 Tires

Fig. 1.80 Tire characteristic rig (ZF Passau)

When these characteristics are measured on special tire test rigs (F&M machi-
nes), the input variables include wheel load, slip angle, camber, longitudinal slip,
and driving velocity.

Indoor test rigs are useful owing to their high reproducibility. Figure 1.80 shows
a universal test rig, where slip angle and camber can be adjusted. Typical results are
lateral force and aligning torque against the slip angle [16].

External drum test rigs have the tire being pressed against the outside of a drum,
usually having a 2-m outer diameter. The drum can be lined with metal bellows
with a corresponding surface, or which can also be glued over with emery cloth as
is seen on safety walking surfaces. Asphalt or concrete layers are not possible due
to centrifugal force effects. The advantage of this type of system is its small
installation space and ease of construction.

Internal drum test rigs have larger dimensions, with the drum diameter often
measuring over 3.50 m. Here, asphalt or concrete can be used as track surfaces
since the coatings are unable to detach due to centrifugal force. Wet, snow-covered,
or even icy conditions can even be simulated [15].

Flat band test rigs see the tire being pressed against a circulating band made from
pliable metal material. The treadmill is given additional support by a bearing the
region of the wheel contact area. Contact between the tire and track is ﬂat, but the
surface of the circulating steel band is problematic since its coating must be pliable
and ﬂexible. One of the main challenges here is achieving an optimal level of lateral
control and regulation of the steel band.

1.5 Testing and Validation

75

Fig. 1.81 Tire measurement bus (in-house construction)

Fig. 1.82 Longitudinal force measurement

Outdoor test rigs such as the one seen in Fig. 1.81 make it possible to conduct
tire measurements on real road surfaces [20]. The measurement bus is able to mount
two passenger car wheels between the front and rear axles on each side of the
vehicle. The right wheel represents the actual test wheel while the other wheel is
used as compensation for the forces exerted by the bus. Figure 1.82 shows the
longitudinal force of various tires on snow-covered tracks against the longitudinal
slip.

There are huge differences between test-rig procedures and real-world condi-
tions. This is often a reason for unsatisfactory correlation between dynamic

76

1 Tires

simulation and measurements. Therefore, it’s extremely important to development
measurement procedures which measure as realistically as possible.

Wheel load, lateral force, speed, and camber can be measured on the vehicle or
can be computed with the help of a simulation. These values can be speciﬁed or
controlled using test rigs, however, lateral force must be controlled through slip
angle. This combination of factors makes it possible to reproduce real tire loads on
test rigs.

Another approach is to measure at constant tire sliding velocity. Tire charac-
teristic maps are usually measured at constant speed, which can give rise to
unrealistically large sliding velocities at the tire footprint [21]. To avoid this, speed
should be determined in such a way that the sliding speed remains constant. Also
beneﬁcial is that this technique leads to approximately constant tire temperatures
during measurement.

Furthermore, measurements can also be done with tire states which are similar to
those which occur under real conditions. If we consider the state space of the wheel
load and lateral force, it can be seen that only small ranges can be attained during
driving maneuvers. These regions can be traversed through special procedures [16].
The inﬂuence of temperature can be proven in measurements. Figure 1.83 shows

the cornering stiffness of a tire during the warm-up process on a test rig.

A holistic approach to understanding the inﬂuence of temperature was realized
with Project TIME (tire measurement) [22, 23]. The main goal of this project was to
arrive at a deﬁnition of a uniform tire test procedure for test rigs and measurement
vehicles which enables the comparative measurement of the static slip angle
characteristics of passenger car tires. Sensitivity studies in this project show that the
inﬂuence of temperature, the curvature of the drum, as well as the wear and coating
of the track surface is signiﬁcant enough to be taken into consideration for the

Fig. 1.83 Cornering stiffness over the tire temperature (Source University Karlsruhe)

1.5 Testing and Validation

77

deﬁnition of measurement procedures. It is helpful to adhere to the conditions that
exist while driving realistically. For this reason, the stationary circular drive which
is often used as an ISO test (constant radius, increasing velocity) is not used as the
reference test. Instead, a test drive known as the cruising test along a circular track
with alternating curves of constant radius would be useful. Besides, this test has the
advantage of preventing one-sided wear of tires and that the tire temperature will
not correlate with the lateral acceleration.

Measurements with instrumentation vehicles show that speciﬁc combinations of
input parameters, that is, wheel load, camber, and slip angle, occur. For every
vehicle and axle considered, there is a clear functional relationship between these
variables. The combinations that occur for each axle type can be represented as a
function of a single parameter, for example, as a function of lateral acceleration.
A slip angle of up to 12° and camber angle of up to 6° are commonly encountered
orders of magnitude. The maximum wheel load sits at about 1.4 times the load
index of
the
above-mentioned range of realistic combinations of wheel load, camber, and slip
angle. To avoid extremely high wear of the tire, the number of measurement points
which are distributed over this region should be as small as possible. The distri-
bution should also reﬂect the stresses on the tire under realistic driving conditions,
Fig. 1.84.

the tire. The measurement procedure will have to cover

Furthermore, it should also be kept in mind that the results of the measurement
should be converted in characteristic map ﬁelds with the help of tire models which

Fig. 1.84 TIME procedure

78

1 Tires

will permit their usage in a vehicle simulation. The mathematical requirements for
the accuracy of these models should also be considered:

++++ Cornering stiffness, camber stiffness for nominal wheel load
++++ Conical forces, angular forces,
+++

State-space in the region of the nominal wheel load 0.2 (cid:1) nominal wheel
load,
Cornering stiffness, camber stiffness in the region of the nominal wheel load
0.2 (cid:1) nominal wheel load
State-space up to the maximum
Remaining measurable regions
Extrapolation in the remaining regions

+++

++
+
O

It should be possible to parameterize the model owing to accuracy requirements.
Moreover, this model should be independent of the direction of operation. Conicity
as well as structural lateral forces and torques should be considered correctly. It
should be possible to remove the offset lateral forces as well as the offset aligning
torques (conicity and structural lateral force independent of each other) easily.
Cornering stiffness, camber stiffness, and coefﬁcients of friction should be easily
scalable. Parameters should be mutually independent, so that the necessary regu-
larity is present when the parameters are identiﬁed.

For every parameter, an adequate number of sampling points should be avail-
able. The sensitivity of individual parameters should be of a similar scale as the
others. Furthermore, the number of parameters should be as small as possible.

The tool used for identifying parameters should have adequate consideration for
possible error. Measurement errors for the procedure in question—for example,
measurements of noise and variations in wheel load—should be determined. The
same applies to the determination of errors for the characteristic values, such as
cornering stiffness. One model that has been developed to meet these requirements
is the MF-TIME [22].

This tire model has been designed together with the TIME measurement pro-
cedure in such a way that the above prerequisites are fulﬁlled. Still, parameter
identiﬁcation remains a relatively tedious process which can be only partially
automated.

Before starting with parameter identiﬁcation, the measurement drift should be
analyzed and eliminated. To do so, the tires are measured constantly without slip
angle and camber using the TIME procedure. The ﬁrst step pertains to the basic
properties of cornering stiffness, camber stiffness, and pneumatic trail over the
wheel load. For this, key values (bright lilac) are computed analytically from the
linear part of the TIME procedure and determined, for instance, using a least square
method. This same technique is then frozen and used as the standard procedure for
additional processes, Fig. 1.85.

In the second step, the offsets (turquoise) and the remaining linear parameters
(lilac) are determined for small slip and camber angles and frozen once again. In the
third and last step, the parameters for large slip angle (yellow) are determined,
Fig. 1.86. Measurement and calculation using a virtual MF-TIME test rig is shown

1.5 Testing and Validation

79

Fig. 1.85 Cornering stiffness, camber stiffness, and pneumatic trail model

in Fig. 1.87. Finally, results should be represented in the form of characteristic
curves, Fig. 1.88.

Ultimately, real tire forces can be determined without correction factors from ﬂat
track measurements and a validated vehicle model. If no measurements are avail-
able during the concept phase of a vehicle, simulations will have to be carried out.

1.5.2 Outdoor Objective Testing

Outdoor measurements, as the name suggests, are carried out in the open. Here, a
differentiation is made between tests which are carried out on public roads verses
those which are carried out on test tracks. Due to variations in environmental
conditions, it is relatively difﬁcult to evaluate and compare results. Therefore, the
environmental conditions should always be documented and one should always use
comparisons with reference tires.

1.5.2.1 Wear Endurance

Tires are examined with respect to operational performance (mileage) and durability
before being released into series production. Tire wear endurance tests are carried
out on test tracks and on public roads and the tire wear patterns are captured and

80

1 Tires

s
p
e
t
s

n
i

n
o
i
t
a
c
ﬁ

i
t
n
e
d
i

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
P

6
8
1

.

.

g
i
F

1.5 Testing and Validation

81

Fig. 1.87 MF-TIME measurement and computation

evaluated. Such tests help tire developers get speciﬁc potential statements on
respective tires or tread proﬁles. The various parameters, such as tread pattern
depth, and air pressure, should be documented and evaluated. Figure 1.89 shows a
set of tires for which the proﬁle height was measured several times during endur-
ance testing. It is important that the wear be uniform and that the extrapolated
operational performance (mileage) meets expectations.

A single endurance test alone would not reveal much. Factors such as season
(100%), road (200–300%), vehicle (100%), tire course, and driver (1500%) can have
major inﬂuences on results. It is for this reason that tests should always be carried out
in convoys, where two vehicles with identical conﬁgurations should be tested with
driver and tire changes. During testing, the tread pattern should be evaluated for noise
and tread depth should be measured once about every 5000 km. Special attention
should be paid to irregularities in wear patterns, such as middle wear, saw-toting, or
ﬂuting. After endurance testing, rim ﬂange wear should also be noted, Fig. 1.90. Rim
ﬂange wear is an abrasive process which has a marked effect on the rim ﬂange seat.
Also important is knowing the load collective during the endurance test. This
can be done through analysis of the g-g diagram, where longitudinal acceleration is
plotted against the lateral acceleration and the a-cross-V diagram, that is, the lateral
acceleration is plotted against speed [24].

Figure 1.91 shows a typical highway collective on the left, characterized by
relatively low lateral and longitudinal acceleration levels. Highway entries and exits
are clearly visible on the left side. On the right side is a curved country road with
jerky driving. Here, the ranges between longitudinal and lateral acceleration ranges
are signiﬁcantly larger.

82

1 Tires

t
n
i
r
p
r
e
g
n
i
F

b

,
a

8
8
.
1

.

g
i
F

1.5 Testing and Validation

83

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

8
8
.
1

.

g
i
F

84

1 Tires

Fig. 1.89 Evaluation of endurance

Irregular tire wear occurs mainly due to chassis settings and the design of the
chassis [25]. The effects on tire wear due to these factors can be more or less
pronounced. For example, negative camber creates a larger contact area on the inner
shoulder due to the skewed positioning of the tire relative to the contact surface.

1.5 Testing and Validation

85

Fig. 1.90 Wear of rim ﬂange in the tire and wheel

Because of this disproportionate contact area, the inner shoulder has a larger
sliding area as it passes the tire footprint, hence facing a greater amount of wear.
Similarly, owing to a shift in footprint, a positive toe-in creates a longer contact area
on the outer shoulder, therefore giving the outer shoulder a larger sliding area,
Fig. 1.92.

important

The goal should be to achieve an optimal ratio of toe-in and camber to achieve a
balanced level of wear. Generally, neither toe-in nor camber should be extreme.
Most
together with
low-cross-section tires >35%, create self-reinforcing wear of the inner shoulder,
which can no longer be compensated by the toe-in. Figure 1.93 shows the paths for
various wear magnitudes as a function of chassis settings.

large camber values,

to recognize is

that

The graph makes it evident that excessive camber and toe-in has a negative effect
on tire wear. Furthermore, we see also the line of rectangular ground pressure

86

1 Tires

Fig. 1.91 Endurance load collective for highways and a country road

Fig. 1.92 Footprint under camber

1.5 Testing and Validation

87

Fig. 1.93 Optimal setting of the chassis with respect to wear (Source Michelin)

distribution as well as the line of balanced forces as a function of toe-in and camber.
Here, it is evident that the lines lie in a similar region, i.e. for wear that is as uniform
as possible, and that the toe-in and camber should be present in a speciﬁc ratio
which depends on the given tire size.

In addition, care should be taken to ensure that the inner shoulder is not over-
strained through modiﬁcations to the track inclination under longitudinal forces. In
more concrete terms, this means that the wheel should not go too strongly into
camber when the brakes are applied, and that the toe-in should not be too large
during acceleration.

A reduction in camber prevents the self-reinforcing effect of wear while rolling
forward in a straight line. The increase in toe-in helps to reduce inner shoulder
run-in and shifts the wear towards the outer shoulder while moving in a straight
line. However, this is only a workaround.

Wear characteristics can be reproduced on the test rig as well [26]. There are
methods for representing non-uniform wear, reproducing measured load collective,
or for recreating simulation results. In all test rig measurements, it is important that
the tire isn’t thermally overstrained. It is also necessary to bind the wear of the
rubber, for example, with talc or stone dust.

88

1 Tires

Fig. 1.94 Utilization of traction force (Source Michelin)

1.5.2.2 Properties on Wet Roads

Wet road characteristics of tires are some of the most important safety features. The
reason for this is simply that customers very often unknowingly use a much higher
level of tractive force in wet conditions than during dry road conditions, Fig. 1.94.
On a dry track, the typical distance of the coefﬁcient of friction present from the
longitudinal or lateral force is very large. On a wet track, however, this is not the
case. It is important to inform customers of this difference through education, but it
equally important to use the options which are available to keep the coefﬁcient of
friction between the road and the tire as high as possible under wet conditions. It is
additionally important to measure the coefﬁcients of friction on both asphalt and
concrete road surfaces [27].

The wet-slip measurement is carried out on a circular track, Fig. 1.95. The
comparison factor while driving along circular tracks is the coefﬁcient of friction
which is achieved by a tire on wet tracks featuring different surface coatings.

The time required for a vehicle to take one lap around an irrigated circular plate
of a deﬁned diameter is measured by means of a light barrier. To minimize driver
inﬂuence on measurements, approximately seven laps are completed and a mean
value is calculated from the fastest ﬁve laps. With this mean value and the circle’s
diameter, the coefﬁcient of friction can be determined.

To prevent outside conditions from negatively inﬂuencing mutual comparison of
the measured values, two additional comparison tires should be used. At the start of
the test drive, the ﬁrst comparison tire is tested ﬁrst, followed by the second, which
must be identical in terms of make and dimension in order to enable corrections to
be made. Afterwards, the test tires are measured.

After three to four tests, the initial comparison tire is used again to document any
changes that may have taken place in the testing environment. Furthermore, at the

1.5 Testing and Validation

89

Fig. 1.95 Circular track Mercedes-Benz Untertürkheim

end of the measurement drive, the second comparison tire should be used as the
penultimate tire and the ﬁrst comparison tire should be run again as the last tire after
a testing series. The second comparison tire is intended to correct changes in the
coefﬁcient of friction for the ﬁrst comparison tire, since this value can change
throughout the course of a measurement day. Final results still must be classiﬁed
with respect to tire dimensions, wherein the average of the current competitors
represents the 100% mark.

Time is also measured for wet handling tests, Fig. 1.96. Wet handling tracks
pose special challenges to road constructors since these stretches should have
smooth asphalt with as little hysteresis friction as possible, so that tire measurement
is selective. Often times, these test tracks are regularly polished with truck tires
under increased sip angle or with special brushes. Lap times during wet handling
are just one criterion; the subjective response under wet conditions is far more
crucial.

1.5.2.3 Lateral Aquaplaning

To study the lateral aquaplaning properties of a tire, vehicles are driven through an
irrigated curve multiple times at increasingly higher speeds, until the vehicle skids.

90

1 Tires

Fig. 1.96 Wet handling track (Michelin)

Using acceleration sensors which are attached to the vehicle, vehicles are measured
for adequate ground adhesion that is, whether any lateral acceleration exists or if it
is skimming over the surface of the water, resulting in the vehicle slipping tan-
gentially off the curve.

For testing and measurement purposes, a 5- to 7-mm ﬁlm of water is ﬂowed onto
a track with a 2–3° incline, Fig. 1.97. Very important is that the water ﬁlm retains a
constant height or thickness throughout testing. When driving through the watery
basin, it is preferable to use an electronic speed limiter or cruise control. Cones are
set up on the testing track to allow drivers to adjust for the correct steering angle for
the measurements at the earliest possible moment, and so that the vehicle can move
along the curve without any adjustment.

All measurements for a set of tires should be carried out one after another,
because any eventual pause would lead to cooling and therefore a change in the
rubber mixture. Additionally, all measurements should be carried out in the same
way.

Individual speeds should be the same for all tires, and tests should be carried out
at equal intervals. The new tires should have been used carefully for 300 km before
being mounted to the vehicle. Before the ﬁrst measurement and again after all tires
have been measured, reference tires should be measured. This provides proof that
measured tires are comparable.

As a result, the achievable lateral acceleration is able to be plotted against
vehicle velocity. A parabolic increase is seen in the lower speed range, v2/r. In this

1.5 Testing and Validation

91

Fig. 1.97 Aquaplaning measurement in Papenburg

range, no aquaplaning occurs and the tire still adheres completely to the track
surface. The maximum lateral acceleration is a measure of how much water the tire
can push back in the boundary regions while still maintaining adhesion to the track.
This value is a major factor in tire evaluations.

In Fig. 1.98, the speed value of the maximum lateral acceleration indicates the
point beyond which the tire exhibits aquaplaning characteristics. The slope of the
decreasing side is a measure of the behavior of the tire at higher speeds. It indicates
whether the tire is still in a position to restore contact with the track after aqua-
planing has occurred. The value of the integral below the curve is also used as a
criterion and shows the aquaplaning ability of the tire at best. A very good tire has a
steeply increasing edge, a high value of the maximum lateral acceleration at high
speeds, and a ﬂat decreasing edge until the boundary region.

1.5.2.4 Run-Flat Properties and Tire Unseating

In order to determine run-ﬂat properties of a tire, in addition to simply knowing the
pure maximum fail-safe distance of a tire without air, it is important a tire remain
seated on the rim. This is why various tire unseating tests are carried out.

Usually, except in the case where consumer run-ﬂat distance is being calculated,
tests are carried out with the electronic stability control (ESC) deactivated and with
a partial load. The tire valve is removed so that there is no chance of air pressure
building up due to heating. The run-ﬂat distance is one that is measured for the
customer, which is comprised of curved parts, sometimes poor road conditions, as
well as fast interstate highways. These tests are carried out on test tracks such as

1 Tires

Hersteller

Profil
Brandnummer
a-max
v
Bemerkungen

bei

a-Integr %,

Dimension
Luftdruck

Michelin

MXM

G5-8

1
76,97

225/60 R16

100,00 %

2,0/2,2

4,58
bei
Vergleichssatz

Yokohama
2
70,70

3,65

bei

G1-4

AVS-TW1-W

225/60 R16

72,60 %

2,0/2,2

R.390

Yokohama
3
64,50

3,27

bei

G7-10

225/60 R16

49,28 %

2,0/2,2

Michelin

MXM

4
76,19
4,61
Vergleichssatz 2. Messung

G5-8

bei

102,16 %

225/60 R16

2,0/2,2

1

2

4

W220 Bereifung 16"
225/60 R16

92

 
]
s
s
/
m

l

[
 
n
i
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
e
c
c
a
 
l
a
r
e
t
a
L
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5

4

3

2

1

0

Vorderachse

3

55

60

65

70

75

80

85
Geschwindigkeit [km/h]
Velocity km/h 

90

Queraquaplaningmessung in Papenburg
Fahrzeug: W220
Messender: Härer

Aquaplaning measurement

Bemerkungen: -
Wasserhöhe: 6.5 mm

Lufttemperatur: 9 °C
Fahrbahntemp.: - °C
Anlauf: trocken

Integrationsbereich: von 60 bis 85 km/h

Entwicklung PKW
EP/GSR

Härer
19.10.2000

Fig. 1.98 Result of the aquaplaning measurement

Papenburg. What is important is that the load collective should always have the
same characteristics (g-g diagram) [24].

In tests for determining the achievable run-ﬂat distance of a tire, the compara-
bility of results for a given tire dimension is very important. Comparability can be
ensured by keeping constraints or boundary conditions such as wheel load and
environmental inﬂuences (temperature, cloud cover, etc.) as constant as possible.
Additionally, for studies which are released to the public, the “worst-case scenario”
should be veriﬁed. That is, with the maximum load conditions and with high
ambient temperatures on dry roads. This is crucial since tires can be cooled by brief
rain showers, especially the sidewall which is under enormous stress during
fail-safe operations, due to the evaporating water which cools the surface of the tire.
One important goal here is to know how the tire would behave under real driving
conditions in association with the vehicle. In this instance, the test drives should be
evaluated with respect to the following points (among others):
(cid:129) Rolling noise on various track surfaces
(cid:129) Sensitivity to lane grooves
(cid:129) Vibrations of the steering wheel, or effects of unevenness on the road (horizontal

butt joints, etc.) on the steering wheel

(cid:129) Effects of lateral joins or similar road surface characteristics in terms of noise,

jerkiness, post-pulse oscillation, etc.

(cid:129) Response characteristics of the tire to the steering wheel angle (lateral force

buildup) and centering.

1.5 Testing and Validation

93

In a test drive which measures run-ﬂat distance, an airless tire with run-ﬂat
properties with a deﬁned load is driven down a predeﬁned section of a test track
until the driver declares the vehicle “no longer drivable.” This usually happens
when the inner or outer sidewall structure breaks due to the loads and stresses,
which gives rise to an increased level of vibration and noise. While driving, care
should be taken to ensure that there is no intermediate acceleration or braking and
that curves are negotiated with due care (normal driving) to prevent the tire from
becoming unseated and to avoid strong tumbling.

Additionally, a speed of 80 km/h should not be exceeded. As soon as the vehicle
exhibits vibrations or noise due to the tires which is so strong that it is no longer
possible to continue driving normally, the test should be ended. In the circumstance
that the tire is still operable after an initial lap (50 km), a second round can be
attempted. If the tire is still operable after the second lab, the test will be ended.

In addition, there are several objective tire unseating tests. A few of these will

now be offered as examples:

In the classic tire unseating test for normal tires, the bead unseating test, the air
pressure is reduced while driving on a circular track until the tire is unseated. The
air pressure upon unseating is documented.

In the bead retention test, the front wheel (right or left) is deﬂated. Three laps are
made at a maximum possible speed on asphalt with a coefﬁcient of friction of
greater than 0.5. The test is deemed successful if the tire does not become unseated,
Fig. 1.99.

In the ramp-off test, the rear wheel (left wheel when driving in a clockwise
direction) is deﬂated. The vehicle is moved tangentially in a semicircle while a load
change is brought about by applying and then releasing the accelerator pedal,
Fig. 1.100. In this test, the vehicle begins at an initial speed of 40 km/h and is
brought in steps up to a speed of 60 km/h. The test is considered to have been
passed after three cycles.

For a double-lane change test with a deﬂated rear wheel, the velocity is increased
from 60 to 100 km/h. The test is successful upon the completion of three lane
changes at 80 km/h.

In the rim roll-off J-turn test, the vehicle velocity is increased in steps of 2.5 km/
h starting at the initial speed of 30 km/h. The left front wheel is deﬂated (right front
wheel in the case of left-handed curves). While accelerating from a full stop with
full throttle and subsequent full braking under maximum load, the test is successful
if no unseating occurs. Figure 1.101 shows a diagram of this maneuver.

Fig. 1.99 Unseating test bead retention

94

1 Tires

Fig. 1.100 Ramp-off

Fig. 1.101 Unseating test double-lane change, J-turn, and acceleration under full throttle

The rim roll-off test is an evaluation which is made with consideration for the
overall characteristics of the vehicle: full braking from 80 km/h. Here, stability is
evaluated subjectively and the braking distance is evaluated objectively. The test is

1.5 Testing and Validation

95

considered to have been cleared successfully when there is no tire unseating for a
maximum braking distance of 120% relative to the reference value.

Yet another important criterion to consider is the handling characteristics of
vehicles with deﬂated tires. Here, gentle and predictable behavior is necessary. This
is documented in the double-lane change test as well as during evaluations for
run-ﬂat distance.

In the case of self-supporting tires, misuse cases with correct tire pressure should
also be veriﬁed. Here, a deﬁned threshold is screwed onto the track at a 45° angle
relative to the direction of travel. These obstacles are driven over at increasingly
higher speeds to simulate customer misuse. After every passage over the obstacles,
the tire and wheel are examined for damage and air loss. This test is extremely
important because the creeping loss of air due to cracks in the tire carcass or in the
wheel often goes unnoticed and could result in the complete destruction of the tire.
It was found during tests that tires with reinforced sidewalls can pass this test
with higher velocities than conventional tires. This is because of the stiffer design of
the sidewall which effectively prevents impacts from being transmitted to the rim
ﬂange. In this test, absence of damage on both the tire and wheel is a prescribed
value, that is, there should be no visible damages or loss of air up to and including
40 km/h.

1.5.2.5 Winter Testing

Winter properties of tires are evaluated both subjectively and objectively. Objective
measurements are often carried out through a drive in hilly conditions, Fig. 1.102.

Direction of travel

Destination
(Top of the Hill) 

Reflektor

Vehicle with
reflektor

Start :

(Bottom of the hill) 

Sub section 1

Fig. 1.102 Driving on tracks (driving on course and serpentine roads)

96

1 Tires

A consistent track surface is important for objective tests, and changes in outside
temperature, the Sun’s rays, and snow conditions are captured constantly through
reference measurements.

Objective measurements are used, for instance, to determine the differences in
traction for different tires on snowy surfaces. Narrow curves shouldn’t be included in
these measurements, because it is not possible to ensure consistent conditions. The total
time required by a vehicle to complete a track consisting of several parts is recorded.
Here too, comparison tires (reference tires) are run as the ﬁrst and last sets of tires, and
after every three sets of test tires. Methodology includes a start-up test from rest at
2000 rpm, where the distance which is covered in 1.5 s is recorded. In the brake test,
initial deceleration is measured from 40 km/h. Lateral acceleration is recorded when a
test is conducted on a circular track with a constant steering wheel angle.

1.5.2.6 Comfort and Noise

For comfort measurement on roads, the same setup is often used as in the case of
ﬂat spot measurements. Acceleration sensors are ﬁxed to the vehicle’s ﬂoor and to
the front and rear seats. The vehicle is then driven on a reference road at a constant
speed, and the measurements from the three axes can then be used to compute the
frequency spectrum.

In the laboratory, rolling test rigs are used to determine the transfer function of a
vehicle’s chassis and suspension as it relates to a tire. Two proﬁles are established
for a given tire: ﬁrst, by itself, and then when it is attached to the test rig. The two
results are compared with one another to determine the general transfer function of
the vehicle.

The transfer function has two parts: the ﬁrst relates to the total noise inside the
passenger cabin, and the second relates to the vibrations felt at predeﬁned points in
the passenger cabin. A typical excitation test is the bump-bar, which is also used on
test rigs for objective measurements, Fig. 1.103.

Fig. 1.103 Bump-bar test rig
(Source Bridgestone)

1.5 Testing and Validation

Fig. 1.104 Noise
measurement with an artiﬁcial
head (Source Michelin)

97

Artiﬁcial head measurements are used when measuring vehicle interior noise.
The head and torso of a dummy are positioned in the front passenger seat, and an
artiﬁcial head microphone is attached, Fig. 1.104. The vehicle is then driven over a
test track at a constant velocity (e.g. 80 km/h), and the noise level for each tire is
recorded.

Outside noise levels are measured on standardized tracks, Fig. 1.105. Test dri-
vers drive into the measurement area at 50 km/h in second or third gear. The driver

Fig. 1.105 System for measuring outside noise (Source Michelin)

98

1 Tires

then accelerates to maximum speed and maintains this level until the vehicle leaves
the measurement area. The sound vibrations emitted by the vehicle as it passes by
are recorded by two microphones.

The maximum recorded sound level is considered the result of the measurement.
Although these tests are carried out at maximum acceleration, the test vehicle
engine and exhaust are clad with sound-absorbing materials. Thus, the role that the
tires play in the overall outside noise can be determined effectively.

1.5.2.7 Objective Driving Behavior

The systematic evaluation on a test segment works based on strict driving proce-
dures. Here, the evaluations are both objective (with recorded measurements) and
subjective. Once the general testing “duties” are fulﬁlled, a new “course” can be
attempted for evaluation—for example, driving freely on country roads and high-
ways without specifying a process.

Tire evaluations cannot be separated from evaluation of the overall chassis and
driving dynamic. Driving dynamic criteria, in which the tires play a signiﬁcant role,
includes maneuvers such as steering wheel angle requirement over lateral accel-
eration and hinging at 0.5 g, as well as the reaction characteristics of the vehicle.
Typically, ESC does not change the quality ranking of tires, but rather only the
track times. Nevertheless, tires should also be evaluated without ESC and with
regulated brake force distribution and ABS when possible.

Other factors that inﬂuence measurements are test conditions such as load status,
temperature, and track. Hence, vehicles should be
environmental conditions,
weighed prior to tire evaluation so that actual wheel loads are known. The tires
should also be balanced optimally and have appropriate air pressure. Furthermore, it
is important that the tires rest overnight (separate from the car). Before measure-
ments are conducted, the tires should have at least 300 km of wear. During mea-
surements, the tires should be warm, and evaluations should always be carried out
using only one vehicle.

For objective tire measurements, the stationary circular motion, steering wheel
impulse, one-time steering wheel sinus, ongoing sine of the steering wheel, and
impulse input are all important maneuvers.

The results of these maneuvers are recorded in the vehicle, Figs. 1.106 and 1.107

shows the typical effects of various tire conﬁgurations on driving dynamics.

The steady-state skid pad test is a frequently used maneuver for evaluating the
behavior of the vehicle and tires objectively. This method makes it possible to
evaluate the self-steering characteristic in the limiting range, the steering wheel
angle requirement with the corresponding steering torque effort, and the behavior in
the limit region. Furthermore, it is also possible to draw inferences on the magni-
tude of the slip angle and of the rolling angle. The tests themselves see driving
conditions which are characterized by the radius of the circular track, vehicle
velocity, and steering wheel angle. The tests are carried out in such a way that one
of these three variables is kept constant, and the progression over time is deﬁned as

1.5 Testing and Validation

99

Fig. 1.106 Objective evaluation of tires with a measurement system (Source Michelin)

Self-steering gradient 
Slalom 
Max Lat.acceleration 

Eigenlenkgradient
Slalomdurchfahrt 
Max Querbeschleinigung

1
3
,
1

7
1
,
1

Schwimmwinkelgradient
Rear slip angle gradient 
Wankwinkelgradient
Roll angle gradient 

0
6
,
1

1
5
,
1

9
8
,
0

9
8
,
0

0
0
,
1

1
9
,
0

8
0
,
1

7
8

,

0

2
9
,
0

2
9
,
0

1
5

,

0

1
5

,

0

9
4

,

0

7
4

,

0

0
5

,

0

6
2

,

0

4
2

,

0

7
2

,

0

4
2

,

0

7
2

,

0

3
2

,

0

3
2

,

0

4
2

,

0

8
2

,

0

3
2

,

0

1
3

,

0

5
2

,

0

2
3

,

0

2
2

,

0

3
8

,

0

1
5

,

0

5
8
,

0

8
4

,

0

1,60

1,40

1,20

1,00

0,80

0,60

0,40

0,20

0,00

Hersteller A
Manufact. A             Manufact. B 

Hersteller B

205/55R16

205/55 R16

225/50 R16

225/45 ZR17

VA: 225/45 ZR17
HA: 245/40ZR17

(Winter)
205/55 R16

(Winter)
225/45 R17

Fig. 1.107 Objective driving dynamics tire measurement, typical inﬂuence

100

1 Tires

the second variable. The steady-state skid pad test for a constant track radius with
variable velocity has established itself as a particularly good evaluator.

When tires are evaluated on a circular track, it is noteworthy that the tire tem-
peratures vary from left to right and, therefore, the tire properties differ extremely.
This is due to the left-to-right wheel load variance. For this reason, testing should be
carried out in both directions with plenty of time in between direction changes to
allow for the tires to cool.

Alternatively, a so called cruising test can be used. This is carried out on a
handling track. Tire heating and wear is uniform and realistic throughout the
combination of alternating curves, but the measurement system needs to be matched
to suit the test track. That is to say that the lateral acceleration measurement must be
ﬁxed to the vehicle, so that a determination of the rolling angle relative to the road
can be made.

The steering wheel angle jump is a driving maneuver to determine driving
behavior in a non-steady state. In this method, the vehicle is steered, starting from
rectilinear motion with a prescribed steering speed, into a steady-state skid pad test
with a similarly prescribed lateral acceleration. This method helps to evaluate the
vehicle’s reaction to quick steering movements. Driving conditions in this instance
can be characterized through vehicle velocity, steering wheel deﬂection speed, and
the ﬁnal steering wheel angle which is part of the speciﬁed lateral acceleration. For
objective tire tests, a lateral acceleration of 0.5 g is applied.

The one-time steering wheel sinus maneuver can also help to determine the
non-steady-state driving characteristics. This method starts with the vehicle being
driven in a straight line, after which the steering wheel is moved in a sinusoidal
pattern with a prescribed amplitude and frequency. Normally, the vehicle velocity is
80 km/h with a pattern frequency of 0.5 Hz. Here, the steering wheel amplitude
should be large enough to achieve a lateral acceleration of 4 m/ss.

Yaw ampliﬁcation is evaluated for steering angular velocities of less than 10°/s.
The goal is to increase the yaw rate and lateral acceleration in the region of low
steering angles with lateral acceleration in a linear manner. An evaluation of the
steering torque based on steering angle is also performed. With higher steering
angular velocities of 300°/s, the delay in the lateral acceleration buildup is evalu-
ated. Here, lateral accelerations of 0.2 and 0.5 g are built up. Similarly, the yaw
stability at 0.5 g after the steering action is also evaluated. In addition, oversteering
at 0.5 g and at maximum lateral acceleration is evaluated. Yaw damping is eval-
uated at 0.5 g.

1.5.3 Outdoor Subjective Testing

The evaluation of tires is a challenging task, although, or simply because, anyone
with a driving license can offer a subjective opinion. The opinions of a normal
driver and a good subjective evaluator lie worlds apart. There’s a reason that it takes
up to three years to train a subjective evaluator, provided the person has the

1.5 Testing and Validation

101

required intrinsic talent. Common evaluation drive tests with development partners
are important. Tire evaluators of the development partner should “experience” the
differences between various prototype tires on known series vehicles as well as
prototype vehicles, thus deﬁning evaluation criteria and common reference vehi-
cles. An excellent overview of such evaluation criteria is given in [28].

However, excellent evaluations can also be provided by normal drivers so long
as a few ground rules are followed. This is especially useful for the decision maker,
who can’t sit for 5 h every day in a car, to make decisions and evaluations.

Ideally, tests should be carried out independently by two drivers with the same
vehicle. Tests should always begin with a reference tire. At the end of a test, the
evaluations should be repeated with the reference tires. Evaluations should be done
as a blind exercise where the evaluator does not know which tire is mounted on the
vehicle. Drivers should only come to know which tire is being evaluated only after
the testing is complete, at the earliest. This helps to reduce driver inﬂuence sig-
niﬁcantly and in enhancing evaluation quality. Vehicle parameters, wheel quality,
and assembly quality (such as balancing) should also be known for the evaluation.
Generally, the evaluation is done through a comparison, that is, sets of tires are
compared against each other.

A two-stage evaluation technique is useful in this situation. In the ﬁrst stage,
physical values such as amplitude and time are recorded. In the second stage, the
signiﬁcance of these values for the overall impression is recorded.

Before evaluation, it should be ensured that the evaluator is thoroughly familiar
with the vehicle and its properties. Furthermore, evaluations should always be done
according to the same schema, wherein the conditions of the given test environment
determine the test sequence.

All tires should have a matching wear pattern, that is, they should have only
been mounted to the evaluation vehicle in the same positions. Before evaluation,
tires should be run-in and warmed up.

Following this procedure, maneuvers for lane adherence testing are usually
conducted. These maneuvers describe lane adherence under longitudinal force.
Here, the vehicle is accelerated and braked at a low speed and lane adherence at a
constant velocity can be seen at about 130 km/h. Stability on uneven surfaces is
also evaluated through the amplitude of the deviation.

Evaluation of the increase in yaw rate is conducted at 130 km/h with slow
changes in the angular velocity of the steering wheel up to 0.2g. The linearity of the
steering wheel angle and lateral acceleration are evaluated up to about 0.4g. A
relatively narrow curve is necessary for this. To simulate the behavior of a vehicle
during quick overtaking maneuvers, quick steering wheel angular velocities of up to
0.5g are used. Here, the stabilization time, the change in yaw rate, the amplitude of
the dynamic oversteering, and the damping time (the ﬂyback or return time with the
unrestrained steering wheel) are recorded.

The characteristics of a fast lane change, which might take place in an emer-
gency situation, are evaluated up to the maximum lateral acceleration. The evalu-
ation of the necessary steering wheel forces is then assessed at
low angular
velocities of the steering wheel of up to 0.2g. The stabilization process which

102

1 Tires

follows a critical situation is evaluated through a quick deﬂection of the steering
wheel angle up to 0.2g. Here, the ease of steering is evaluated.

The analytical process has two steps. In the ﬁrst step, quantitative statements are
made (e.g. amplitude larger/smaller). In the second stage, qualitative statements are
made (better/worse). Figure 1.108 offers an example of an evaluation protocol
which permits a systematic relative evaluation [29].

Comparison or reference tires must always be used when evaluating comfort.
Testing is performed on a road with signiﬁcant unevenness and lateral joins.
Criteria here include the vertical acceleration at the driver seat console (measure-
ment system) as well as the subjective evaluation from at the driver’s seat and
steering wheel. The feeling of comfort at the back of the vehicle is also evaluated.
In this test, the vehicle velocity is about 80 km/h.

Comfort and noise evaluations are done on deﬁned tracks at a clearly speciﬁed
velocity. Evaluations are done as separate blocks. Evaluators of comfort and noise
do not necessarily need to be the same people who evaluate the handling.

For test runs, the track as well as the run should be standardized which helps
everyone involved to concentrate on the essentials. On public roads and handling
courses, this process can be supported by a Digitalker. Figure 1.109 shows an
example of a curve evaluation stretch, whose route points are announced to the
driver with the help of the global positioning system (GPS). The evaluator can also
be informed about the destination to which they should drive (navigation), how fast
they should travel (velocity speciﬁcation), how they should drive (steering wheel
angle speciﬁcation), and what to watch out for (evaluation speciﬁcation).

Assistive technologies such as Digitalker help to reduce driver strain and allow
much more attention to be given to the actual evaluation. During recorded drives,
route segments are noted and text is recorded at the characteristic points of the ride.
During subsequent evaluations, text is again recorded at the characteristic points
provided that the direction of travel is also taken into consideration [30].

A classic subjective tire evaluation consists of a single step and typically consists
of the criteria that are listed in the evaluation questionnaire shown in Fig. 1.110.
In the most basic sense, what should be seen in the subjective evaluation is that
the vehicle reacts as precisely as the steering movements given by the driver. The
vehicle should also be able to center itself on its own, so that it can move forward in
a straight line autonomously. The buildup of lateral forces through the steering area
or lateral acceleration should be linear and harmonious and not jerky. The ﬁtment of
the tires about the rear axle should also provide adequate stability so that the vehicle
can safely perform quick lane change maneuvers in emergency situations.

Furthermore, while driving in a curve, it should be possible to make steering

corrections easily and predictably.

In the limiting regions, understeer should not be extremely pronounced so that
lane change maneuvers can be performed safely. If the accelerator is released or if
acceleration is increased while in a curve, the vehicle should react in a predictable
manner and not turn too sharply into or out of the curve. Under a full load in second
gear, the vehicle should move forward in a straight line without the tendency to pull

1.5 Testing and Validation

103

Fig. 1.108 Comparative subjective evaluation (Source Michelin)

104

1 Tires

Fig. 1.109 Digitalker (in-house construction)

to the left or right. For tires which are conspicuous, the tread design often must be
reworked.

Vehicles should have particularly low rolling noise under almost all conditions
and track surfaces while achieving the highest level of comfort. Yaw reaction on
uneven tracks and even the displacement of the rear axle should be as low as
possible and react as little as possible to lane grooves.

Properties which are relevant to tires and which require subjective evaluation are

those related to driving comfort, drive dynamics, and steering characteristics.

The most critical areas of driving comfort are as follows:

Rolling (Rough Road)
This is a perceptible and audible vibration in the range of 30–400 Hz. Rolling
vibrations are caused by both the tire and the road surface. Other inﬂuencing factors
for this phenomenon include the dampers, top mounts, and car body. It can occur
when the vehicle is driven on a rough road with stochastic street excitation (e.g. a
variety of road surface coatings). Measurement of rolling is carried out mechani-
cally by evaluating the perceptible vibrations at the driver seat and foot area, as well
as acoustically, by evaluating audible vibrations.

Scanning (Patchy Asphalt)
This is a vehicle response to the stochastic unevenness of the road which can be felt
and heard in the range of 10–120 Hz. In addition to the tires, the dampers, the

1.5 Testing and Validation

105

[date]
[driver]

[tire size]

[location / test track]
[vehicle]
[inflation pressure]
[temperature]
[road condition wet/dry]

N.N.

225/55 R17 W(Y)

Möckmühl / A81
N.N.
2,1 / 2,2
16
dry

[test No.]

[normal road 100-120 kph]
[center point feeling / yaw gain]
[self-aligning torque (center)]
[linearity / harmony]
[stability / lane change]
[cornering precision]
[understeering at border area]

[throttle-lift reaction in a curve]
[throttle-change 2. gear]
[smooth road]
[rough road]
[cornering squeal]

[pattern  nois e]

[riding c omfort]

[cross joints]
[patch-asphalt]
[steering-shoc]
[pull at const. speed]
[straight line stability bumpy road]
[groove sensitivity]

[average normal road]

[Autobahn high speed]
[center point feeling / yaw gain]
[lane change stability]
[straight line stability]
[linearity / harmony]
[lift throttle in a curve]
[cornering-braking]
[crosswind reaction]
[tyre uniformity]
[impact boom]

[average Autobahn]

[overall acceptance yes/no]

[general tire information]
[rolling direction]
[asymmetrie]
[tire condition]
[rim protection rib]
[MB identification rib]

[tire marking]

[rim size]

D
 
e
r
i
T

E

 
 
e
r
i
T

F
 
e
r
i
T

[manufacturer / pattern / DC-brand-No.]

4

5

C
 
e
r
i
T

3

7
7
8
8
7
7

6
6
7,5

6,5
6,5

7

7
8
8
7,5

A
 
e
r
i
T

1

8
8
8
8
8
8,5

7
7
8

6
6

7

8
8
8
8

i.O.
6

7,6

B
 
e
r
i
T

2

5
6
6
6
6
5

7
7
5

7
8

6

4,5
6
6
6,5

i.O.
8

6,2

7
7,5

5,5
6

6

8
8
8
8
8
8

7
7
7

7

8
8
8
8

6
6
6
6
5,5
5

8
8
4

7
8

6

6
6
7
6

7,5
7,5
8
8
7
7,5

8
8
7

7

7,5
8
8
8

i.O.

7

7,7

i.O.
7,5

6,5

i.O.

6

7,3

yes

i.O.
5,5

7,5

yes

yes

no

(yes)

yes

new

no

y es

97W

new

no

y es

97W

new

no

y es

97Y

new

no

y es

97W

new

no

y es

97W

new

no

y es

97W

7,5 x  17

7,5 x  17

7,5 x  17

7,5 x  17

7,5 x  17

7,5 x  17

7,5

6,2

7,0

6,3

7,5

7,3

VA front ax le]
HA [rear ax le]
VA front ax le]
HA [rear ax le]

[rating]

10 [very good] 
8   [good]  
6    [satisfactory]  

4
2
0

[sufficiant, borderline]              
[deficient]                   
[insufficient]

DAIMLER
Entwicklung PKW
EP/ECR

Fig. 1.110 Evaluation of tires

damper bearings, and even the axle ﬂexibility in the longitudinal direction are
important. Evaluation for this aspect of driving comfort is done on streets with
lateral joins, short lateral waves, and manhole covers (patchy asphalt). Individual

106

1 Tires

obstacles also excite scanning. Evaluation for scanning is performed the same as
with rolling, that is, mechanically and acoustically. A special form of scanning is
the butt-join and the driving over of manhole covers, for which mechanical and
acoustic evaluations are often carried out separately.

Jerkiness of Steering (Strength of Impulse under Lateral Acceleration)
A pulse-like rotational oscillation of the steering wheel in the range of 17–20 Hz is
the result of a jerky excitation of the axle with the dynamic wheel load variation and
hence dynamic aligning torques, which are transferred through the steering column
to the steering wheel. Tires have a deﬁnitive inﬂuence on this phenomenon, and it is
therefore also evaluated. Lateral acceleration describes a jerky vertical street
excitation with more than 0.5 g at the wheel which is on the inner side, for example,
due to the crossing of thresholds on just one side.

Shimmy (Imbalance + Tire Uniformity)
Shimmy describes the perceptible and visible rotational oscillation of the steering
wheel in the range of 10–20 Hz, occurring between speeds of 80 and 180 km/h.
The natural frequency of the axle is excited in opposite phases due to an unevenness
of the tire or the imbalance of the complete wheel assembly while rolling down a
smooth street.

Trembling
This is a perceptible vibration at the seat, foot well, and steering wheel above
10 Hz. The axle vibration comes due to same-phase imbalance regulation in the
structure of the car body, seat, and I-panel with the steering wheel. Trembling can
be caused by track inclination, the engine, and the tires. Jerky steering could also
occur here.

Jarring (Engine, Axle)
This tangible, low-frequency oscillation with a frequency of 8–12 Hz is mainly
noticeable in the upper body and stomach region. This phenomenon sees the mass
of the axle resonating with the tires. Furthermore, the engine experiences spluttering
on the engine and chassis sub-frame mounts. This phenomenon is observed on poor
and medium-poor roads with short wavelengths.

Micro-Jarring
This tangible, low-frequency oscillation occurs on optically smooth road surfaces in
the range of 10–16 Hz. Once again, the axle mass on the tire suspension oscillates.
These oscillations are caused by invisible short waves of the track which give rise to
resonances at speeds up to 120 km/h.

Driving dynamics are veriﬁed through the following maneuvers:

High-Speed Oscillation
This synthetic maneuver is brought about by the driver and is meant to verify
driving robustness at higher speeds. If the steering wheel twitches slightly, a
combination of rolling and yaw oscillation in the range of 2–3 Hz is created.
A damping or ebbing response that can be connected to the steering wheel oscil-
lation is important to see here. This phenomenon depends strongly on the tires.

1.5 Testing and Validation

107

Drift and Pull
This occurs when the customer realizes a perceptible steering torque (pull) or
deviation from the curve (drift) during forward straight-ahead driving on an inclined
road. The lateral downhill force or grade resistance of the vehicle leads to internal
steering forces, which are inﬂuenced (among other things) by camber side forces,
forces on the slip angle side, and the pneumatic trail. This phenomenon is evaluated
during straight-ahead driving at 80 km/h on an inclined track, whereby no con-
spicuous restraining torque or steering wheel angle correction may take place.

Lane Groove Sensitivity
This occurs when steering correction is necessary on roads with grooves.
Deviations arise due to the lateral camber forces of the tire, and evaluations are
done on a grooved lane at about 80 km/h.

Side Wind Sensitivity
This occurs when steering angle correction is required in the presence of side winds.
The severity of side wind sensitivity also depends on the tire.

Removal (Straight Ahead)
Here, the deviation of the vehicle from its course is evaluated while braking along a
straight line and with the steering wheel in a ﬁxed position. The yaw reaction of the
vehicle is evaluated over a load change in second gear between 40 and 80 km/h.

Forward motion in a straight line
This refers to the feasibility of corrections and deviations from forward motion in a
straight line caused by inclinations in the road surface and routing. If forward
motion in a straight line is poor, the yaw eigenfrequency is excited in the range of
0.9–1.8 Hz and the vehicle will deviate from its desired motion straight ahead
depending on the lane or the driver, requiring a correction measure from the driver.
Evaluations here are carried out at speeds ranging from 100 km/h to the maximum
velocity (Vmax) on highways or similar tracks with non-ideal ﬂat surfaces.

Stability in Curves
This driving dynamic has a broad meaning, but it speciﬁcally describes the resonant
intrinsic steering behavior (oversteering). The vehicle’s reaction to a steering angle
speciﬁcation is measured in the linear and nonlinear range of lateral acceleration of
0–4 Hz. The drive response is evaluated for stationary and non-stationary driving
along curves. The evaluation is done on blocked high-speed test stretches, on
special handling courses, and on vehicle dynamic surfaces. The vehicle is operated
between 80 km/h and Vmax. The lateral acceleration range is veriﬁed up to 1g. Safe
and predictable driving characteristics are the most important factors to consider
here.

Braking at high speed while driving along curves
In this instance, the yaw reaction of the vehicle is evaluated during strong braking.
By displacing the axle load from the rear to the front (the superimposition of
kinematics/elasto-kinematics is also possible), yaw reactions with a strong

108

1 Tires

dependency on tires are generated. The aim is a yaw reaction which can be con-
trolled easily, especially at speeds between 100 km/h and Vmax.

Load change reaction (withdrawal of acceleration while driving along a
curve)
This is a yaw reaction of the vehicle upon the withdrawal of the acceleration
abruptly or in response to sudden acceleration. Here, there is also a shift in axle
load. Veriﬁcation is done in the same way as braking along curves.
Shift due to µ-change (HA-shift)
Through abrupt variations in lateral forces, primarily at the rear axle, a vehicle can
experience shifts in the rear axle as well as a yaw reaction. This phenomenon is
excited by track conditions (manhole covers, varying coefﬁcients of friction, etc.)
and is generated while driving along a straight line or along a slight curve by a track
which creates a variation in the lateral force.

Stability in the case of extreme maneuvers
A few classic maneuvers are the (ISO-) lane change, the 36-m slalom, and the “elk
test” for evaluating vehicle reaction with respect to the time following a steering
angle input. This is evaluated in terms of driving stability at the front and rear axles.
This is veriﬁed by driving on a test track between 80 km/h and Vmax through lane
changes at all speed and lateral acceleration ranges. The aim is harmonious and
predictable vehicle reactions, high stability of driving in the limit ranges, and gentle
and predictable transitions to the limit range. Differentiation is made between the
speed ranges and the drive states of driving along a straight line and driving along a
curve for evaluating the steering characteristics:

Quasi-static parking
Tire drill torques is evaluated indirectly here. Torque with and without application
of the brakes is recorded.

Steering withdrawal
The steering wheel has a tendency to revert to its original position on its own. The
aligning torque of the tire which contributes to the overall resetting is determined in
the range of 0–100 km/h. However, the main control variable is the front axle
kinematics.

Steering reversal (automatic relapse of the steering)
Vehicles with front-axle drive tend to turn in (understeer) on their own under the
action of a longitudinal force. With strong longitudinal acceleration and at a
walking pace, the tendency of the tires to turn is evaluated.

Steering response (reaction of the vehicle to small steering angles)
At speeds above 30 km/h, the reaction of the vehicle to steering inputs is evaluated.
Steering response means the reaction of the vehicle to small steering wheel inputs
while driving forward along a straight line. Here, the vehicle moves from 60 to
120 km/h, and small steering angles (of up to 5°) are slowly adjusted. The reaction

1.5 Testing and Validation

109

of the vehicle is evaluated. The goal is to achieve a perceptible gradient of the
steering torque and a harmonious reaction from the vehicle.

Finding the center/centering for small steering angles
Here, it is necessary that an independent steering relapse should result in the
straightening out of the steering. The independent retention of steering while
driving along a straight line can be characterized in the straightened position and in
ﬁnding the straight position at speeds of between 60 and 120 km/h. A classic
chassis-side target conﬂict arises here with “drift-off.”

Steering response (vehicle reaction while driving on curves)
The goal here is to achieve harmonious vehicle responses for small steering angle
additions while driving on a curve (constant velocity, constant radius, about 0.5–
0.6g). The steering force characteristics are also evaluated here.

Steering wheel restoration while driving along a curve
Here, the aligning torque characteristics of the tire are evaluated. The main factor in
this situation, however, is the front axle kinematics.

Steering precision (faithfulness to curve)
The need for re-steering back into the curve is evaluated here. This evaluation is
done from 40 km/h up to Vmax. How often and how strongly a steering wheel
impact must be corrected over the course of driving along a curve in order to drive
through the desired curve under the inﬂuence of control variables (side wind,
unevenness of the track) will be evaluated. Normally, a country road with a large
percentage of curvy sections is selected for this. The aim is to make no steering
interventions, or to make at the most only very small interventions while driving.
Figure 1.111 shows a typical tire evaluation course for the measurement of
synthetic excitations and Fig. 1.112 shows a typical course for evaluating a driving
proﬁle which is closer to that of actual customer usage.

To keep track of evaluated segments, test drives can be recorded. Here, the
prooﬁng of velocity speciﬁcations and lateral acceleration is important. A false
color representation, Fig. 1.113, demonstrates this practice. Figure 1.114 shows the
target velocity as well as the actual velocity. From this graph, it can be seen that for
ﬁve test drives on the same segment, only the third test drive and beginning of the
fourth test drive meet requirements.

An evaluation of test track proﬁles is shown in Fig. 1.115. The ﬁgure also shows
the g-g diagram, which plots the longitudinal acceleration against lateral acceler-
ation and lateral acceleration against velocity. Figure 1.116 shows the high-speed
maneuver. Typical evaluation procedures such as stability and braking on curves
can be seen in this representation. Similarly, the handling course in Fig. 1.117
shows that boundaries have been reached in terms of vehicle dynamics and
handling.

Using these recording methods, we can ensure that driving maneuvers are car-
ried out “properly.” Figure 1.118 shows diagrams of three test specimens on a
public stretch with many steering components which were recorded without the
knowledge of the evaluator. An excellent evaluator (a) will drive cautiously with an

110

1 Tires

Fig. 1.111 Evaluation tracks with synthetic excitation (Test terrain at Papenburg)

eye on the road far ahead, therefore braking and accelerating relatively little. They
keep themselves able to approach limiting ranges of lateral acceleration indepen-
dently and autonomously. A normal driver (b) brakes and accelerates more fre-
quently, and often fails to achieve the lateral acceleration that would enable holistic
tire evaluation. An extreme driving style (c) shows frequent acceleration and
braking which take place at the limiting ranges.

At the end of the evaluation, the front axle tires are “overdriven” due to
excessive understeering and the entire evaluation could be considered questionable.
The driving style can also be calculated with a simple index: the standard deviation
of the longitudinal and lateral acceleration.

Figure 1.119 shows a group of drivers who were assigned the task of evaluating
the customer-relevant vehicle dynamics on a “steering round” and then on a

1.5 Testing and Validation

111

Fig. 1.112 Evaluation real tracks and highways

“comfort round.” The standard deviations in the longitudinal and lateral accelera-
tions can once again be used to determine who actually fulﬁlled this task.

Despite all attempts to formalize and standardize tire evaluation procedures, the
subjective evaluation remains the key differentiator in tire development. Without
excellent tire evaluators, it is not possible to imagine a successful tire development
program for the tire or vehicle manufacturer.

1.6 Tire Characteristics

The tire is the only connection between the vehicle and the road. The tires represent
four postcard-sized surfaces which are responsible for transmitting longitudinal and
lateral forces. Local properties of the contact surface between the tire and road are
very complex and will not be described in this section. Instead, the overall behavior
of tires and the road will be discussed.

112

1 Tires

Fig. 1.113 Visualization of the velocity

Fig. 1.114 Speed monitoring

1.6.1 Driving and Steering Characteristics: Forces

and Torques

The mechanisms which lead to typically deﬁned tire properties can be best
explained with the help of a model. A steel-belted radial tire consists of a rigid rim,

1.6 Tire Characteristics

Customer lap 

113

l

 
g
 
n
i
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
e
c
c
a
 
l
a
n
d
u
t
i
g
n
o
L

i

l

 
g
 
n
i
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
e
c
c
a
 
l
a
r
e
t
a
L

Lateral acceleration in g 

Velocity in km/h 

Fig. 1.115 Public roads

Fig. 1.116 Oval track (Test track in Papenburg)

114

1 Tires

Fig. 1.117 Handling course (Test track in Papenburg)

Fig. 1.118 Evaluation of the evaluators: excellent judge (a), normal driver (b), extreme driving
habit (c)

1.6 Tire Characteristics

115

Fig. 1.119 Evaluation of the driving style

Fig. 1.120 Ring model

which is surrounded by an elastic ring. The connection of this ring to the rim is
deﬁned by its stiffness. On the elastic ring, which forms the steel belt, elastic cleats
are attached, which represents the tread. The physical rolling mechanism of a tire is
like that of a tracked vehicle. Here, the length of the tracks is deﬁned by the length
of the steel belt and deﬁne the rolling circumference. From the rolling circumfer-
ence, the dynamic rolling radius is also incidentally derived, but this is not to be
considered the geometric radius, Fig. 1.120.

Compressive forces are generated by the ﬂattening of the tire where it comes into
contact with the road. These forces differ from place to place. Ground pressure
distribution cannot be represented analytically, since the capabilities of the stress–

116

1 Tires

Fig. 1.121 Brush model for explanation of the longitudinal and lateral forces

strain curve is far exceeded. Therefore, ground pressure distribution must be esti-
mated with veriﬁcation through measurements. Estimates can be based on mono-
mial, elliptic, parabolic, or polynomial approaches. Some estimates can also
describe the length of the footprint.

In this case, it is often assumed that a change in footprint length due to ﬂattening
of the elastic band can be neglected. In this case, it’s necessary to make assumptions
about the friction between the tread and road to understand how longitudinal and
lateral forces arise. The two states of grip of adhesion occur when the force gen-
erated through elastic deformation is smaller than the maximum adhesive force.
When this doesn’t happen, sliding or skidding occurs. The force due to the
deformation of the tire tread is approximately linear: F = cx. Approaches to the
calculation of adhesion force range from the basic Coulomb calculation of friction
to friction modeling which considers pressure, speed, and temperature, Fig. 1.121.
The application point of the lateral force is located behind the center of a wheel.
This distance, known as the pneumatic trail, creates an aligning torque which tends
to return the steering wheel back to a straightened position and acts against the slip
angle. With help from these simpliﬁed approaches, basic tire characteristics can be
derived mathematically, Fig. 1.122.

A rolling tire forms a contact surface with the road, that is, its footprint. When
forces are transferred during acceleration, braking, or while driving along curves,
the contact surface and the road move relative to each other. This relative sliding
velocity relative to the vehicle velocity is known as slip. This applies to the lateral
direction as well. If the lateral velocity of a tire under pure slip angle is related to the
vehicle velocity, the slip is obtained as the tangent of the slip angle. This also makes
it clear that, without slip, a tire will not transfer any forces.

Usual representations here are the longitudinal versus slip curves, in which the
longitudinal force is plotted against the slip. We also have µ-slip curves, in which
longitudinal
load is plotted against
slip. Similarly, there is the also slip–longitudinal force diagram, in which the

force referenced through the wheel

1.6 Tire Characteristics

117

Fig. 1.122 Basics of the longitudinal and lateral force characteristic curve

circumferential force is plotted against the drift and slip. Analogous representations
are found over the slip angle, where the aligning torque is also usually represented
in addition to lateral force.

Tire characteristics are inﬂuenced by various parameters which are very important

to describe for the tire speciﬁcations manual and for tire modeling simulations.
Major evaluation parameters with regard to longitudinal force include:

The main evaluation parameters with respect to lateral forces are as follows:

(cid:129) Slope of the characteristic curve
(cid:129) Maximum characteristic curve for driving and braking
(cid:129) Corresponding slip
(cid:129) Maximum end value of the longitudinal force

(cid:129) Lateral force at a slip angle of 0°
(cid:129) Cornering stiffness
(cid:129) Maximum cornering stiffness at a 3.5–4.5° slip angle
(cid:129) Corresponding slip angle
(cid:129) Maximum end value of the lateral force

In the case of the aligning torque, which is obtained as the product of the lateral

force and pneumatic trail, the characterizing variables are as follows:
(cid:129) Aligning torque at a slip angle of 0°
(cid:129) Aligning stiffness
(cid:129) Maximum of the aligning torque
(cid:129) Corresponding slip angle
(cid:129) Slope at an aligning torque of 0
(cid:129) Slip angle at an aligning torque of 0
(cid:129) End value of the aligning torque
(cid:129) Pneumatic trail = aligning torque stiffness/cornering stiffness

118

1 Tires

The tread material is of deﬁnitive importance to the transmission of forces. The
tread is made of special rubber mixes. Rubber is basically a viscoelastic material,
which is susceptible to deformation with relative ease and whose material properties
lie in the transition region between a tough liquid and a solid body. One important
property here is the hysteresis, that is, the time lag which exists between the
application of a force and the resulting deformation. This property is accompanied
by a loss of energy in the form of unusable heat.

In addition, the elastic properties of the stresses depend on the frequency and
material temperature. At low temperature, the stiffness is high and the material
becomes brittle, like glass.

At higher temperatures, the modulus of elasticity assumes smaller values and the
material is very ﬂexible and elastic. In the medium temperature range, that is, the
glass transition temperature, the material attains its maximum viscosity. It is pos-
sible to show an equilibrium of frequency and temperature within a speciﬁc range.
There are two basic mechanisms of tire friction: adhesion and hysteresis.
Adhesion occurs due to a molecular bonding between the rubber material of the tire
and the track of the road. If an intervening medium such as a ﬁlm of water is
present, the formation of bonds is reduced and therefore the adhesion component of
friction is reduced. The hysteresis aspect, which acts as a non-skid coating under
wet conditions,
through
micro-roughness of the track surface, a surface quality which wears very quickly.
Asphalts with a high coefﬁcient of friction under wet conditions have a pronounced
hysteresis component with a high degree of micro-roughness. Due to the resulting
high sensitivity to wear, such asphalts must be renewed at regular intervals if high
coefﬁcients of wet friction are to be maintained.

is the form-ﬁt component. Hysteresis comes about

Owing to the viscosity of rubber, the deformation of a rubber tread block can be
described as sliding over the surface coating of the road in a ﬂowing motion. This
inter-meshing effect is subject to a loading and unloading cycle. The deformation
gives rise to a hysteresis with every cycle and an accompanying loss of energy.

The adhesion is the result of molecular interactions in the contact area between
the tire and the road. These connections form, break up, and are formed again. In
the process, molecular chains of rubber are expanded and broken up in a cyclic
manner. Viscoelastic work is also performed. The main prerequisite for the adhe-
sive behavior of rubber is that the tire should remain in contact with the road, but
this can only occur in the case of a dry road.

In practice, a road has varying values of macro- and micro-roughness. For tire
rubber, this means excitation over the entire frequency range. On wet surfaces, the
coefﬁcient of friction is always smaller and varies strongly with the quality of the
surface. A ﬁlm of water on the rubber tread prevents molecular adhesion until the
ﬁlm is broken. Until then, only the intermeshing effect due to the rubber viscosity
remains completely effective in sustaining adhesion. If the water ﬁlm thickness
exceeds a certain threshold, the micro-rough spots will become “ﬂooded.”

1.6 Tire Characteristics

119

During the slip process, molecular adhesion and teething effects create a fric-
tional force which acts against the slip. This leads to a change in vehicle velocity.
The tread of a tire undergoes deformation while the belt band which lies on the
inside is almost inelastic. Upon brake application, the road, which is the friction
partner, moves the contact surface somewhat
towards the rear, causing tread
deformations in the process. The rubber blocks of the tread allow a relative motion
between the lower part of the rubber block and the belt. This process is known as
shearing or pseudo-slip. In the rear part of the contact surface, material stresses
increase and, if shear forces continue to act in addition to this and the shear force
exceeds the limiting value for adhesion, a real slip can occur. In the ascending part
of the curve, the tread is essentially subjected to a mix of pseudo-slip and slight
slip. The proportionate shear gives ride to load frequencies which set off the
adhesive mechanisms such as molecular adhesion and inter-meshing. Since the slip
rates are still small, temperature has only a small inﬂuence. In the descending
branch of the µ-slip curve, the share of the “real” slip increases and the tire heats up.
At higher temperatures, however, hysteresis decreases signiﬁcantly and the value

of the coefﬁcient of friction drops.

The greater the magnitude of the skid velocity and street roughness, the greater
the drop of the coefﬁcient of friction. On wet surfaces, lamellae play a decisive role
in adhesion. Lamellae are the small incisions which are seen on tread blocks, which
are created with blade-like inserts in the hot mold during vulcanization. Lamellae
help to channel and store water during operation on wet road surfaces. They create
peal pressure points along their edges and make it possible to break through the
residual water ﬁlm which would otherwise not be absorbed or stored. If lamellae are
too strong, they would reduce the tread stiffness for wet grip.

Design rules for tire tread differ from one tire manufacturer to another. There are
a few basic rules, e.g. a closed outer shoulder leads to outside noise reduction and
ensures stability while driving along curves. Grooves running along the circum-
ference improve handling and stabilize straight-ahead movement. Longitudinal and
lateral lamellae enhance rolling comfort. Open inner sides improve water drainage.
Arrangement of tread blocks, also called the pitch arrangement, inﬂuences noise
characteristics. Longitudinal grooves inﬂuence noise mainly in the 1000-Hz range.
Closed outer shoulders with small negative space and a varied pitch arrangement
between the shoulder and the center enhance stability and reduce outside noise.

A few typical diagrams are shown on these pages which show the measurement
of the longitudinal force for a pure longitudinal slip, Fig. 1.123, the measurement of
a lateral force, Fig. 1.124, and the measurement of the aligning torque for a pure
slip angle, Fig. 1.125.

The combined load is also important, Figs. 1.126 and 1.127. If a tire load
changes from purely lateral to a combination of lateral and longitudinal forces, the
new longitudinal stresses will reduce the lateral force which is transmitted.
Similarly, for a purely longitudinal adhesion and added additional lateral force, the
longitudinal adhesive potential
the braking distance
increases. This effect is not evenly distributed. The application of driving or braking
torque reduces lateral adhesion even more strongly than the appearance of a slip

is reduced. In this case,

120

1 Tires

Fig. 1.123 Measurement of the longitudinal force for various wheel loads (Source TNO)

angle reducing the longitudinal adhesion. This also explains the fact that, while
moving forward in a straight line, a driver can lose control of a vehicle when the
brakes are applied too strongly or
the vehicle is accelerated too quickly.
Conversely, even on tight curves, it is possible to accelerate moderately.

1.6.1.1 Linear Region and Small Signal Characteristics

Lateral forces do not act at the center of the wheel but are instead displaced towards
the rear by the pneumatic trail. In the linear region, the pneumatic trail is about 1/6
the length of the tire footprint. The pneumatic trail is at its maximum when sliding
does not occur. According to this simple model, the pneumatic trial would have to
be very small for sliding to occur. The pneumatic trail can thus be used as an
indicator of adhesive potential. Besides recording the entire characteristics curve, it
is also important to evaluate tire characteristics based on key values.

The zero-lateral force is the force which acts for a slip angle of zero. This force is
normally split up into two components, one of which is independent of rotational
direction and another component which is dependent. The component which is
dependent on the rotational direction is measured on test rigs and is called the
structural lateral force, while the component which is independent of rotational

1.6 Tire Characteristics

121

Fig. 1.124 Measurement of the lateral force for different wheel loads (Source TNO)

direction is called the conicity. The zero-aligning torque is the aligning torque for a
slip angle of zero. Both the zero-lateral force as well as the zero-aligning torque
inﬂuence rectilinear forward motion of a tire.

At the rear axle, slip angles adjust in such a way that the lateral forces at the rear
left and rear right are in equilibrium. At the front axle, with released steering, the
steering wheel angle is set such that the aligning torques are also equal and
opposite. This would normally cause the vehicle to run askew since the lateral
forces will not be equal in magnitude. When the steering is held ﬁrmly, the slip
angle again adjusts itself so that the lateral forces increase. Hence, the zero lateral
forces and zero-aligning torque at half the front axle load and at half the rear axle
load are important. These values are determined by measuring the slip angle for
small slip angles and for half the rear or front axle load.

The relationship between drift due to the forces on downward slopes as well as
the tire properties for a small slip angle is well-known. Should a driver need to
apply a constant torque to the steering wheel to move forward in a straight line, we
call it a pull. If the vehicle tends to drift when the steering wheel is released, we call
it drift.

Pull and drift can be understood most clearly if the balance of forces and torques
are considered, and when the acting tire forces are balanced. If the resulting forces

122

1 Tires

Fig. 1.125 Measurement of the aligning torque for different wheel loads (Source TNO)

are balanced, that is, if their resultant is zero, the vehicle will move forward in a
straight line. This holds true for a ﬁrmly held steering wheel upon release as well.
The torques, too, come into equilibrium when the steering wheel is held ﬁrmly
and then released. Tire forces along with their effective lever arms and free torques
as well as the steering and frictional torques are included in this state of torque
equilibrium. To restore the balance of torques, the vehicle builds up slip angle until
equilibrium is attained. The resulting total lateral force makes the vehicle drift.

The set slip angle forms a “crabbing” motion and the steering wheel stands at an

angle (oversteering slip angle).

The lateral force of a tire in the region of straight line motion is divided into
conical lateral force and structural lateral force. For this, measurements are made on
the tire in the clockwise (CW) and counterclockwise (CCW) directions.

Conicity ¼ 0:5 (cid:1) SF SA = 0(cid:4)
Ply steer = 0:5 (cid:1) SF SA = 0(cid:4)

ð

ð

½

½

ÞCW + SF SA = 0(cid:4)
ð
ÞCW (cid:3) SF SA = 0(cid:4)
ð

ÞCCW
(cid:5)
ÞCCW

(cid:5)

Aligning torques are measured in both directions of rotation and are similarly
described. In addition to the forces and torques at angles of inclination, their
dependencies on the angle of inclination are also required in order to be able to set

1.6 Tire Characteristics

123

Fig. 1.126 Measurement of the longitudinal force for various slip angles and constant wheel load
(Source TNO)

up the current balance. To balance these equations, the cornering stiffness and the
aligning torque stiffness are required. The characteristic values derived therefrom
are the moments which remain when the forces are zero.

Ply steer residual aligning torque (PRAT)

½
PRAT = 0:5 (cid:1) SAT SF = 0

ð

ÞCW + SAT SF = 0

ð

ÞCCW

(cid:5)

Conicity residual aligning torque (CRAT)

CRAT = 0:5 (cid:1) SAT SF = 0

ð

½

ÞCW (cid:3) SAT SF = 0

ð

ÞCCW

(cid:5)

and the forces which remain if the torques are zero.

Ply steer residual cornering force (PRCF)

PRCF = 0:5 (cid:1) ½ SF SAT = 0

ð

ð

ð
ÞCW + SF SAT = 0

ÞCCW

(cid:5)

124

1 Tires

Fig. 1.127 Measurement of the aligning torque measurement for various slip angles and constant
wheel load (Source TNO)

Conicity residual cornering force (CRCF)

CRCF = 0:5 (cid:1) ½ SF SAT = 0

ð

ð

ð
ÞCW (cid:3) SF SAT = 0

ÞCCW

(cid:5)

The following abbreviations are used above:

self-aligning torque
SAT
SF
side force
CW clockwise
CCW counterclockwise

It is also important to know the point of origin of these forces. Whereas the
structural lateral force tends to act with a higher lever arm than the lateral force due
to slip angle, the cone engages with a much smaller lever arm (almost the ideal
wheel contact point).

Both, the conicity and the camber lateral force have the same lever arm, which is

almost zero, Fig. 1.128.

Figure 1.129 shows the effect of these forces on drift. For a lateral force of zero,
there is an aligning torque (RAT) which results in a steering wheel torque. For an
aligning torque of zero, on the other hand, there is a residual lateral force which
makes the vehicle drift (corresponding to the released steering wheel). In the classic
tire uniformity measurement with a slip angle of zero, it is not possible to arrive at
any statement on the tendency to drift to the right. To do so, it would be necessary
to measure the aligning torque and lateral force over the slip angle.

1.6 Tire Characteristics

125

Fig. 1.128 Points of action of conical, structural, and lateral force

Fig. 1.129 Tire forces for small slip angles (Source Michelin)

In this way, it is also possible to estimate how the vehicle might respond to

structural lateral forces and conical forces:

For a delta with structural lateral forces on both sides, there is no run off, since
slip angle continues to build up as long as torques are in equilibrium. The forces are
almost equal in magnitude due to the lever arm, that is, there is a slight drifting to
the left, but the steering wheel is correspondingly tilted.

For a delta with structural lateral forces on one side, there is no drift, since the

balance of torques extends over both wheels.

For a one-sided cone, there is drift, since the conical and lateral forces do not
have the same lever arm owing to the slip angle. A balance of torques is built up:

126

1 Tires

Fig. 1.130 Total balance of the front axle

Axlepneumatictrail (cid:1) cone = axle and pneumatic trail

ð

Þ (cid:1) Fy

Figure 1.130 depicts the different driving situations. As the ﬁgure shows, the ply
steer forces for a ﬁrmly held steering wheel give rise to a steering torque and lateral
force. In addition, the ply steer forces tend to pull the steering wheel to one side
when it is let go. Here, an equilibrium of forces is established. Since the ply steer as
well as the lateral force that arise due to the resulting slip angle act with the same
lever arm, there are no resultant forces. The vehicle moves forward in a straight
line. In the case of conical force when the steering wheel is held ﬁrmly, the situation
is the same as in the case of ply steer forces, except here the steering torque is a little
bit smaller for the same amount of force. However, when the steering wheel is
released, the conical force, unlike the ply steer force, results in drifting. This is
because the forces cannot go into equilibrium when the torques are balanced. This

1.6 Tire Characteristics

127

Fig. 1.131 Sign convention

is because the conical and lateral forces do not act at the same point owing to the
slip angle. The tendency to drift due to cone differences is expressed as

1 (cid:3) Axle pneumatic trail/ Axle pneumatic trail + tire pneumatic trail

ð

Þ;

and drops with increasing pneumatic trail. As a result, the vehicle tends to drift in
the direction of the positive conus force.

The torque experienced by a tire for zero lateral force (RAT) should be large
enough to compensate for the torque which usually results from downhill force,
multiplied with the sum of the axle and pneumatic trail. Similarly, the longitudinal
force with its corresponding lever arm should also be taken into consideration in the
torque balance. Here, the rolling resistance (cid:1) lever arm as a function of the camber
is important and the frictional torques from the wheel bearings and one-sided
braking forces act with this offset. Due to the various coordinate systems which are
used in tire and vehicle measurements, the following sign convention should be
followed: the structural side force acts on the right hand as seen in the direction of
travel. Hence, it has a negative algebraic sign. The torque about the vertical axis is
left-handed. The conical force is positive if the forces applied point “into” the
vehicle. A positive conical force reduces the toe-in angle due to elasto-kinematics,
Fig. 1.131.

While studying such complex systems, veriﬁcation can be done with a Taguchi
plan, Fig. 1.132. This diagram conﬁrms the primary inﬂuencing factors on drift
properties. It is clear that the angle of the gradient is most important, because
downhill force is proportional to this variable. The most important value is PRAT,

128

1 Tires

Fig. 1.132 Taguchi plan with 16 sets of tires (Daimler and Continental Cooperation)

that is, the built-up torque for the slip angle for which the lateral force is zero. The
cornering stiffness of the tire is also important, even if secondary. A smaller
cornering stiffness tends to be beneﬁcial in this instance. The symmetric conicity
value and, above all, the ply steering force which was previously explained do not
play any role. Therefore, the value for PRAT should also be speciﬁed in the tire
speciﬁcations manual, even though it is very difﬁcult to measure.

The conicity value is very important for the run-off or drift tendency if the values
from left and right differ. This effect will dominate if a change of the tire at the front
axle has an impact on the run-off, or if the state of wear becomes noticeable.

Hence, the conicity value should also be noted in the speciﬁcations manual. The
conicity is a measure of belt centering and helps to verify the quality of the tire. An
order of magnitude of x ± 30 N would be appropriate, where x is the “natural
conicity” of the tire speciﬁcation. This value is determined by the tire manufacturer
and should not exceed ±50 N.

Another particularity lies in the fact that conicity values change while vehicles
are being driven. However, it changes in a relatively symmetric manner when the

1.6 Tire Characteristics

129

Fig. 1.133 Change in conical force over run-time

chassis is set up properly. This means that the conicity change in itself does not
have any negative impact, Fig. 1.133. Both effects are additive, i.e. the conicity
cannot be moved outwards by decentering the belt, and the conicity can be moved
through driving operations, e.g. by replacing the tire.

Driving stability and ease of steering are very important in all driving situations.
Stability is deﬁned as the ability of a vehicle to keep undesirable vehicle move-
ments to a suitable level even in the presence of disturbances. Ease of steering
means steering responses which can be predicted by the driver. Tire properties have
a major impact on these basic characteristics. The most important tire properties are
the cornering stiffness, lateral stiffness, camber stiffness, and the pneumatic trail.
Another inﬂuencing factor is the tire circumferential force while the vehicle is being
driven or braked.

Steering ease is inﬂuenced by stationary sensitivity to steering, i.e. the amount of
yaw rate or lateral acceleration which can be achieved for every steering input.
Another inﬂuencing factor is cornering stiffness. Cornering stiffness is limited on
the lower end by steering sensitivity which is too low. On the upper side, it is
affected by steering sensitivity which is too high. Another evaluation parameter for
steering ease is the yaw response time until the ﬁrst maximum after a quick steering
input. Here, it should be ensured that the increase in cornering stiffness is not useful
beyond a certain value.

Above all other tire characteristics, lateral stiffness is another key parameter. The
lateral stiffness should have a certain minimum value so as not to have a destabi-
lizing effect. If lateral stiffness and stiffness with respect to slip angle are too low,
the steering precision will be too low. If the values are too high, the vehicle will
react violently. The optimal range essential depends on the yaw torque.

As a response characteristic for the driver, aligning torque or pneumatic trail are
very important. Unexpected torques can destabilize the control circuit between
driver, vehicle, and environment. The reduction in aligning torque can be used as a
preliminary warning of the limiting region starting from the mean slip angle itself.
Here, the response time should be as short as possible.

130

1 Tires

One inﬂuencing factor in curve handling, especially in the boundary regions,
takes place through camber-side force. For smaller wheel loads, the cornering
stiffness of tires should be as large as possible to ensure that the wheel load on the
inside rear wheel is kept as high as possible should the brakes be applied while in
the curve.

Cornering stiffness is deﬁned as the slope of the lateral force over the slip angle.
Pneumatic trail for the 0° slip angle is deﬁned as the quotient of the aligning torque
stiffness and the cornering stiffness, wherein the aligning torque stiffness is com-
puted as the slope of the aligning torque over the slip angle. The cornering stiffness
increases with wheel load as a ﬁrst approximation about the operating point,
depending on the tire, in a somewhat linear manner. However, for wheel loads
above 130% of the nominal wheel load, it begins to fall again. According to a
simple theoretical calculation, the pneumatic trail increases by an exponential factor
of 1.5 times the wheel load as a ﬁrst approximation. However, slightly higher
values are obtained in measurements around the operating point, depending on the
tire. The cornering stiffness can be used as a measurement of the side wind
response. The pneumatic trail provides information about the necessary additional
torque. Therefore, the cornering stiffness and zero aligning torque are important for
a half-axle load. Simpliﬁed, this means that the greater the cornering stiffness, the
smaller the shift under side winds, and the greater the pneumatic trail and additional
steering torque. Camber stiffness is deﬁned as the slope of the lateral force over the
camber angle. The camber stiffness can be used as a measure for lane rut charac-
teristics. Therefore, camber stiffness is important in the case of the half-axle load.
Simpliﬁed, this means that the greater the camber stiffness, the more sensitive the
tire is to lane grooves. Typically, the ratio of camber stiffness to cornering stiffness
is speciﬁed. The camber follow-on is very small and insigniﬁcant. This is because
the camber lateral force is created by an uneven distribution of ground pressures.
What is important is that the lateral forces due to slip angles and the lateral force
due to the camber should not act at the same point.

The values are dependent on the air pressure, Fig. 1.134. As air pressure
increases, the cornering stiffness decreases for small wheel loads in the region of
normal wheel loads. In the case of large wheel loads, the cornering stiffness
increases. The pneumatic trail generally drops with increasing air pressure but
always increases linearly with wheel load. The quotient of camber and cornering
stiffness remains nearly constant.

The maximum of the lateral force characteristic curve (coefﬁcient of static
friction at slip angle) and the zero-crossing of the aligning torque usually coincide
for the same slip angle. The maximum of the lateral force characteristic curve is a
measure of the cornering potential of a tire. The zero-crossing of the aligning torque
can be used as approximate value of the corresponding slip angle.

The maximum under varying wheel loads are important. With a high axle load
outside of the curve, this could be, for example, 0.8 (cid:1) axle load. With a low axle
load inside of the curve, this could be, for example 0.2 (cid:1) axle load.

In simple terms, this means that the higher the maximum, the higher the max-
imum attainable lateral acceleration. Wheel load sensitivity means that the drop in

1.6 Tire Characteristics

131

Fig. 1.134 Dependency on air pressure of cornering stiffness and pneumatic trail

the lateral forces Fy/Fz is relative to the wheel load over the slip angle. Simpliﬁed,
this means that the larger the wheel load sensitivity, the more problematic the
behavior in the limiting regions. This sensitivity is determined by measuring the
wheel load, but is also determined by measuring the slip angle (quotient of lateral
force and wheel load over slip angle). The rim width is another factor which
inﬂuences tire properties, cornering stiffness, and pneumatic trail. Here, it is found
that as the width of the rim increases, cornering stiffness also increases. One inch
can mean an increase of up to 8%. However, the pneumatic trail drops rather
negligibly.

1.6.1.2 Nonlinear Range of Coefﬁcients of Friction and Braking

Distance

The braking distance on dry and wet surfaces is very important as it
is a
safety-relevant property. Nevertheless, utilized adhesion which is required by
customers on dry roads is usually much less than on wet roads.

Customer-positive tire physics are characterized by a number of conﬂicting goals
which need be taken into consideration. This can be shown most easily by plotting
the extent of damping against frequency. Wet and dry traction as well as the rolling
resistance depend on the frequency. Whereas low damping is important in the case
of rolling resistance,
it must be high while braking. Figure 1.135 shows the
damping properties against temperature.

132

1 Tires

Adhesion 
friction

Hysteresis 
friction 

Rolling 
resistance

Fig. 1.135 Damping over frequency (Source Continental)

These conﬂicting goals can be seen clearly in the case of tires. Similarly, there
are conﬂicts between rolling resistance, (wet) adhesion, and wear. This particular
relationship is often called the “magic triangle.”

Figure 1.136 shows these conﬂicting goals for a range of sample tires which
have comparable operational performance. What is surprising is that the only way
to avoid these conﬂicting goals is through new technologies. The ultimate goal is to
make tire damping selective relative to frequency.

A target conﬂict also exists between dry braking distances and wet grip. Given
the conditions of present-day road trafﬁc, the probability of accidents on wet roads
is about ﬁve times greater than that of dry conditions. Therefore, it makes sense to
afford a higher level of importance on wet grip.

Both wet and dry braking distances can be estimated in a relative manner from
the tire properties by analyzing the coefﬁcients of friction. The Mercedes tire
measurement bus has measured a correlation between the coefﬁcient of friction and
braking distance measurements, Fig. 1.137.

Fig. 1.136 Conﬂict goals dry braking distance and rolling resistance (for comparable operational
performance)

1.6 Tire Characteristics

133

Fig. 1.137 Coefﬁcient of friction against braking distance

Fig. 1.138 Repeated braking of a tire

Coefﬁcients of friction are essentially a function of wheel load, road surface, tire,
environmental and test temperature, measurement rate, heating procedure, and the
condition of the tire.

Tires can be “braked in,” meaning that tire tread lugs can become polished due
to friction during braking, which gives rise to “sawtooth” wear, leading to shorter
braking distances, Fig. 1.138.

The coefﬁcient of friction also depends on temperature and the tire rubber
mixture. Winter tire mixtures are suitable primarily for temperatures below 7 °C,
while summer tires are suitable for temperatures above this. On extremely dry
roads, summer tires have the shortest braking distance, even on negative slopes.

1.6.2 Driving Comfort—Noise and Vibrations

Minimizing vibrations and noise is always a challenge to the developers of tires and
vehicles. The perception of noise and vibrations depends mainly on the amplitude,
frequency, and damping of the automobile. However, perception of vibration can

134

1 Tires

vary from person to person depending on the situation. Some factors involved here
include age, gender, height, body positioning relative to the vibration source,
activity during vibrations, and the expectations of the person. Cultural expectations
also play a role which cannot be underestimated.

The eyes and inner ear are basically able to perceive vibrations in the range of
0.1–0.5 Hz. A car rolling over a road with long-wavelength unevenness lies in this
frequency range. These types of oscillations can quickly lead to unpleasant dis-
turbances in equilibrium, especially for children. This phenomenon is often referred
to as sea or car sickness.

Organs and large parts of the body such as the arms, leg, back, heart, and
stomach respond very sensitively to frequencies between 0.5 and 60 Hz. Such cases
usually involve jerks or jumps or other forms of shock (agitation).

The largest organ in the human body, the skin, is sensitive to stimuli between 60
and 100 Hz, which is a characteristic range for heavy machinery. Such oscillations
can produce a tickling sensation in the human body.

Various sources of mechanical and acoustic vibrations act upon a vehicle: the
engine, the powertrain, and aerodynamic resistances or vibrations of the structure as
well. Engines are becoming quieter and smoother from generation to generation,
and chassis shapes are becoming more and more aerodynamically reﬁned. As a
result, the share of the noise at the interface between tire and road has been
increasing for some time now although the rest of the noise has been receding. It
has simply not been possible to achieve noise optimization of tires to the same
extent over the same period. To attain the goal of increased noise reduction, it is
crucial to know why and when a tire is set into oscillations and how it transmits
them.

1.6.2.1 Noise

A series of vibrations is triggered by the tires, starting from the contact surface
between the tire and road (jerks, impacts, friction, etc.). The tire belts which are
expanded and harnessed by the inner pressure of the tire amplify these vibrations.
There are several mechanisms which translate these vibrations to noise, Fig. 1.139.
These mechanisms depend individually on the velocity of the vehicle and lead to
different frequencies, Fig. 1.140.

The rolling motion excites initial longitudinal/torsional resonance in the tire.
Usually, these resonances lie in the range of 30–40 Hz. The torsional eigenreso-
nance of the tire is the oscillation of the tread relative to the bead. In the case of
vehicles, the interior compartment can also be excited. This phenomenon is known
as humming.

The resonance position depends on sidewall stiffness, air pressure, and belt
angle, or that which is the resonance system of a rim-sidewall-steel belt. Experience
has shown that it is quite difﬁcult to shift tire resonance, since tire resonances are
primarily a function of the tire’s dimensions. Often, an impact analysis of wheels
and tires shows that any change in the resonance due to air pressure variation can be

1.6 Tire Characteristics

135

Fig. 1.139 Mechanism of noise generation (Source Goodyear)

Fig. 1.140 Tire noise pressure over frequency (Source Continental)

136

1 Tires

detected. Going through all of the sampled wheels also shows that there are “better”
and there are “worse” brands. Often, then, in the case of conﬂicting goals, rolling
comfort must be sacriﬁced in the interest of humming reduction. Tire manufacturers
can also produce tires in special ways: by using asymmetrically calendared steel
cord to improve damping, modiﬁed winding proﬁles with different materials for
making more rounded contours, or the use of rubber mixtures with better damping
properties. The tangential eigenresonance of the tire can be changed, for instance,
with a stiffer side wall. Increasing air pressure by 1 bar changes tangential eigen-
frequency by about 5 Hz.

Another means of noise reduction is to reduce excitation with the help of better
in-tire damping, but this will be at the expense of rolling resistance. To reduce noise
in general, care should be taken to ensure that no eigenfrequencies of the tire lie in
the region of this tangential eigenresonance.

If we look at both mechanical and acoustic comfort, we ﬁnd that structure-borne
vibrations and airborne noise are caused by impacts and friction as well as by air
compression in the contact area between the tire and the road surface.

During rolling, road unevenness gives rise to jerkiness. The tires undergo
deformation according to the forces which act externally, and start to oscillate in
their internal structure or at their surface. These oscillations are then transmitted to
the vehicle as structure-borne noise and/or to the surrounding air as airborne noise.
Tires damp the impacts and vibrations of the road with the help of its viscoelastic
properties and through the loss of energy brought about by deformation (hystere-
sis). If the excited frequencies are in the range of the eigenfrequency of the tire, this
acts as an ampliﬁer of the oscillations. This reinforcement leads to a deterioration in
comfort, especially if this frequency is near the eigenfrequencies of the vehicle.

This is why it is necessary to know precisely which tire oscillations arise. Modal
analysis is the determination of eigenmodes, eigenfrequencies, and damping of an
oscillating structure. To carry out modal analysis, the tire is mounted on a bench
which is isolated from oscillations (ﬁxed rim) and excited with a shaker. The
acceleration at various points of the tire surface and the force of excitation are
measured and the response function of the tire is computed. From a set of response
functions, the modal forms can be obtained with the corresponding frequency and
damping. Vibration characteristics of a tire essentially depend on the frequency.
Below 30 Hz, the tire behaves like a spring. Between 30 and 250 Hz, the tire could
be considered a composite vibrating system with several eigenoscillations. These
oscillations can be divided into two categories: radial and lateral, Fig. 1.141. The
eigenmodes can also be visualized.

Above 250 Hz, the tire vibrates mainly in the surface region of the interface
between the tire and the road. The oscillations then take place before and after the
contact surface. At higher frequencies, the damping increases. As a result, the
vibrations cannot propagate in an arbitrary manner.

Tire rolling noise originates from the roughness of the track surface along with
the tread proﬁle of the tire. This gives rise to oscillations in the tire structure, the air
enclosed in the tire, and the ambient air which is dragged along by the tread.

1.6 Tire Characteristics

137

Fig. 1.141 Classing of eigenoscillation (Source Continental)

The excitation due to track surface through individual obstacles creates not only
mechanical, but acoustic vibrations as well. On smooth tracks (macro-rough roads),
the passengers perceive only acoustic noise. The major part of the acoustic energy
here lies below 800 Hz. The surface roughness thus excites the tire, making it
vibrate and creating a noise inside the vehicle due to the vibration of the tire
structure and the air volume enclosed in the tire (Fig. 1.142).

For the vibrations of air columns, very speciﬁc vibration patterns exist. The ﬁrst
harmonic, also known as the cavity oscillation, lies in the range between 200 and
250 Hz, Fig. 1.143. Similarly, the impact of the rubber blocks of the tread on the
track surface also generates noise. These accelerations set the tires into vibrations at
contact run-in and run-out, and at frequencies which depend directly on the cycle in
the region of contact in the rubber blocks and tread grooves. These frequencies

138

1 Tires

Fig. 1.142 Visualization of eigenoscillation forms (Source Continental)

Fig. 1.143 Resonance through cavity (Source Continental)

usually add up to 1000 Hz. Once set into motion, the tire excites the surrounding
air, which gives rise to the described noise inside and outside the passenger cabin.
To reduce acoustic load due to impact noise, the tread proﬁle features a speciﬁc
architecture which eliminates peak noise, which is the main source of acoustic
discomfort. This reduces the total noise level.

Another source of noise is the whining of the tread itself. This noise arises as
individual tread blocks meet the road surface. Based on a tire manufacturer’s
experience, attempts are made to ﬁnd a pattern which does not generate this

1.6 Tire Characteristics

139

whining sound. Arrangements of tread blocks could lead to the formation of beats if
the elements are of comparable size. This leads to signiﬁcant peaks of similar
frequency levels. The amplitude or volume can be reduced through a thicker tread
substrate and smaller groove width, but this effort would have to be weighed in
terms of its effects on other properties.

The slip, too, could lead to noise formation. If a tire is rolling down a track, it
gives rise to mechanisms which operate in the contact surface, namely friction and
micro-slip. These properties contribute to tire grip. At constant velocity, rubber
blocks slipping against the asphalt give rise to a hissing sound.

This hissing sound can be compared to the hissing sound which can be heard
while driving over a wet road. This high is a frequency noise (800–4000 Hz) with
low amplitude. For larger slip values, the rubber blocks slip at the contact run-out
faster than in the case of uniform movement. The energy released by such processes
can produce pronounced noise such as the classic “squeaking” which can often be
heard while driving over a painted surface as typically found in a parking lot or
basement garage.

When a tire rolls across a surface, the blocks which impact at the contact run-in
trap the surrounding air in the tread grooves. The tread is compressed as the contact
is passed and with this, the air which is trapped in the grooves is also compressed.
At the contact run-out, the air escapes suddenly in a process known as air pumping.
The noise is ampliﬁed even further if the compressed air begins to resonate.

1.6.2.2 Vibrations

Tire vibrations are transmitted mechanically through the wheel suspension, springs,
and steering system to the remaining vehicle components. In the vehicle itself, these
vibrations can be perceived on the ﬂoor of the vehicle, in the seat, and at the
steering wheel. Sound is transferred through surfaces inside the vehicle and through
the air. The restricted driving comfort which can be experienced on rough roads is
due to irregularities in the direction of travel, which in Western Europe is mostly
experienced on country roads. The strength of these vibrations and discomfort is
determined by the tires and suspension, which have a direct effect on the strength of
these accelerations. The reduction of these accelerations depends similarly on the
tires and suspension and is known as the damping time or attenuation.

For a vehicle which moves between 20 and 110 km/h on a road with longitu-
dinal unevenness in the wavelength of 0.5–50 m, a theoretical frequency range of
0.1–60 Hz is responsible for the oscillations which arise. For a vehicle traveling
80 km/h on corresponding roads, the main source of vibration energy lies below a
frequency of 30 Hz.

The eigenfrequency of a car body’s cushioned mass is about 1.5 Hz. At this
frequency, the car body encounters strong vibrations, which are known as car body
resonance or the trail effect. Mainly between 10 and 20 Hz, un-cushioned masses
whose eigenfrequencies lie in this range are set into oscillation. The system of
wheels and tires oscillates vertically between the road and the vehicle, in a process

140

1 Tires

known as wheel jumping. The motion of the un-cushioned masses is transferred to
the inside of the vehicle as well.

Although the excitation frequencies for the front and rear axle are identical, the
rear axle ends up being excited after the front axle during operation. The time lag
between the excitation of front and rear axle depends on the wheelbase and speed of
the vehicle.

Tires don’t have any eigenoscillations in the frequency spectrum between 0 and
30 Hz. Within this bandwidth, the magnitude of force exerted by the tire on the
wheel steering elements and the car body depend directly on the radial stiffness of
the tire. This parameter also determines the frequency of the cushioned and
un-sprung masses.

Individual unevenness on road surfaces such as tar patches, lateral joins, man-
hole covers, bridge joints, or small potholes act as external impacts on a tire. These
obstacles, which could be 5–30 mm high and a few millimeters to a centimeter
long, can project out from the surface of the road (patches, manholes) or interrupt
the road surface brieﬂy (potholes, frost damage).

feel

Inside the vehicle,

the driver and passengers

the impacts whose
multi-frequency excitation lead to mechanical and acoustic vibrations in the fre-
quency band between 0 and 200 Hz. The accelerations resulting from this occur
brieﬂy or over an extended period and essentially depend on the type of tire. This
phenomenon is called polling or scanning. Here, the tire climbs over an unevenness,
is deformed but without copying the unevenness completely, and then drops down
on the other side of the unevenness. Throughout this process, a vertical and lon-
gitudinal force act upon the center of the wheel.

While rolling over objects, tires experiences two effects:
By minimizing the force transferred to the center of the wheel, the wheel ﬁlters
the forces and is excited into vibrations at its eigenfrequency in the process. Here,
the energy which was stored while rolling over obstacles is released.

While driving over an individual obstacle, therefore, the tire will be excited to
oscillation at one or more of its eigenfrequencies. The forces caused by the tire
vibrations act at the center of the wheel and cause a strain on the car body.

Even the wheel/tire units themselves can trigger unpleasant vibrations. The
reason for this is minor unevenness encountered while driving, or manufacturing/
assembly irregularities of the tires. Irregularities can exist in the tire contour, in its
distribution of mass, or in its stiffness. The irregularities in mass cause imbalances,
which are often caused themselves by a minor ﬂuctuation in tread thicknesses.
Balance or imbalance can be classiﬁed two ways: static and dynamic. Static
imbalance can be detected on a stationary wheel, whereas dynamic imbalances can
only be detected on a rotating wheel. Dynamic imbalances create centrifugal forces
which do not lie parallel to the plane containing the center of the wheel, thereby
creating a tilting torque. This torque leads to ﬂuctuations in the lateral force at the
center of the wheel, which is then perceived by the driver as shuddering or as
vibration of the steering wheel. Generally, static imbalance is much more percep-
tible at the steering wheel than dynamic imbalance.

1.6 Tire Characteristics

141

Similarly, the tire contour can suffer from non-uniformity. Radial and lateral
runouts exist in this case. Radial run out is an irregularity in the tire radius, that is,
the tire isn’t actually round. Lateral deﬂection describes an irregularity in the dis-
tance between the outer side of the tire and the center plane of the wheel which
leads to ﬂuctuations in the lateral forces at the center of the wheel, which are
subsequently perceived by passengers as wobbles or jolts with corresponding
characteristics.

A radial deﬂection forces the center of the wheel into a non/rectilinear forward
motion, forcing it to make up and down motions. If the tire is rolls while under load,
this effect results in ﬂuctuations in the radial forces at the center of the wheel.

The same phenomenon can also be observed at the force level: if a tire is subject
to ﬂuctuations in radial stiffness, this parameter does not have the same values
across the circumference of the whole tire. The main reasons for this are the
variations in thickness or curves of the inner fabric layers in addition to local
agglomerations of material.

As with radial misalignments, ﬂuctuations in radial stiffness also lead to vertical
oscillations at the center of the wheel. This could lead to vibrations and even noise
at the ﬂoor, seats, or steering wheel of the vehicle.

If a tire is subject to ﬂuctuations in lateral stiffness, this is due to an inhomo-
geneous distribution of the lateral stiffness across the circumference of the tire. This
is usually caused by ﬂuctuations in fabric layer density and duplications of material.
Like lateral misalignments, variations in lateral stiffness also lead to undesirable
ﬂuctuations in the lateral force at the center of the wheel and to lateral vibrations of
the passenger compartment. The excitation frequencies which are caused by the
absence of uniformity are several times greater than the wheel rotational speed.
Thus, the amount of ﬂuctuation depends directly on the velocity of the vehicle.

If velocity is changing, the forces caused by unevenness excite the various
eigenfrequencies of
the vehicle components. These components include the
un-sprung masses of the wheel and tire units, the ﬂoor of the vehicle, the steering
wheel, and other parts. These forces, which act from the outside and which are
ampliﬁed by resonance effects of individual vehicle structures, create oscillations,
which in turn cause jerks, tingling vibrations, or even noise.

1.7 Tire Models and Simulation

The simulation of the vehicle with tire models is the ﬁnal stage of detail in the
digital design process. During the development of the chassis, simulations are
carried out with consideration for all the chassis components, such as the steering
system, axle models, spring/damping models, and of course,
the tire models,
Fig. 1.144 [31–34]. These models are mostly mathematical, but physical models
can also be incorporated owing to the complexity and computing reasons. The
models are parameterized with measurement data.

142

1 Tires

Fig. 1.144 Overall vehicle simulation

Fig. 1.145 Digital tire test bench

Simulation results are being used to an increasing extent in place of measured

data.

Tire properties are simulated with very detailed models and results are generated
with the help of virtual test rigs, Fig. 1.145. Simulation results then serve as the
basis for parameterization of the tire model.

1.7 Tire Models and Simulation

143

Fig. 1.146 Systematic modeling

Based on a CAD model, tire behavior is described and evaluated in various
modeling stages. The process is carried out by the tire manufacturer while designing
the tire conﬁguration for the analysis, evaluation, and optimization. The simulation
makes it possible to arrive at inferences even in the absence of hardware, and allows
for a better understanding of the system. Simple disturbance effects can also be
turned on or off as desired. In addition, important parameters that are difﬁcult or
impossible to measure can be recorded, and important effects can be isolated.
Nevertheless, these tests must be validated at the end. The overall process of model
construction is described in Fig. 1.146.

Tire models for predicting tire properties are built mostly based on ﬁnite element
models or even with the help of multi-body system models. Besides this, there’s a
differentiation between tire models for tire design and for models which are
intended for the design of the complete vehicle. These models are described in
Fig. 1.147.

1.7.1 Tire Models for Tire Development

In tire development, classic ﬁnite element models are used, for instance, to predict
compression and expansion in tires with run-ﬂat characteristics while in their
fail-safe mode, Fig. 1.148. For this, special elements which approximate the
characteristic behavior of rubber will have to be used. Tires with air should contain
an appropriately scaled element for internal tire pressure which allows the model
tires to be used to predict properties such as spring characteristics, Fig. 1.149. Finite
element model simulation is also used to analyze eigenfrequencies and eigenmodes

144

1 Tires

Fig. 1.147 Tire models for tire and vehicle simulation

Fig. 1.148 Stresses in the case of run-ﬂat tires in run-ﬂat mode without air (Source Goodyear)

of stationary and rolling tires. Thanks to this technique, parameters which could
lead to unfavorable resonances can be identiﬁed at a very early stage and be taken
into consideration accordingly, Fig. 1.150.

1.7 Tire Models and Simulation

145

Fig. 1.149 Simulation of the tire deﬂection characteristic curve (Source Pirelli)

Fig. 1.150 Simulation of the structure (Source Continental)

The prediction of ground pressure distribution is equally elementary, Fig. 1.151.
The aim with ground pressure is ﬁrst to ensure a large footprint and secondly to
promote peak pressures which are as small as possible in the ground pressure
distribution. Optimization of ground pressure distribution is of decisive importance
in determining the quality of longitudinal and latitudinal force generation. If the
model also considers the adhesive and sliding properties of the contact surface, it is
additionally possible to simulate the lateral forces as well as the longitudinal forces.
This allows for inferences to be drawn about footprint deformation as well as the
distribution of sheer stress in the footprint, Fig. 1.152.

The proﬁle is additionally discretized to allow for further analyses of ground
pressure distribution, which of course increases the model’s complexity consider-
ably, Fig. 1.153.

Models with discretized tread are also used for designing wear characteristics as
well as for noise simulation, Fig. 1.154. With the CAD drawing of the tire proﬁle as
a starting point, a two-dimensional (2D) ﬁnite element model is created and then
converted into a three-dimensional (3D) model.

Even the interaction between tire and road can be simulated. Figure 1.155 shows
a simulation of the interaction between tire proﬁle and track surface. This overall

146

1 Tires

Fig. 1.151 Optimization of the ground pressure distribution, situation at start (b), optimal (a)
(Source Continental)

Fig. 1.152 Sliding movement in the footprint (Source Continental)

1.7 Tire Models and Simulation

147

Fig. 1.153 Simulation of lateral force (Source Pirelli)

Fig. 1.154 Modeling of the proﬁle (Source Pirelli)

148

1 Tires

Fig. 1.155 Finite element simulation of ground pressure distribution inclusive of the proﬁle
model

simulation makes it possible to directly evaluate interactions of tire with its environment
in a comprehensive and uniform simulation process.

1.7.2 Tire Models for Vehicle Development

A correct mapping of the tire is a key component to the simulation of a complete
vehicle, since tires are the components through which all ground excitations will be
transferred to the complete system. Therefore, one of the aims of tire modeling is to
arrive at a compromise between a detailed description and low computing effort. In
multi-body system model (MKS) simulation programs, tires can be equated with
force elements.

Tire models help not only to represent tire properties both qualitatively and
quantitatively, but to predict them as well. During chassis development, simulations
are done taking all of the chassis components into consideration. This includes the
steering system, axle models, spring/damping models, and of course tire models. In
the modeling of tires, various information is required to build a working model.
This includes the kinematic points of the chassis, masses and moments of inertia of
the individual chassis components, and the characteristic curves for stiffness and
damping of the elastic parts. Owing to the large number of chassis and tire models,
a tire description which ﬁts the process is usually needed for the vehicle simulation.
In this area, there is no question that the tires inﬂuence vehicle simulation results
like no other vehicle subsystem, and that they are the most complicated subsystem.
Depending on the focus, tire models must satisfy different requirements. These
requirements range from simple models for stationary rolling states across level
surfaces to complex methods which can simulate tire behavior over obstacles or
uneven roads. If a model does not adequately satisfy task requirements, its simu-
lation result loses its value.

1.7 Tire Models and Simulation

149

Fig. 1.156 Areas of application of tire models

Tire models are mostly mathematical, but sometimes partially physical owing to
their complexity and for computing reasons. Models are parameterized with the
help of measurement data or with simulation results.

Tire models are usually built for examining vehicle dynamics and to predict tire
properties and characteristics based on mathematical approximation functions with
the help of a MKS or even a ﬁnite element method Fig. 1.156. Many elements
which are complicated in terms of their system dynamics, such as the nonlinear
force elements (springs, dampers), kinematic conditions, and contact models, are
incorporated into the overall model, Fig. 1.162.

Determination of parameters is an essential part of tire modeling [35]. With the
help of standardized tire measurements, model parameters can be determined in a
short time and the necessary validations can be made. The goal in this step is to
simulate or map the tire under the proper considerations depending on the task, in
terms of force transmission mechanisms and movement characteristics. Parameter
identiﬁcation methods are used for the approximation parameters of the models,
while the parameters which can’t be measured directly, such as the course of the
coefﬁcient of friction, are determined with the help of tire characteristic maps.

Based on measurement results, the free parameters of the various tire models can

be customized to achieve a realistic tire response during simulation.

One important distinguishing feature of the models here is the depth of

modeling, Fig. 1.157, and suitability for various use cases.

150

1 Tires

Fig. 1.157 Differences in depth of modeling

1.7.2.1 Horizontal Dynamics

When characteristic ﬁeld models are used, the movements of the individual parts
within a tire are not computed relative to each other. Only the relation between the
input and output variables of a system are considered, Fig. 1.158. Characteristic
map models are the basis for real-time simulations and can be used for vehicle

Fig. 1.158 Input and output relations of a tire model

1.7 Tire Models and Simulation

151

dynamic calculations but not for comfort analyses. The creation of characteristic
map models isn’t very complex due to the small numbers of parameters.

If the force measurements have been carried out, the measurement data will be
identiﬁed for the tire models. Simple Pacejka approaches are very well suited to
characteristic curves [36].

Fy ¼ D (cid:6) sin C (cid:6) arctan (cid:6) B (cid:6) a (cid:3) arctan B (cid:6) a

ð

ð

ð

Þ

Þ
Þ

Figure 1.159 shows that Pacejka approaches are very well suited for longitudinal
and lateral force measurements. Whereas the approximation of individual curves
where y = f(x) is highly suitable for commonly used models, things become sig-
niﬁcantly more difﬁcult with characteristic maps.

The same issue also appears in the case of basic data generated from the char-
acteristic maps, such as cornering stiffness and pneumatic trail, Fig. 1.160. Among
important key characteristic data, e.g. cornering and camber stiffness, deviations of
more than 10% are often seen between measurement and model data.

Fig. 1.159 Identiﬁcation of tire models

Fig. 1.160 Cornering stiffness and pneumatic trail in different models

152

1 Tires

Fig. 1.161 Inﬂuence of the different measurement processes

Today, measurements used to identify tire characteristics maps are increasingly
gathered on vehicles [37]. Here, it is important to ensure that the vehicle is mea-
sured at various amounts of load and that a precise camber (rim–road) and roll angle
measurement is made. Subsequently, measurements need to be made on the vehicle
all the way up to their extreme limits. An overview of the inﬂuence of measurement
procedures on result quality is shown in Figs. 1.161 and 1.157. Here, the entire
process chain must also be veriﬁed.

The validity range of these models is relatively small, since the parameters used
are applicable only under speciﬁc conditions and states. Owing to their short
computing times, however, the models are frequently used in vehicle dynamic
simulations.

Extensions are described, for instance, in [38]. Alternative tire models can be
found in [39]. Tire temperature plays a major role in vehicle dynamics as well;
hence there have been several attempts in the recent past to include the effects of tire
temperature in simulation [40, 41].

1.7.2.2 Vertical Dynamics

An example of a simple multi-body tire model consisting of springs, masses, and
dampers can be seen in Fig. 1.162.

Further reﬁnements would be a rolling model, radial spring model, or a model
with a deformable belt band and forces in the tire contact surface [42, 43]. Tire
parameters which are required for the calculation can be determined through special
measurements or calculations from complex tire models. Thus, the model is in a
position to drive over uneven roads and to transfer forces which arise to the axle
and subsequently to the vehicle. Ground contact is scanned through so called
brushes and the contact forces which arise are computed. One means of reducing
the computing effort of comfort models is the reduction in degrees of freedom of the
mechanical structure.

1.7 Tire Models and Simulation

153

Fig. 1.162 Tire contact models

Brush and ring models map the tire belt with a rigid circular ring which is
coupled to a rigid rim through nonlinear stiffness and dampers. In the brush model,
the contact area is modeled in such a way that individual, deformable brushes
between the tire belt and substrate describe the transmission of forces in the lon-
gitudinal and lateral directions.

The most widely used analytical model is the elastically embedded circular ring
(in all its variations). With this model, it is not only possible to successfully
compute the slip characteristic curve and model properties of a tire, but also the
non-stationary rolling processes. One important requirement here is that all tire
models have easy parameterization from standard measurements. Additionally,
parameter optimization and the reduction of parameters to as few as possible is also
preferred.

So called structural mechanical models work with a slightly ﬁner discretization.
Their accuracy and computing times greatly depend on the degree of discretization.
The computing time is usually shorter than in the case of ﬁnite element models,
which makes it possible to use them in vehicle dynamic modeling. These models
are used especially for simulations of uneven track surfaces, driving over obstacles,
and in the area of comfort-relevant vibrations. Here, the computing times are sig-
niﬁcantly longer than when compared to empirical or semi-empirical models.
However, the number of required model parameters and effort needed for deter-
mining them is less. By discretizing the tire, the vibrations of the tire itself and its
eigenfrequencies can also be represented. In this way, it is possible to simulate
driving over obstacles and even rolling over track unevenness. While traveling over
an obstacle, such as a ditch, the tire is subjected to an impact right up to the rim by
the obstacle. When this is simulated, the tire should follow the following features: it
should be possible to represent the mass distribution in detail, to describe the rim–
belt contact, and to physically map the internal air pressure difference in the tire.

154

1 Tires

1.7.2.3 High-Frequency Dynamics

The most precise tire models are ﬁnite element models. They provide the deepest
insights into the processes which take place within the tire, but are associated with
long computing times which stands in the way of their use for vehicle dynamic
simulation.

FE models take component deformation under the inﬂuence of force into con-
sideration, and are usually employed for determining eigenfrequencies or other
component properties [44]. Here, nonlinear models of materials are used for the
various rubber mixtures and the steel inserts of the belt and carcass are embedded
into the elements.

Through detailed representation and linking of individual tire components, tire
behavior can be simulated even without prior measurement. However, while run-
ning simulations with such tire models, it is essential to know the tire structure
precisely. Long computing times are accepted in the area of chassis simulation,
where the deformation of elastic chassis components must be taken into account,
such as during a vehicle crash. However, ﬁnite element tire models cannot be used
in complete vehicle simulation. It may be realistic to use such models in real time
only in the near future, Fig. 1.163 [14].

Fig. 1.163 Simulation of the interaction between road and the tires (Source COSIN, Prof. Gipser,
Esslingen)

1.7 Tire Models and Simulation

155

Fig. 1.164 Finite element contact model, structural tire model, structural wheel-tire model, and
structural tire–acoustic model (Source COSIN, Prof. Gipser, Esslingen)

Finite element tire models can also be linked with other ﬁnite element systems.
Figure 1.164 shows the extension of the ﬁnite element concept from the contact
model, to a tire model, a wheel model, and ﬁnally a model which can map the
vibrations of the air enclosed in the tire.

Chapter 2
Wheels

Nothing moves without wheels. This elementary statement describes not only a
technical prerequisite for a functioning automobile, but also the signiﬁcance of
wheels in vehicle design. Wheels must be designed to meet the demanding task of
achieving complete harmony with the vehicle body, because they contribute sig-
niﬁcantly towards the overall high design and build quality of the complete vehicle
[45].

Many vehicle- and axle-speciﬁc tasks are carried out through the wheel, namely
the transmission of dynamic driving forces between the vehicle and the road.
Wheels must carry the vehicle load, sustain forces of impact from the ground, and
transmit the rotary motion of axles to the tires. Furthermore, wheels must be able to
receive and transmit the forces of acceleration and braking as well as lateral forces
while maneuvering around corners. Wheel size is determined mainly by the space
required by the braking system, axle components, and the size of the tires used.

Casting is considered the shortest path from raw material to ﬁnished product
when it comes to wheels, while at the same time offering some excellent design
options. Various archeological ﬁndings indicate that humans were using casting
techniques as early as the end of the Bronze Age (1800–800 BC) to design rela-
tively light and simultaneously visually appealing cast bronze wheels, Fig. 2.1.
Unlike the typical disc or spoked wooden wheels which were common at the time,
these one-piece cast wheels had hollow spokes and hubs, and were used only for
very exclusive applications.

Perhaps the ﬁrst

light metal cast wheel for automobiles was UK Patent
No. 7928 ﬁled by Edwin Perks and Harold Birch, dated April 14, 1899, Fig. 2.2.
This “motor wheel” consisted of two aluminum cast parts which were linked
together with screws, between which—in a completely modern manner—a motor
was located. Something like this was previously inconceivable with the comparably
fragile wire spoke wheels. With this new wheel, functionality was at the forefront.
By the 1920s, wood was being increasingly replaced by steel as a material for
automobile wheels, and the wire spoke wheel had already become a standard
among all Grand Prix cars. In 1924, Ettore Bugatti presented the ﬁrst practical light
Fig. 2.1 Cast wheel made
from bronze, dating to around
800 BC (reconstruction)

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.2 Cast wheel from
Perks and Birch, 1899

metal cast wheel at the French Grand Prix in Lyon, Fig. 2.3. In three patents, he
described his light metal cast wheel as having better brake cooling, greater strength
compared to wire spoke wheels, and the possibility for using tubeless tires.
Although the debut in Lyon was not successful due to a number of tire punctures,
the characteristic wheels with strip spokes became a trademark of the Bugatti Grand
Prix cars. Ten years
returned to using lighter,
weight-optimized wire spoke wheels for reasons of functionality and in an effort to

later, however, Bugatti

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.3 Light metal cast
wheel from Bugatti, 1924–
1932

159

reestablish its prominence in the Grand Prix sport. Later, in the 1960s, Bugatti’s son
Roland lamented the mediocre quality of the cast wheels used by his father, par-
ticularly their unsatisfactory deformation characteristics. The only advantage he
saw was the lower manufacturing costs when compared to wire spoke wheels.

As car racing resumed after World War II, solo efforts towards the use of cast
wheels by avant-garde sportsmen such as Charles and John Cooper or Alex von
Falkenhausen went largely unnoticed. However, rapid development of engines and
chasses coincided with rapid advancements in tire manufacturing, causing wire
spoke wheels to be relegated to the background by the end of the 1950s. Broader,
more advanced tires required broader wheels which were also more stable in terms
of shape and which could handle tubeless tires.

In the interest of weight savings, magnesium was the ﬁrst choice in cast wheels, as it
has a density 32% lower than that of aluminum, Fig. 2.4. The problematic corrosion
and low expansion behaviors were initially hardly a concern with these race car wheels.
However, as some automobile manufacturers began to equip even series models with
magnesium wheels starting in the 1960s, the issue of corrosion in magnesium wheels
was quickly identiﬁed as a problem in day-to-day operations, Fig. 2.5.

2.1 Wheel Terminology

Two main parts are distinguished in a wheel: the rim and the wheel disc. These two
parts can be manufactured as one piece, connected to each other in a ﬁxed manner,
or be detachable [46, 47].

160

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.4 Magnesium cast wheel for Lotus F1 race cars of 1958 (size 5 J (cid:1) 15, weight 3.7 kg!)

Fig. 2.5 Corrosion as seen on magnesium wheels

In common conversation, the terms “rim” and “wheel” are often used synony-
mously. The term “wheel” is also frequently used to describe the complete wheel
and tire assembly, Fig. 2.6.

The wheel disc is the part which connects the rim with the wheel/axle hub
assembly. The wheel disc typically has holes for brake system cooling purposes.
The center of the wheel disc contains the center hole and wheel bolt/screw holes.
The wheel is ﬁxed to the axle using these holes. The center hole is a passage
through which the wheel is centered radially on the axle. In addition, wheels are

2.1 Wheel Terminology

161

Fig. 2.6 Terms related to the wheel

often equipped with alignment gauge holes which make it possible to use the
surface of the brake disc as a reference for the track and camber adjustments. This,
together with the tire beat seat, determines the concentricity (or radial run-out) of
the wheel. The attachment face, along with the rim ﬂange, is responsible for the
axial run-out of the wheel.

Technically, the term “rim” describes only the radially outermost part of the
wheel which receives the tire. Thus, the rim represents the elementary link between
the wheel disc and tire. It acts as an airtight seal for tubeless tires and is geomet-
rically matched to suit the tire. In most cases, wheel rims are divided into four
sections.

The wheel rim is limited on the inside and outside by rim ﬂanges (inner rim
ﬂange and outer rim ﬂange). The wheel rim represents the lateral end stop for the
tire beads and absorbs the forces which arise due to tire pressure and axial tire loads.
Speciﬁcations for the tire ﬂange are provided in the guidelines of the European Tyre
and Rim Technical Organization (ETRTO). The speciﬁcations deﬁnitively describe
the geometry of the rim ﬂange and its relationship with the drop center and can vary
depending on the type of usage and intended application. For example, the rim
ﬂange shape most commonly used for passenger cars is the J-horn form. The lower
B-.horn form is used for smaller vehicles and for mini-spare wheel systems.

The rim shoulder describes the area where the tire contacts the rim. It centers the
tire in a radial direction. This is the area where the tire ﬁnds the correct positioning
for radial and axial run-out, and it’s also the area where all dynamic driving forces

162

2 Wheels

are transmitted. In the case of tubeless tires, which is the type predominantly used
for passenger cars, the wheel–tire system is sealed at the rim shoulder.

The rim bed connects the inner and outer rim shoulders. In the case of auto-
mobiles, the most frequently used design is a drop center rim. Drop center rims
have a uniquely deﬁned form with a low-lying rim bed. The deep rim bed is a
necessary recess in the rim well which facilitates tire mounting and dismounting. To
mount a tire on such a wheel, the tire is ﬁrst positioned with one side of the tire bead
in the drop center, so that it can be drawn over the rim ﬂange on the opposite side.
The rim hump is a raised bead in the rim shoulder region. This helps to prevent
tubeless tires from jumping off the rim in low-pressure situations. H2 rims are used
predominantly in the passenger car segment, but extended hump rims (EH2+),
which feature a slightly larger hump diameter, are sometimes used as well, espe-
cially for run-ﬂat tire applications, Fig. 1.47.

The most important terms for the function, design, and engineering of wheels are

listed below.
(cid:129) Rim diameter (nominal diameter, dimension from rim shoulder to rim shoulder)
(cid:129) Rim circumference (measured value, determined using a special band which

runs around the rim shoulder)

(cid:129) Rim width (width of the rim, inner dimension between rim ﬂanges)
(cid:129) Center hole diameter
(cid:129) Rim offset (distance in mm from the center of the rim to the wheel contact

(cid:129) Bolt hole diameter (diameter of the circle on which the midpoints of the screw/

(cid:129) Rim ﬂange width (measured from the inner diameter of the rim to the saddle

surface)

bolt holes lie)

point of the horn radius)

Many factors must be taken into consideration when designing passenger car
wheels, some of which often present conﬂicting goals. The most crucial factors are:
(cid:129) High fatigue strength
(cid:129) Promotion of brake cooling
(cid:129) Reliable wheel fastening
(cid:129) High concentricity
(cid:129) Low axial run-out
(cid:129) Minimal space usage
(cid:129) Good protection against corrosion
(cid:129) Light weight
(cid:129) Low cost
(cid:129) Easy wheel and tire assembly
(cid:129) Good tire seating
(cid:129) Good seating of wheel balancing weights
(cid:129) Appealing design
(cid:129) Improved vehicle aerodynamics (Cw value)

2.2 Steel Wheels

2.2 Steel Wheels

163

The wheel forms the link between the tire and vehicle axle. It ensures that the forces
from the tire’s contact area are transmitted to the wheel hub.

In vehicle construction, there are many different wheel concepts intended for a
variety of applications. Wheels differ in terms of design, construction type, mate-
rials, and manufacturing processes.

Steel wheels are used by most automobile manufacturers as basic equipment
because of their robustness, material resilience, relatively lightweight construction
using high-strength steels, and cost-effective manufacturing technologies. Steel
wheels represent the most economical wheel version over the operational lifetime of
a vehicle.

The steel wheel consists of two parts: the rim and the wheel disc. These com-
ponents are made from hot-rolled steel sheets using the rolling and bending
reshaping processes, and then are welded together. The overall most cost-effective
type of passenger car wheel is made of hot-rolled and pickled steel strip sheets
wound out from a coil. The excellent mechanical properties of this material makes it
possible to manufacture thin-walled wheels with narrow tolerances to their ﬁnal
dimensions using highly automated and very precise bending and reshaping
processes.

The CO2 discussion in recent years has pushed automobile manufacturers
towards lightweight construction, accelerating the adoption of high-strength,
ﬁne-grained construction steel and dual-phase steel. The high tensile strength of
these materials (600–750 N/mm2), along with very good formability and weld-
ability, enables efﬁcient manufacturing of lightweight and inexpensive wheels.

There is a potential for further weight reduction through the use of tailored
blanks for wheel manufacturing. In this case, the sheet thickness of the starting
material is adapted to the stresses of the wheel by joining sheets of material using
laser welding to form a plate or board.

A standard passenger car wheel made of steel, Fig. 2.7, is the focus of discussion
throughout the following pages. It usually consists of two parts—the wheel rim and
the wheel disc—which are connected to one another through spot or arc welding.
The rim shown in Fig. 2.8 holds a tire thanks to its standard proﬁle and also
ensures a secure, airtight ﬁt during vehicle operation. Drop center rims, which are
used almost exclusively these days in passenger car applications, make it possible
to simultaneously mount the tire and increase air volume through the radial recess
in the rim well. Such rims also make it possible to position the tire valve and tire
pressure electronics comfortably at the drop center ﬂange. The two rim shoulders
center the tire beads in a radial direction and absorb the forces which are generated
mainly from the vehicle’s weight.

When faced with low air pressure and strong lateral forces, the safety humps
between the rim shoulders and drop center prevent the tire beads from slipping into
the drop center and consequent sudden loss of air pressure. The rim ﬂanges serve as

164

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.7 Standard steel passenger car wheel

Fig. 2.8 Rim

axial limits for the tire beads and absorb lateral forces as well as forces associated
with the tire’s internal air pressure.

The task of the wheel disc, Fig. 2.9, is to connect the rim to the vehicle hub, and

can be divided into essentially three areas:

2.2 Steel Wheels

165

Fig. 2.9 Wheel disc

(cid:129) Wheel ﬂange with center hole and bolt holes
(cid:129) Fastening ﬂange with ventilation holes
(cid:129) Wheel disc edge

The wheel disc is centered on the offset portion of the vehicle hub, which is

provided for such a purpose through a center hole with tight tolerances.

The wheel disc is fastened to the hub using wheel bolts or, in the case of wheel
nuts, with stay bolts or stud bolts. The wheel bolts or studs are pushed through bolt
holes which are designed concentrically in relation to the center hole. The bolt holes
are either spherical or conical, providing a positive form-ﬁt connection. When using
elevated wheel disc bolt holes in conjunction with prescribed bolt or nut torque
speciﬁcations, a suitable elasticity is achieved in this region which helps to counter
the tendency for fasteners to come loose during operation. Furthermore, the axial
inclination of the outer contact surface of the wheel ﬂange relative to the inner
contact surface helps to ensure that the screw connections are pre-tensioned.

Between the wheel ﬂange and the edge of the wheel disc is a bulge which helps
to create space for vehicle brakes. It peaks off in an axial direction into a bulge in
order to achieve stiffness and a more consistent distribution of stresses. Ventilation
holes for weight-saving and brake-cooling purposes are arranged between the
stiffening bulge and the edge of the wheel disc. The edge of the wheel disc serves as
the seat and fastening point for the rim.

2.2.1 Steel Wheel Concepts

Differences between steel wheels exist mostly in the design and type of connection
between the wheel disc and the rim.

166

2 Wheels

2.2.1.1 Standard Wheels

In standard steel wheels, as illustrated in Fig. 2.7, the wheel disc is connected to the
rim in the region of the drop center. This allows the edge of the wheel disc to make
ﬂat contact with a small internal circumference of the rim, making the design both
economical and weight-saving. To achieve a secure connection, the system is
designed to be press-ﬁt, with the outer diameter of the wheel disc being made
correspondingly larger, which serves to relieve stress on the connection weld under
dynamic stresses.

2.2.1.2 Structural Wheels

In structural wheels, the connection of the wheel disc to the rim is identical to that
of the standard wheel. The main differences are seen in the design of the wheel disc,
which has provisions for relatively large ventilation holes and therefore a higher
degree of design freedom for wheel ﬂashing or hubcaps. In the structural wheel
shown in Fig. 2.10, the number of spokes is equal to the number of bolt holes—a
trait seen in most structural wheels—and can be attributed to strength considera-
tions. Greater design freedom comes at the expense of greater sheet material
thickness, and structural wheels therefore have a weight and cost disadvantage
when compared to standard wheels.

2.2.1.3 Semi-full-face Wheels

Semi-full-face wheels like the one in Fig. 2.11 have their wheel disc connected
beneath the outer rim shoulder, enabling better space utilization for brakes and a

Fig. 2.10 Structural wheel

2.2 Steel Wheels

167

Fig. 2.11 Semi-full-face wheel

wheel disc design which offers a visually robust appearance. This design requires
additional machining effort with regard to the wheel disc edge to ensure a form-ﬁt
to the shoulder region.

2.2.1.4 Full-Face Wheels

In the case of full-face wheels, the outer rim ﬂange is actually part of the wheel disc,
Fig. 2.12. The rim can be welded bluntly with two circumferential seams or on one
edge of the rim with a seam in the horn/ﬂange area. This wheel construction form
leads to a surface design which can make the wheel appear larger in diameter,
offering corresponding options with respect to the geometric design of the venti-
lation holes. However, these beneﬁts come with considerably greater manufacturing
and ﬁnishing effort, as well as a comparatively very high wheel weight. Full-face
and semi-full-face wheels are used mainly in off-road and pickup type vehicles.

2.2.2 Steel Wheel Design

Steel wheels are conceived with due consideration for the constraints which are
deﬁned by the vehicle manufacturer for new vehicle models. These constraints
include:
(cid:129) Rim size
(cid:129) Rim offset
(cid:129) Axle, and therefore wheel load
(cid:129) Hub connection dimensions

168

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.12 Full-face wheel

(cid:129) Brake contour
(cid:129) Styling speciﬁcations (number and eventually the shape of ventilation holes)
(cid:129) Geometric requirements due to the wheel cover (hubcap)
(cid:129) Test speciﬁcations for release from development

With the help of computer-aided design (CAD) systems, the ﬁrst wheel concepts
are created at the start of construction. New designs are based on established
constraints as well as the individual experience of the design engineers. The most
suitable designs are preselected using computer-aided simulation based on the ﬁnite
element method.

At this phase, computer simulations are used to carry out operational stability
tests, which are later conducted using wheel prototypes. The deﬁnitive test for the
wheel disc design is the rotating bending test, and for the rim design is the rolling
test. The most important result of these computations is the visualization of the
corresponding stress distributions as the result of external forces acting on the
wheel, Fig. 2.13. The wheel variant with the lowest stress levels and the most
homogeneous stress distribution will be used to optimize the ﬁnal design to achieve
the necessary wheel stiffness at a minimum weight.

The stress values recorded after the last computation are used to reﬁne an
optimized wheel. At this point, the results are compared with the available material
data of the steel intended for use in the ﬁnished product and with the results of
previous projects. If the evaluation is positive, a prototype will be produced. If the
evaluation is negative, additional optimization loops are necessary. If design opti-
mization leeway is exhausted due to required constraints,
the only remaining
alternative is to use a higher-strength material or to enhance the material strength of
the starting material.

Through the use of operational fatigue simulations and project experience, and
even based on measurements with expansion strips with real loads, the last step is

2.2 Steel Wheels

169

Fig. 2.13 Distribution of stresses in the steel wheel

the construction of a production tool for prototypes and a test series for veriﬁcation.
Simulations reduce development time and project costs considerably.

The use of steel grades with ever-increasing strength and reduced expansion
properties requires very precise deformation simulations which work in parallel
with the design and construction of manufacturing tools, with the help of corre-
sponding computation programs employing a non-linear approach.

With computer simulation programs, the individual stages of stamping can be
simulated, with their respective constraints, particularly during the manufacture of
complex wheel disc geometry. The results of these computations, as shown in
Fig. 2.14, make it possible to detect any deviations in material thickness during the
forming process. In turn, the tool designer can optimally determine the corre-
sponding changes necessary to obtain process-safe and functionally reliable form-
ing tools.

2.2.3 Choice of Material

In the case of steel wheels, the choice of starting material depends on the speciﬁ-
cations of the vehicle manufacturer with respect to operational strength and weight
requirements. One important aspect to consider is the availability and quality of the
selected material in the respective global production location of the steel wheel.
Normally, hot-rolled and pickled sheet material
is used in the passenger car
segment.

Owing to the ever-increasing requirements with regard to the ratio of wheel load
to wheel weight, high-strength steels must be used in most cases in order to keep
wheels as light as possible. Dual-phase steels are used mainly for the wheel discs,
and micro-alloyed steels are used for the rims, Fig. 2.15. A reduction in expansion

170

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.14 Distribution of the material thickness in a forming stage

characteristics due to increasing steel strength also imposes certain physical limi-
tations in the cold forming processes used in the manufacture of steel wheels.

2.2.4 Steel Wheel Manufacturing Process

Steel wheels are manufactured in a multi-step process. The wheel disc and rim are
manufactured in different plants, and are later joined together. The ﬁnished com-
ponent is then coated in order to meet corrosion resistance requirements.

2.2.4.1 Wheel Disc

The manufacture of passenger car wheel discs takes place in a multi-step, auto-
mated transfer press, Fig. 2.16. For smaller series production numbers, individual
press lines are also used, in light of economic considerations.

2.2 Steel Wheels

171

Fig. 2.15 Types of steel used for vehicle wheels

Fig. 2.16 Transfer presses for producing automobile wheel discs

The manufacturing process, shown in Fig. 2.17, begins with the uncoiling of
ribbon steel which is usually delivered as a wound coil. The uncoiled ribbon steel is
fed with the help of an aligning apparatus to the upstream board-cutting stage. The
result is a rectangular board with rounded corners which features stamps or other
markings as an identifying feature. The board is then sent to the ﬁrst forming stage:
pre-tensioning. Depending on the complexity of the wheel disc shape, a second
pre-tensioning may be necessary. A pressed inversion is then added, and the center

172

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.17 Process ﬂow of passenger car wheel disc manufacture with the various operational steps

hole enlarged. The middle partition is then pressed in and the edge of the center
hole is raised. Next, the bolt holes are pre-formed and the outer edge of the wheel
disc is raised. Ventilation holes are then punched with a wedge-action tool.
Depending on the geometry and number of the ventilation holes, two separate
stages may be necessary in the transfer press due to space constraints. After ven-
tilation holes are punched, sharp edges may be present on the breakout side of the
holes. These sharp edges are tempered by pressing, which helps to improve cor-
rosion protection and prevent hand injuries from subsequent handling of the wheel.
In the ﬁnal manufacturing step, the bolt holes are punched out, and the beveled
surfaces which receive the wheel bolts or nuts are treated with a special surface
structure in order to ensure smooth attachment and detachment characteristics. The
center hole is also calibrated to its ﬁnal dimension.

2.2.4.2 Rim

The wheel rim is prepared with a roughing mill in an automated production line,
Fig. 2.18. As with the wheel disc, the process ﬂow (Fig. 2.19) begins with the
unwinding of ribbon steel which is delivered in the form of a coil or strips. The
ribbon steel is fed through an aligning apparatus to the upstream cutting unit, and
the previously rounded-off band strip with corresponding rolled longitudinal edges

2.2 Steel Wheels

173

Fig. 2.18 Roughing mill of a wheel rim production line

Fig. 2.19 Process ﬂow for rim manufacture

is cut to a computed length, stamped for identiﬁcation, and forwarded to the
rounding machine. At this step, the strip is shaped into an open ring and ﬂat-pressed
at two ends to improve subsequent direct current butt welding.

The slag created during the welding process is chipped away on the inner and
outer edges of the ring while the piece is still warm, with the aim of leaving as little
residue on the surface as possible. The weld is then smoothed using suitable rollers
to improve surface structure.

174

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.20 Proﬁler station for rim manufacture

In the subsequent step, the welding area is smoothed with the appropriate rollers
to improve the surface structure. Here, the roll-on compression at the ring edge is
cut out and rounded off. In the last step at the roughing mill (cog train), the
ﬂat-pressed welding area is rounded, resulting in a circular, closed ring.

Because of stringent requirements for rim proﬁles, and to facilitate initial
material molding, the ring should be extended in a conical manner at the open sides
using a press. Afterwards, the rim contour is proﬁled in three successive stages. The
speciﬁed proﬁle is given to the rim through specially adjusted bottom and top rolls
of the tool, Fig. 2.20. After the three stages, the end proﬁle is achieved, and the
piece is sent to a press, where it is calibrated. With the help of a split mold with
horizontal divisions, the rim is then brought to the standardized circumference
dimension through uniform radial overextension of the material.

Next, the valve holes are punched on a rotary table in a three-step process. First,
the valve hole niche is pressed in. This niche may have to be inclined at a certain
angle relative to the drop center ﬂange in order to meet functional requirements in
terms of valve positioning. The next step involves the punching of the valve hole,
and in the third stage the hole is pressed into achieve a smooth surface, which will
prevent the valve seal from being damaged during assembly or when mounting the
wheel onto the vehicle.

In the case of steel wheels, material thickness in present-day rim proﬁles is
increasingly customized to suit stresses through a ﬂow-forming process, Fig. 2.21.

2.2 Steel Wheels

175

Flow formed, rarefied areas 

Fig. 2.21 Flow-formed rim proﬁle and ﬂow forming machine for rim rings

This process makes it possible to reduce the weight by up to 800 g per wheel,

depending on the thickness of the starting material and the size of the rim.

The previously calibrated circular rim ring is subsequently ejected into a
machine which stands parallel to the rim line, placed on a spinning mandrel, and
rolled out using four rotating compression rollers. The movement of the pressure
rollers under computer numerical control (CNC) creates the desired thicknesses of
the material for the rim. The displaced material ﬂows under the pressure rollers
(counter-ﬂow method). Once the ﬂow-forming process comes to an end, the extra
material is typically trimmed off, and the ﬂow-formed ring is fed once again to the
rim production line.

2.2.4.3 Wheel Assembly

The wheel disc and rim are guided on roller conveyers through an automated
welding line, Fig. 2.22. First, the rim is positioned horizontally in an orientation
which depends on the positioning of the valve hole. Next, the wheel disc is posi-
tioned inside the rim.

2.2.4.4 Surface Treatment

For surface protection, the assembled steel wheels are hung from a chain conveyer
system, and ﬁrst pass through a cleansing bath in which they are freed of manu-
facturing residues such as lubricants, metallic abrasion, and dirt. This is followed by
the rims undergo
the application of a zinc phosphate coating. Subsequently,
cathodic protection. Paint is applied through a chemical reaction of a binding
medium effected by the ﬂow of an electric currrent from an external electrode

176

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.22 Wheel assembly

(anode) through the conducting paint to the wheel, which acts as the cathode. The
result of cathodic protection is a very uniform coating of approximately 20 µm,
which is baked in an oven at around 190 °C.

As a ﬁnishing step, if necessary, an additional top coat of paint up to 30 µm
thick can be applied with the help of a rotary table and corresponding robotic
assistance.

2.3 Light Metal Wheels

Light metal wheels are typically constructed from aluminum or magnesium alloys
[48–51], and are manufactured using various technologies. Aluminum wheels are
offered as cast wheels, forged wheels, metal plate wheels, or hybrid wheels.
Magnesium wheels are either cast or forged.

Among the beneﬁts of light wheels are their improved vibration characteristics,
more responsive suspension characteristics, reduced fuel consumption, and higher
load capacity. Light metal wheels are often used on commercial vehicles, especially
in weight-sensitive applications such as liquid or bulk material transportation, where
maximum weights often come into play. In these cases, the additional cost for wheels
made from light metals is generally recovered within the ﬁrst several years of use.

2.3 Light Metal Wheels

177

When compared to steel sheet, aluminum is easier to form and has excellent
weldability; however, the welding process (metal inert gas [MIG] welding) is more
expensive. A greater level of manufacturing complexity and the higher material
costs versus steel wheel manufacturing stand in the way of a wider range of
applications for aluminum wheels. Furthermore, the availability of high-strength
steel sheet has greatly reduced the original weight advantage of aluminum sheet,
thus shifting the cost–beneﬁt in favor of steel wheels.

Light metal alloys typically use aluminum as their base metal, and in rarer cases
(e.g. car racing), magnesium [52]. Depending on the production method, aluminum
wheels can be either cast or forged alloys.

Aluminum cast wheels are manufactured from aluminum alloys using a
low-pressure casting technique. The rough casting is molded in a steel die, which is
ﬁlled with molten aluminum and cooled to a solid under controlled conditions.
Aluminum alloys with silicon content ranging from 7 to 11% are used, depending
on whether the goal is to attain good castability or higher strength [53].

Two alloys are generally accepted in aluminum wheel casting. GK-AlSi11 is
used for lightly loaded wheels up to 16 in. in diameter. The excellent castability
provided by this alloy’s high silicon content enables efﬁcient manufacturing with a
low rejection rate, thanks to minimal casting errors. This alloy cannot be hardened
through heat treatment, so wheels must be designed with greater wall thickness,
resulting in a higher wheel weight.

GK-AlSi7Mg is used for larger wheels with higher wheel

loads and for
weight-optimized wheels. The 0.2–0.5% magnesium content in the aluminum alloy
leads to greater strength after subsequent heat treatment (solution annealing and
storage under heat). The use of this alloy allows wheels to meet high load
requirements with a minimum of material.

In order to meet stringent safety requirements such as those regarding strength
and leak-prooﬁng, only pure primary aluminum is used in the aluminum wheel
manufacturing process. Non-primary aluminum can include contaminants, such as
iron and copper. Iron can lead to the formation of needle-like structures in the grain,
weakening mechanical properties (tensile strength and ultimate strain). Copper
contamination leads to reduced chemical resistance.

Forged aluminum wheels are used in the passenger vehicle segment, and in the
if weight-optimized wheels are needed and the required
commercial segment
weight cannot be achieved with cast wheels. The forging process makes it possible
to design wheels with thinner walls and thus less material and lower weight,
Figs. 2.23, 2.24, and 2.25.

The input materials for forged wheels are round continuous casting rods made of

AlSi1Mg, which are sawed into precisely “portioned” discs.

These discs are then fed into a three-stage forging process to create the visible
side (designed side with disc and star) and a ﬂow roll-pressing process for manu-
facturing the rim itself. In addition to the stiffening, which is achieved through
plastic deformation, the material is reﬁned and ﬁnished through a heat treatment
process.

178

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.23 Microporous structure (structural conditions)

Fig. 2.24 Strength values for aluminum materials

Owing to the higher manufacturing costs and rigorous safety measures required
(a high risk of ﬁre exists during chipping machining processes), it has not yet been
possible for magnesium alloys to become established in this area. However, these
alloys are sometimes used in individual cases for special vehicles and in car racing.

2.3 Light Metal Wheels

179

Fig. 2.25 Impacts of the differences in materials in the ﬁnished wheel

2.3.1 Light Metal Sheet Wheels

The basic manufacturing process for a light metal sheet wheel is largely the same as
that for a steel sheet wheel. Because of weaker material strength, wall thickness
must be greater than that for a steel sheet wheel. Despite production technology that
could be easily mastered, aluminum sheet wheels have not managed to penetrate the
market, since steel wheels offer more design freedom at an economic price level.
Figure 2.26 shows an aluminum sheet wheel used by Mercedes-Benz. One chal-
lenge with such wheels would be compliance with welding parameters at the
connections between the rim and the wheel disc.

2.3.2 Light Metal Cast Wheels

The most common cast wheel manufacturing method is low-pressure die casting. In
the casting machine, molten aluminum sits in a temperature-controlled crucible
below the casting mold. The casting die and smelting brick are connected through a
riser pipe. Once the mold is closed, the pressure in the smelting brick is increased to
approximately 1 bar, which causes the molten aluminum to rise through the riser
pipe and ﬁll the die.

The heat of the molten aluminum is dissipated during the solidiﬁcation process
by means of precise cooling channels in the die. The focused cooling and heat
dissipation during solidiﬁcation, along with the casting parameters as a whole
(pressure, temperature, and time), have a decisive impact on the quality of the
casting.

180

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.26 Aluminum plate wheel of the Mercedes 123 series, 1979

After the casting step, the manufacturing process is entirely automated. The
blank castings are removed by a robot arm, passing through a chain of conveyor
systems and the following processing steps:
(cid:129) Casting
(cid:129) Removal of riser pipe bore
(cid:129) X-ray testing
(cid:129) Heat treatment
(cid:129) Mechanical processing
(cid:129) Brushing and deburring
(cid:129) Leakage test
(cid:129) Painting
(cid:129) Dispatch

During the X-ray test, blanks are checked for casting errors per customer
speciﬁcations. Defective parts with non visible casting errors like porosities,
shrinkage cavities, material splitting are sorted out and will be remelted.

The ﬁrst aluminum cast wheel was presented by BMW in October 1968 in the
2800 CS. Over the course of the following year, almost all other automobile man-
ufacturers began offering such wheels, initially for their top models and subsequently
for entire model ranges. People recognized just how strongly wheel design inﬂuenced
the overall appearance of a vehicle. Some automobile manufacturers such as BMW,
VW, Toyota, and Nissan self-manufactured light metal wheels for some time.

The forerunners of the general movement toward aluminum cast wheels were the
makers of aftermarket wheels, who in the 1960s recognized the market need for
sporty lightweight wheels made of light metals such as magnesium and aluminum.

2.3 Light Metal Wheels

181

Fig. 2.27 First Mercedes-Benz aluminum cast wheel

These wheels weren’t actually lighter, but were generally 1 or 2 in. wider, thereby
widening the track width and enabling higher cornering speeds. The main reason
for retroﬁt wheels, however, was their attractive appearance. By the 1980s, alu-
minum wheels were offered almost exclusively, with magnesium wheels falling out
of favor, due to their previously mentioned shortcomings, for all vehicles short of
race cars and a few exclusive street models. Figure 2.27 shows the ﬁrst Mercedes
aluminum cast wheel, which dates back to 1984.

In the early 1970s, the preferred alloy used for aluminum wheels was AlSi12,
which had a high expansion coefﬁcient and excellent casting properties. However,
as tire cross sections sank to below 70%, plastic deformations were increasingly
common because of potholes and driving over curbstones. This deformation was
due to the low hardness of the material, especially in the inner rim ﬂange area,
Fig. 2.28.

Fig. 2.28 Deformed rim ﬂange

182

2 Wheels

Early tests designed to improve deformation characteristics using AlSi11, which
featured lower silicon content and the addition of magnesium with almost equally
good expansion values, were not adequate. Realistic tests were performed over a
ridge using various materials, and the deformation characteristics were studied,
Fig. 2.29. A deformation of 2 mm was established as a limit value.

The results led to the use of the alloy AlSi7Mg0.3. As the name suggests, the
silicon content of this alloy is only 6.5–7.5%, and the magnesium content only
0.3%. However, heat treatment (T6) of the wheel is a deﬁning reason for consid-
erably improved strength values. Here, the molding blanks are solution-annealed
for 4–8 h at 525 °C + 5 °C, in order to bring the hardening alloy components into
the solution. Immediately after the molding blanks are removed from the annealing
furnace, they are quenched in water to ﬁx the microstructure state brought about by
the solution annealing. Finally, the molding blanks are stored at 150–180 °C for 6–
8 h to allow precipition of surplus dissolved alloy elements. The strength values
that are mentioned below for the “T6” state will be attained only if all
the
parameters for the heat treatment are precisely adhered to and the composition of
the alloy is closely matched with it, Fig. 2.30.

The strength values achieved through heat treatment satisﬁed automobile man-
ufacturers such as Mercedes-Benz, who had until then preferred forged wheels
exclusively, Fig. 2.31.

For aluminum alloy cast wheels, material composition in accordance with EN 1706
is strictly regulated with respect to various elements—particularly iron (Fe), copper
(Cu), manganese (Mn), magnesium (Mg), and titanium (Ti)—in order to achieve a ﬁne
eutectic structure and necessary strength characteristics. One component not captured
by EN 1706 is the so-called permanent or long-term reﬁnement materials, which are
0.03% strontium (Sr) or antimony (Sb).

GK-AlSi11

GK-AlSi7MgT6

Porefree

Forged

Fig. 2.29 Rim ﬂange deformation as a function of
manufacturing

the material,

tire cross section and

2.3 Light Metal Wheels

183

Fig. 2.30 Heat treatment unit

Fig. 2.31 Aluminum cast wheels
GK-AlSi7Mg0.3 T6

for Mercedes-Benz models

after

1985. Material

Aluminum cast wheel alloys

Chemical composition as a % of overall mass
Alloy

Silicon (Si)i
Iron (Fe)
Copper (Cu)
Manganese (Mn)

AlSi11
10.0–11.8
0.19 (0.15)
0.05 (0.03)
0.10

AlSi7Mg0.3
6.5–7.5

(continued)

2 Wheels

AlSi7Mg0.3
0.25–0.45

0.08–0.25 (0.10–0.18)

184

(continued)

Chemical composition as a % of overall mass
Alloy

AlSi11

0.45
0.07
0.15
0.03
0.10
Remaining

Magnesium (Mg)
Zinc (Zn)
Titanium (Ti)
Individual additives
Total additives
Aluminum (Al)

Mechanical properties

Alloy
Type of casting
Post-treatment
Tensile strength Rm (MPa)
Elastic limit Rp0.2 (MPa)
Elongation at rupture A (%)
Brinell hardness HB
Thermal conductivity (W/mk)
Density (kg/dm2)

AlSi11
Die casting
–

80
170
7
45
120–190
2.65

AlSi7Mg0.3 T6
Die casting
Artiﬁcial aging (T6)
290
210
4
90
150–220
2.70

The tables above list the minimum values of separately cast sample rods for
wheel casting in accordance with EN 1706. Depending on the positioning of the
measurement, the wall thickness, and associated solidiﬁcation conditions, different
values can be present. Therefore, different minimum values are prescribed for
various regions of the wheel, including the front and rear rim ﬂanges, drop center,
spokes, and wheel hub. To comply with these minimum values, special cooling
methods and media are used, with the aim of accelerating the solidiﬁcation process.
In addition, the inﬂuence of curing and baking time during the painting process
must be considered with regard to strength values to avoid softening. For this
reason, subsequent repairs which require high temperatures are not possible.

Owing to the previously mentioned potential for corrosion issues, further
remarks regarding magnesium wheels, from a modern-day viability standpoint, are
unnecessary. Nevertheless, examples of past attempts at weight reduction through
the use of magnesium are still an interesting topic of discussion.

In an effort to ﬁnd an inexpensive alternative to expensive forged wheels,
Porsche worked with Mahle in 1969–1970 to develop a 5.5 J (cid:1) 15 magnesium
pressure-cast wheel. It weighed 4.5 kg, half as much as comparable steel plate
wheels, and 1 kg less than the comparable forged wheel. With ﬁve wheels per
vehicle, the weight was reduced by 22.5 kg, Fig. 2.32.

In 1970, Mercedes-Benz developed magnesium sand-cast wheels in 10 K (cid:1) 15
or 13 K (cid:1) 15 size for the Daimler-Benz C111 prototype. In this case, a weight
savings of 49 kg was realized across the ﬁve wheels, Fig. 2.33.

2.3 Light Metal Wheels

185

Fig. 2.32 Magnesium pressure-cast wheel from Mahle, for the Porsche 914/6

Fig. 2.33 Magnesium cast wheel for the Mercedes C111, dating back to 1970

In light of such high weight savings potential, the development of magnesium
alloys should be further explored with respect to strength, corrosion characteristics,
and costs. Signiﬁcant improvements in the corrosion characteristics of magnesium
have already been seen through the development of high-purity (HP) alloys,
Fig. 2.34.

186

Fig. 2.34 Comparison of
corrosion types (109-4 mm/
3.6 Ks) (source SAE
9504422)

2 Wheels

More recent applications of magnesium for street wheels have been restricted to
a few exclusive cases. These situations involve vehicles whose owners rarely
subject them to winter conditions and road salts, thus allowing the unsatisfactory
corrosion characteristics of magnesium to be neglected.

In any case, manufacturers of magnesium wheels explicitly cite the importance of
preventing—and promptly repairing—any damage to the paint or protective coating,
given the high risk of corrosion. Preventive measures for avoiding contact corrosion
between vehicle hub and wheel bolts—such as the use of aluminum adapter plates—
are indispensable. In parallel with efforts to achieve better corrosion resistance, the
focus has been and continues to be on reducing the cost of magnesium alloys.

Nevertheless, without signiﬁcant changes in material properties—particularly the
strength characteristics under dynamic loads—the potential for magnesium as a
weight-saving wheel material cannot yet be recognized for wheels meant for daily
use.

Magnesium casting alloys for wheels

Chemical composition as a % of total mass
Alloy

MgAl9Zn1 (AZ91) EN-MC 21121 MgAl6Mn (AM60) EN-MC 21230

Sand casting, die molding and
pressure casting
8.0–10.0
0.30–1.0
–

Usage

Aluminum (Al)
Zinc (Zn)
Manganese (Mn)
Silicon (Si)
Iron (Fe)
Copper (Cu)
Nickel (Ni)
Others, each
Magnesium
(Mg)

0.30 max
0.03 max
0.20 max
0.01 max
0.05 max
Remaining

Pressure casting

5.5–6.5
0.2 max
0.1 min
0.10 max
0.005 max
0.010 max
0.002 max
0.01 max

2.3 Light Metal Wheels

187

Mechanical properties of magnesium alloys

Alloy

MgAl9Zn1 (AZ91) EN-MC 21121

Type of casting

Die casting

Pressure

MgAl6Mn (AM60)
EN-MC 21230
Pressure casting

Tensile strength
Rm (MPa)

Elastic limit
Rp0.2 (MPa)

Elongation at
rupture A (%)

Brinell hardness
HB

Sand
casting
F 160–220
ho 240–280
wa 240–280
F 90–120
ho 110–140
wa 150–190
F 2–5
ho 6-12
wa 2–7
F 50–65
ho 55–70
wa 60–90
51

F 160–220
ho 240–280
wa 240-300
F 110–130
ho 120–160
wa 150–190
F 2–5
ho 6-10
wa 2–7
F 55–70
ho 55–70
wa 60–90

F 200–250
(240)

F 150–170
(160)

F 0.5–3.0
(3)

F 65–85
(70)

Thermal
conductivity
(W/mk)
Density (g/cm2)
F casting status, ho homogenized, wa artiﬁcially aged [54]

1.81

190–250
(225)

120–150
(130)

4–14
(8)

55–70
(65)

61

1.80

As in the case of cast aluminum wheel alloys, magnesium casting alloys for
wheels also face restrictions on strength-improving and corrosion-inhibiting
additives.

It is worth noting that the thermal conductivity of magnesium alloys is signiﬁ-

cantly lower than that of aluminum alloys.

2.3.2.1 Sand Casting

Regardless of the material being cast, a distinction exists between casting per-
formed with molds which are destroyed after each casting—as seen with sand
casting—and casting with permanent molds—as seen with die casting. In the
1960s, several
light metal wheels were cast using the sand casting method,
Fig. 2.35, as the quantity requirements were too small to justify die costs.

For each wheel rim cast, a negative mold is produced from a positive model and
subsequently ﬁlled with molten aluminum. After the molten aluminum solidiﬁes,
the molding sand is removed and the sprues and risers are sawed off. Compared to
die casting, sand casting has a slower solidiﬁcation process and thus poorer strength
values, which are compensated by thicker dimensions and poorer surface quality.

188

2 Wheels

Apart from short-run production, the sand casting method for wheels was once used
frequently for manufacturing prototypes and design studies. Today, better methods
are available.

Fig. 2.35 Sand casting

2.3.2.2 Die Casting

Die casting became the general standard method for casting of light metal wheels as
requirements for quantity, strength, dimensional accuracy, and surface quality
increased or became more stringent. The simplest form of casting is die casting,
Fig. 2.36. In this process, aluminum smelt ﬁlls a negative mold made of steel using
its own weight. The mold is ﬁlled either manually by a technician or with robotic
assistance. To improve the microstructure,
the die can be rotated during the
solidiﬁcation process (centrifugal casting process).

2.3.2.3 Low-Pressure Die Casting

Today, more than 90% of all aluminum wheels are cast using low-pressure die
casting, Fig. 2.37. This process is particularly well suited for pieces which demand
rotational symmetry—such as wheels. In this process, the die is ﬁlled through a
single central cutout by applying a pressure of about 1 bar onto a bath of molten
aluminum with a warming furnace beneath it. As a result, liquid metal is pressed
into the die through a riser pipe. A quiet, particularly homogeneous form ﬁll takes
place.

2.3 Light Metal Wheels

189

Fig. 2.36 Gravity die casting: the solidiﬁed casting piece before it is removed from the open die

Fig. 2.37 Low-pressure casting machine

190

2 Wheels

2.3.2.4 Pressure Casting

Overall, 70% of all light metal cast parts are manufactured using the pressure
casting process, Fig. 2.38. Here, the mold is ﬁlled with molten metal at a high
pressure and high speed. This method makes it possible to obtain precisely
dimensioned cast parts with excellent surface quality and relatively high efﬁciency.
Aside from high tooling costs, the risk of metallurgical defects due to the nature of
the mold-ﬁlling process can be a disadvantage of this method. Therefore, this
process is not suitable for safety parts such as wheels.

Fig. 2.38 Hot-chamber/cold-chamber pressure casting machine

2.3 Light Metal Wheels

191

A differentiation is made between hot- and cold-chamber pressure casting. With
the hot-chamber method, the casting chamber is located within the heated metal
bath.

With the cold-chamber method, the casting chamber is separated from the
casting machine and is ﬁlled with the required amount of material from the smelting
furnace.

The advantages and accompanying economic viability of pressure casting were
the reasons that spurred development of numerous methods of compensating for the
metallurgical disadvantages of the production method. In vacuum pressure casting,
the hollow space of the mold is evacuated to improve the ﬁlling of the mold.
Another method with a similar goal is pore-free pressure casting, where the hollow
space in the mold is ﬁlled with oxygen before being ﬁlled with liquid aluminum.
This forms an oxide with the incoming metal, which is ﬁnely distributed within the
microstructure of the casting, but which prevents the formation of gas pores and air
bubbles.

In the squeeze-cast process, the goal is to use the advantages of pressure casting
for aluminum wheels. A precisely proportioned aluminum smelt is pressed under
high pressure into a casting mold under exactly deﬁned casting parameters. The
large advantage here lies in the high rate of solidiﬁcation, with positive impacts on
the material structure. Other beneﬁts include a signiﬁcantly lower chip removal
effort—and therefore less material usage—and the comparatively high output and
longer die rest times. This casting method is used in individual cases, but requires a
special, relatively tedious casting machine and dies. The Japanese manufacturer of
pressure casting machines, UBE, has developed a squeeze-casting method used by
Toyota to make casting wheels under its own management, Fig. 2.39. In this
method, too, the aim is to use the advantage of pressure casting and to avoid the

Fig. 2.39 Grain structure in the squeeze-cast method

192

2 Wheels

formation of eddies and trapped air bubbles by reducing the rate at which molds are
ﬁlled and by maintaining the ﬁlling pressure until solidiﬁcation is complete.

Studies on strength characteristics of such wheels have not revealed any sig-
niﬁcant beneﬁts over conventionally produced low-pressure wheels. No details are
available regarding the economic viability in comparison with low-pressure casting.
A ﬁnal variant of pressure casting is thixocasting, which is also known as
semi-solid casting. Here, instead of liquid metal, a heated metal bolt is used for
ﬁlling the mold. Because of its thixotropic structure, the bolt is liqueﬁed when
pressure is applied to it, thereby ﬁlling the casting mold without the formation of
eddies, which occurs during conventional pressure casting.

2.3.2.5 Casting and Flow Forming

After some decades of positive experience with the roll-forming process for forged
wheels and rim halves in the wrought alloy AlSi1Mg, manufacturers of pressure
rolling machines suggested in the mid-1990s that the same method be used to
increase the strength of AlSi7Mg0.3 cast alloy wheels, Figs. 2.40 and 2.41.

The reshaping of these wheels is made possible by the fact

that suitably
pre-molded casting parts are kept at a temperature of over 300 °C during the
reshaping process.

Pressure rolling brings about a signiﬁcant improvement in the cast microstruc-
ture (Fig. 2.42), and with it, an improvement in strength which allows the wall
thickness of the molded rim area to be reduced signiﬁcantly. Depending on the
width of the rim and its diameter, a weight reduction of more than 1 kg is possible
[55].

Fig. 2.40 Flow forming of wheel rims

2.3 Light Metal Wheels

193

Fig. 2.41 Flow pressure machine (third roller not visible)

Fig. 2.42 Microstructure before and after remolding process

2.3.3 Light Metal Forged Wheels

As the name suggests, a forged light metal wheel
is constructed by the hot
reshaping of a round aluminum blank between two shaping tools. The reshaping
process has two stages: the pre-process (4000 t) and the ﬁnishing run (7000 t). The
design is created during the second forging process. This is then followed by the
ﬂow pressure rolling of the rim contour.

The starting material for aluminum forged wheels is 6-m-long continuous cast
rods made of AlSi1Mg with a diameter of 254–303 mm. The size of the wheel is
determined by the height. Following an ultrasound test, cavity-free rod sections are
sawed to predeﬁned lengths. The sawed-off ends—cylinders with diameters ranging
from 254 to 303 mm, with a height of 150 mm—are fed to an automated forging
line. The forging line consists of a heating furnace and three presses. The forging
presses have maximum force of 4000 t (pre-feed), 7000 t (complete stroke), and
8000 t (punching). Robots are used to handle the parts between presses. The result

194

2 Wheels

of the ﬁrst molding process is a blank featuring a ﬁnished wheel disc design, a
punched-out center hole, and a circumferentially arranged circular material reser-
voir containing the material for the rest of the rim.

Using a ﬂow-forming process with three rollers, the circular disc is split (hence
the name “split” wheel) and rolled out on a bell-shaped tool onto the rim. Before the
forged blank is machined, a heat treatment is performed to improve the mechanical
properties.

The machining process is conducted within a ﬁnishing island which consists of a
lathe, a drilling center, and a deburring robot. The complete wheel contour is turned
in a lathe with two separate setups or clamping operations (rough cut and then
processed to ﬁnal dimensions). After this, the bolt holes and valve hole are drilled
and milled on a ﬁnishing center. Robots then perform a deburring to increase
lifespan and improve paint adhesion properties, after which the wheels are washed,
measured for balance and hardness, and stamped.

In the case of bi-color wheels, this process is followed by an initial three-coat
painting operation and is then turned for high sheen and polished. The polishing
process gives a reﬂective sheen to the wheel. The last step is the application of a
clear varnish. High-precision machine ﬁnishing ensures that every wheel is pre-
cisely concentric, with neither lateral nor radial run-out present.

If the manufacture of a forging tool can’t be justiﬁed due to small batch sizes, a
special mold can be used for making forged wheels. In this case, a forged blank in
the shape of a thick-walled cylinder is produced, the bottom of which is a disc
which features the rotational contour of the design and acts as the inner side of the
wheel. With a great deal of machining effort, the wheel design is then milled,
usually to 100%, with a great deal of ﬁnishing effort. The rim well is shaped using
ﬂow forming and is then turned to size.

Figure 2.43 shows the ﬁrst Mercedes forged wheel, which dates to 1970. The

ﬁrst Mercedes lightweight forged wheel, dating to 1995, is shown in Fig. 2.44.

Fig. 2.43 First Mercedes light metal wheel (forged)

2.3 Light Metal Wheels

195

Fig. 2.44 Mercedes light forged wheel

The forged wheel success story began more than 50 years ago with the devel-
opment of the Porsche 911. When Porsche ﬁrst developed the 911 in 1962, a special
wheel was required. It needed to offer both outstanding mechanical properties and
new opportunities for exciting visual designs. It had to be a light metal wheel. The
attractive exterior aside, the lower weight and associated reduction in unsprung
mass promised a signiﬁcant increase in driving comfort.

Porsche already had some experience with light metal wheels, though not for
automobiles. At around the same time, the company was developing lightweight
tanks for the German army. The road wheels of these lightweight tanks were forged
from aluminum.

The OTTO FUCHS company took up the challenge of developing the ﬁrst light
metal wheel for mass production: the legendary Porsche winged wheel (Fuchs rim).
For more than 20 years, this rim was offered as a series and special ﬁtting. Even
today, it is produced as an original spare part for classic Porsche cars.

In the early 1970s, OTTO FUCHS also developed the “Baroque” wheel with
Mercedes, Fig. 2.43. It was the ﬁrst aluminum wheel
to be manufactured in
large-scale series production. With a 15-year presence on the market, this wheel
became a famous classical wheel. To this day, the Baroque wheel remains syn-
onymous with the Mercedes brand and has become a classic in its own right within
the brand.

Further development of casting technologies has been necessitated through the
success of forged wheels and due to the emergence of cast wheels in basic/standard
equipment. There are three crucial areas, however, where cast wheels cannot
compete with forged wheels: weight, material quality, and the beauty of the surface.
The aluminum used in forged wheels has a signiﬁcantly higher yield strength
and elongation at fracture than cast materials. These particular advantages of forged
materials and procedural know-how allow for the highest possible safety reserves.
Furthermore, the polished surface of a forged wheel, coupled with the coordinated
design between automobile and wheel, offers an unmistakable brand and identiﬁ-
cation effect.

196

2 Wheels

Other advantages of forged wheels include:

(cid:129) Maximum area for brake ﬁxtures due to low wall thickness
(cid:129) Further weight reduction due to undercuts on externally connected wheels with

the so-called full-face design

(cid:129) A high level of design freedom due to many possible surface combinations

Today, the topic of climate protection is more prevalent than ever. Forged
wheels are essentially involved in the reduction of overall vehicle weight, thereby
reducing fuel consumption.

Beauty and individuality can be achieved in “exclusive forged wheels.” Using
simpliﬁed tool concepts, automobile manufacturers as well as premium tuners can
equip vehicles with exclusive forged wheels, which offer the maximum potential for
design and beautiful surface qualities, of course at signiﬁcantly higher prices.

In many ways, the wheel is prepared for the important task of ensuring a long
vehicle lifespan. Process controls guarantee excellent material properties. For this
reason, forged wheels are not only lightweight, but also provide optimal security in
critical driving situations, Fig. 2.45.

A paint job consisting of three coats is generally standard for most light metal
wheels. Through priming, color effects, and protective varnishes, paints offer very
good protection against corrosion, in addition to an aesthetically pleasing appearance.
Forged lightweight wheels are highly suited for polished surface designs,
Fig. 2.46. The excellent surface quality, together with the high-gloss sheen of the
forged material in combination with the two-coat clear varnish, makes for a lasting

Fig. 2.45 Forging process

2.3 Light Metal Wheels

Fig. 2.46 Deburred
lightweight construction
forged wheel

197

high-quality surface. While normal lightweight forged wheels are simply deburred
and polished, “individual” and “exclusive” forged wheels undergo high-sheen
polishing.

In the slide ﬁnishing process, the entire wheel surface is polished and then coated
with clear varnish. Here, a particularly high level of sheen is achieved with forged
wheels, Fig. 2.47.

The most basic of all aluminum surfaces treatments is anodization. Even today,

the anodized “Fuchs” rim is capable of meeting current requirements, Fig. 2.48.

Climate protection, CO2 emissions, recycling—these are all terms which hold
greater signiﬁcance today than ever before. In response to the issue of climate
change,
there is an increasing demand for lighter and more aerodynamically
favorable wheels—so-called aero-forged wheels—to achieve the lowest wheel
weight, increased driving comfort, and reduced CO2 emissions, Fig. 2.49. The
thinner walls and abundant room for brake equipment are an advantage in this case.
Further weight optimization can be achieved using the latest manufacturing and
simulation techniques to achieve optimal material properties.

2.4 Synthetic and Carbon Wheels

Synthetic wheels are manufactured with an injection casting technique using
mineral ﬁber-reinforced polyamide with metallic inserts. The use of synthetics as
wheel material is still in the developmental stages, given issues of inadequate
thermal resistance along with problematic wheel fastening and manufacturing

198

Fig. 2.47 High-gloss
polished exclusive forged
wheel (slide ground)

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.48 Anodized forged
wheel “Fuchs” rim

techniques. Unsatisfactory impact resistance, inability to withstand thermal stresses,
and unknown long-term properties would tend to suggest that synthetic materials
are not yet ready for use in safety components such as automotive disc wheels.

Various publications have described successful synthetic wheel development
implementation on vehicles has failed for technical

projects. However, actual

2.4 Synthetic and Carbon Wheels

199

Fig. 2.49 Aero-forged lightweight wheel for the C-Class (BR 205)

reasons, despite the eligibility of various synthetic wheels for TÜV Rheinland
certiﬁcation time and time again. One of the biggest challenges with synthetic
wheels is developing a metal–synthetic hybrid solution to help eliminate synthetic
wheel-speciﬁc weaknesses such as their fragility at the wheel fastening point.

Technology, material, and manufacturing processes have inherent risks which
are being increasingly eliminated through the use of modiﬁed mesh synthetics.
Synthetic wheels made from polyester with carbon reinforcement were ﬁrst used in
the 1970s by Citroen in an automobile application, with their Maserati-engined
Citroen SM. Citroen stopped ﬁelding the synthetic wheels shortly after their
introduction, due to technical issues.

The synthetic wheel’s potential derives from the possibility for weight savings,
and for cost savings when the number of units produced is sufﬁciently large.
Weight-savings potential when compared to cast aluminum wheels ranges from 10
to 30% (as a rough estimate, assuming all technical constraints have been resolved).
Also of interest are the favorable offset crash results owing to the fracture behavior
of the wheel. For example, footwell penetration during a crash can be reduced
through higher energy absorption and self-destruction of the wheel. Favorable
corrosion characteristics are also to be expected from synthetic wheels, reducing the
possibility of paint chipping.

200

2 Wheels

The shortcomings of the synthetic wheel are manifested largely in the form of
unfavorable material characteristics, particularly regarding temperature sensitivity.
Synthetic wheels also experience low elongation at rupture and high notch sensi-
tivity, and in the case of mesh-reinforced synthetics (Duroplast), a “creep” char-
acteristic has been noted under permanent tensile and compressive stress.

Fiber orientation is an extremely complex but deﬁning factor of mechanical
properties, particularly in the case of multi-axial stress states. Synthetics are poor
conductors of heat and have relatively large temperature expansion coefﬁcients. In
the material properties may be altered over time due to inﬂuences
addition,
including UV radiation, climate, and chemical cleaning agents. Signiﬁcant
increases in wall rim and bowl wall thickness could also be necessary, thereby
constraining brake installation space.

In hybrid designs of light metal/synthetic construction,

the bonds between
materials are complex and have yet to be mastered. Additional measures will also
be necessary to ensure that the required true-run properties are attained.

As with other wheels, extensive initial computations are essential
for
cost-effective development, Fig. 2.50. Manufacturing plants are extremely elabo-
rate, and costs can be offset only if wheel production numbers are very high,
Fig. 2.51. The highest weight reduction potential in an entire automobile exists in
the wheel. A wheel with a fully synthetic rim can weigh just 6 kg, with its metal
counterpart weighing 9 kg, Fig. 2.52.

Also included in the category of synthetic wheels are carbon wheels, Figs. 2.53
and 2.54. The technical challenges for carbon wheels are comparable to those for
injection cast wheels. Carbon wheels can weigh up to 50% less than their aluminum
equivalent at the same strength rating, but at a much greater material cost.

When compared to other synthetics, carbon has the advantage of being suited to
lightweight construction and is thereby marketable, even if only in the topmost
premium vehicle segment. The ﬁrst aftermarket carbon wheels have already hit the
market, primarily for ultra-sporty vehicles, but will remain a niche product for the
foreseeable future due to their high price.

Fig. 2.50 FE-design of the Smart Forvision synthetic wheel (source BASF)

2.5 Wheel Development

201

Fig. 2.51 Production device for a synthetic wheel (source BASF)

2.5 Wheel Development

The extraordinary inﬂuence of wheel design on the overall appearance of an
automobile is inarguable, and there is no indication that this will change, Fig. 2.55.
Accordingly, wheel manufacturers must develop processes which impose as few
restrictions as possible when it comes to design freedom. Compromises made in
favor of lower wheel weight over design are considered a rarity. Therefore, it
shouldn’t come as a surprise if a designer’s enthusiasm for so-called lightweight
wheels made of cast or forged aluminum or steel sheet is curtailed.

2.5.1 Design Drafts

Development engineers deﬁne the scope which is available to designers. This gives
rise to wheels, on the one hand, which support vehicle dynamics, enhance comfort
and safety, and are efﬁcient; on the other hand, designers can use the available space
to model wheels in a convincing manner with the usual design quality, Fig. 2.56.

202

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.52 Smart Forvision with synthetic wheel (source Cooperation between Daimler and
BASF)

Fig. 2.53 Carbon wheel with metal
Revolution)

inserts for the wheel bolt connections (source Carbon

2.5 Wheel Development

203

Fig. 2.54 Carbon–aluminum hybrid wheel (source Mubea Carbo Tech)

Fig. 2.55 Wheel design 100 years ago (Mercedes Simplex) and today (E-Class BR 212)

Like vehicle designers, wheel designers should be capable of looking into the
future, since designs are released into the market with a lag time due to the com-
plexity of the development process. The trend towards the design of larger wheels

204

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.56 Development of new wheel designs for the F800 Style concept car

and the smallest possible wheel sickle (the distance between the outer diameter of
the tire and the car body recess) is seen in all vehicle classes. In the preliminary
development stages of a new light metal wheel, engineers ﬁrst decide on rough
framework constraints and new wheel
types in close cooperation with those
responsible for the new vehicles model series. At the same time, wheel experts
examine wheel market trends. These parameters are brought together to deﬁne the
maximum wheel dimensions, along with the basic technical design. Data such as
the maximum permitted axle load, wheelhouse size, and necessary installation
space for brakes deﬁne the limits or scope within which a wheel designer can
exercise their design freedom. A technical feasibility study is then followed with a
ﬁnal wheel design deﬁnition, Fig. 2.57.

2.5.2 Choice of Surface Treatment

Surface treatment of a successful wheel design is its “makeup,” so to speak. In any
case, the regions at which the wheel meets the vehicle hub during assembly (wheel
contact surface, center hole, ﬁxing eyelets) should remain free of paint.
Accordingly, these parts should be masked whenever paint is applied so as to
maintain tolerances for centering and to prevent undesirable seating of the wheel

2.5 Wheel Development

205

Fig. 2.57 2D and 3D development of the design of light metal alloys

and wheel bolts. Before every paint job, a multi-step chemical pretreatment is
carried out to prepare the surface for the primer coat.

Monochromatic Coating With this surface treatment, a primed wheel is painted
the desired color—usually metallic silver—and is ﬁnished with a wet-on-wet clear
varnish after a brief period of ventilation. The combination is then baked.

Multiple Coatings/Multi-color Effects Various techniques can be used to achieve
multi-color effects. Frequently, deep and pre-painted areas of the wheel (usually
silver) are painted over with a contrasting color, often anthracite or matte black.
A suitable wheel design and a special masking process are necessary to carry out
this procedure. The advantage of this design is its ease of cleaning.

Another way to achieving this look is to ﬁrst paint, and then bake, the wheel with
an initial color, such as red. The ﬁrst coat is then painted over with another color,
the coats are processed using a
such as black, and baked again. Finally,
high-precision CNC machine such that the second layer is removed in areas of the
wheel where the ﬁrst layer is meant to be seen. After the second step, the whole
wheel is painted over with a clear varnish and baked again, Fig. 2.58.

Bright-Machined (High-Sheen) So-called bright-machined (high-sheen) or
bi-color wheels need to have a geometry suitable for their surface treatment.
Bright-machined surfaces are created by locally turning/machining the base coat
and primer with a high-speed cutting instrument down to a bare metal surface. To
achieve high surface quality, the casting grain should be free of ﬂaws such as pores.
Also important is that no sharp edges are created at the transitions between the
painted and bright-machined parts, because these can serve as starting points for
corrosion. The bright-machined surface is at a disadvantage when compared to the
painted surface, since it only receives one coat of clear varnish compared to the
three coats for the painted surface. This underscores the importance of chemically
cleaning the original surface before paint is applied, and at the end, of using a
varnish of the highest quality available.

206

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.58 Ronal study: multi-colored painted Mercedes wheel

Bright-machined light metal wheels require a very special paint system which
offers reliable protection against corrosion, especially to the polished metal sur-
faces. During the manufacturing process, bright-machined wheels are ﬁrst com-
pletely coated with paint. The paint is then removed from speciﬁc areas of the
wheel, usually the spokes, using a turning machine with very ﬁne machining tools.
This gives rise to a high-sheen or bright-machined metallic surface, which is
transparently sealed with an additional clear-coating process. These wheels earn
their appeal from the contrast between the painted, colored areas and the high-sheen
metallic surface, Fig. 2.59. Bi-color wheels require a signiﬁcant amount of addi-
tional manufacturing effort compared to other wheels.

In the development phase for paints, vehicle manufacturers deﬁne challenging
goals. In the realm of bright-machined wheels, that goal is the abatement of “fili-
form” corrosion. Filiform corrosion undercuts the metallic sheen in the form of
small threads, and must be avoided. Filiform threads typically follow the micro-
scopic grooves which can be created with the lathe tool during the turning process.
In the advanced stages of ﬁliform corrosion, paint layers can come off through
delamination (Fig. 2.60).

The most stringent tests in the realm of wheel coating development are used
during the development of new anti-corrosion coatings for bright-machined wheels.
First, grooves are cut into segments of bright-machined areas which were cut from a
whole wheel. These grooves reach the shiny, unpolished light metal surface,
Fig. 2.61.

These wheel segments subsequently undergo a 24-h copper-accelerated acetic
acid salt spray (CASS) test, Fig. 2.62. During this test, the wheel segments are
placed in a trough where they are exposed to various highly corrosive salt mist
sprays. Afterwards, the segments are moved to a ﬁliform test chamber. At this

2.5 Wheel Development

207

Fig. 2.59 High-sheen (bright-machined) wheel

stage, the test specimens, which are sometimes covered with a crust of salt, are
subjected to a 28-day variable climate program. During subsequent evaluation, staff
assess the ﬁliform corrosion emanating from the test grooves in the form of threads.
Only anti-corrosion paints which reduce undercutting to a minimum and at the same
time exert no negative impacts on other material properties are released for series
production, Fig. 2.63.

The previously mentioned variable climate test is based on extreme climatic
requirements. In a special chamber, individual wheels are constantly subjected to
alternating environmental conditions. Testing conditions are based on real-world
weather data from across the world, melted water analysis, and air pollution data.
The variable climate test maps for various climatic zones. Thus, for instance, a
hot-moist phase is used to simulate tropical climates, whereas a cold phase simu-
lates environments in northern countries.

During day-to-day automobile use, various moisture and climatic cycles are
experienced, such as morning dew and midday drying. These cycles are considered
under exaggerated corrosive conditions, where tested wheels are sprayed four times
per week with a salt solution to enhance corrosive stresses.

208

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.60 Paint structure of bright-machined wheels

Fig. 2.61 Filiform test

The variable climate test is considerably more stressful for light metal wheels
than the procedure recommended by the German Association of the Automotive
Industry. It is also much faster, making it possible for several test series to be
carried out within the same period. These tests ultimately beneﬁt all customers,

2.5 Wheel Development

209

Fig. 2.62 Salt spray chamber CASS test

V1 Test with
KSL 

V2 Test without KSL 

Fig. 2.63 Effect of anti-corrosion paints on bright-machined, mechanically pre-damaged wheel
(stone impact)

even those living in countries with less corrosive conditions, because there is no
differentiation in wheels sold and used among different markets.

In addition to variable climate, CASS, and ﬁliform tests, a variety of stone
impact, scratch/abrasion, steam jet, and cold resistance tests are carried out to
examine the paint’s mechanical resistance, Fig. 2.64. Samples damaged in these
additional tests can be subjected to aggressive corrosive stresses, and the under-
cutting of paint layers due to corrosion can be evaluated even when they are
conventionally painted.

Additionally, color experts evaluate how well the color and sheen of painted
surfaces is retained after corrosion testing. This is performed in light cabins under
constant temperature and light intensity. An extensive archive of paint sampling
cards is used to make comparisons. This testing program is carried out whenever a
wheel supplier plans on using new materials such as basic paints, varnish,
corrosion-resistant coatings, primers, or pretreatments. These new materials are

210

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.64 Stone impact test

cleared for release only when they pass all tests without objection. In addition,
wheels from ongoing production are frequently tested for compliance within strict
color criteria.

High-Gloss Polished Surface
In the case of wheels with a high-gloss polished surface, the same prerequisites
apply as in the case of bright-machined wheels. However, since color application
normally occurs after polishing, the issue of edge formation is eliminated. In any
case, precise masking or screening is necessary in order to achieve a clean
demarcation between polished and painted areas.

Care should also be taken to ensure that polished wheels are free of any pol-
ishing residue before being painted. As a last step, these designs require a ﬁnal coat
of clear varnish, Fig. 2.47.

Galvanically Treated Surfaces
As with so many other consumer products in the past 20 years, a wave of
high-sheen or even chrome-plated wheels has been seen in Europe, having been
inspired by trends in the United States. No sooner had chrome-plated bumpers been
phased out—which, if not for their stainless-steel construction, could have been
used to study the qualities of chrome-plated materials—when chrome-plated wheels
began to be increasingly offered. Chrome-plated wheels are not only considerably
more expensive, but they are signiﬁcantly heavier as well, Fig. 2.65. Roadside dirt,
salt, and brake wear are the true test of durability for these wheels.

2.5 Wheel Development

Fig. 2.65 Chrome-plated
wheel in the Maybach (basic
wheel same as in Fig. 2.47)

211

Since wheels made of light metals are sold mainly because of their attractive-
ness, the customer also expects this attractiveness to last as long as possible. Apart
from adequate maintenance during their service life,
the quality of resistance
properties is a fundamental piece of the puzzle. The following surface tests are
required before any wheel
is released and should be periodically re-checked
throughout the production process.

Test criterion

Test method

Appearance, quality of the curve
Adhesion
Structure/thickness of layers
Corrosion resistance

Aging
Resistance to oil, grease, fuel, brake
ﬂuid, anti-frost compounds
Resistance to water
Resistance to abrasion
Impact resistance
Contamination due to road dirt and brake
dust
Temperature

Visual inspection
Crosshatch adhesion test
Measuring the layer thicknesses
Salt mist spray test (ASTM B 117), CASS
(copper–acetic acid salt spray) test
Florida weathering, artiﬁcial aging
Solvent test

Water immersion test
Abrasion test (ASTM D 968)
Impact resistance test (DIN 53154)
Can be removed without damage

Temperature shock

212

2 Wheels

2.5.3

3D Volume Modelling

A 3D volumetric model can be produced with the help of modern computer pro-
grams. With these models, wheel developers can create 3D drawings for visual-
ization and discussion among the development team, or for determining component
properties such as weight, processing options during the subsequent production
process, material distribution, or even eigenresonances and moments of inertia.
Based on these data sets, it is possible to perform an optimized ﬁnite element
calculation with virtual
test data. The digital world can simulate challenging
mechanical or thermal operating conditions—for example, driving on a curve with
maximum wheel load, driving over a pothole, driving against a curbstone, or brake
heat stress during hill descents. Inferences can also be made about the production
process and possible areas for improvement, such as whether wheel models can be
cast in permanent dies, whether material solidiﬁcation is desired, and whether a cast
wheel blank can be removed from the mold without any problems. After a new light
metal wheel is completed in the virtual world, we get a digital prototype—a
computer-aided model—which serves as the data pool for all subsequent steps,
Fig. 2.66.

Fig. 2.66 Wheel development with the ﬁnite element method (FEM)

2.5 Wheel Development

213

2.5.4 Veriﬁcation, Operational Stability, and Release

With a comprehensive development program, vehicle manufacturers assess and
verify the quality and safety of newly developed wheels. Manufacturer tests and
studies go far beyond the scope required by statute. In wheel development, the
principle is as follows: in the development and test phase, the focus is on the actual
load proﬁle of light alloy wheels under real operating conditions. Thus, testing
standards are adapted accordingly, Fig. 2.67. As a result, light metal wheels are the
safest, most efﬁcient, and longest-lasting wheel products on the market.

A particularly effective test method for evaluating a new light metal wheel is the
two(bi)-axial wheel test rig, Fig. 2.68. It differs from the conventional rolling test,
where wheels run straight with a speciﬁc and constant contact force on an external
drum. With the two-axial rig, wheels are tested in two directions inside an oversized
drum. Lateral movements and additional contact forces can be applied with this
device. In the Mercedes-Benz context, this test can replace the 6-week test drive
which took place, for example, on the “Kleinen Hockenheimring.” When two-axial
wheel testing is conducted, the loads are validated on the rolling test rig, Fig. 2.69.

Fig. 2.67 Typical speciﬁcations of a vehicle manufacturer

214

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.68 Two-axial wheel test rig

Fig. 2.69 Rolling test rig for calibrating the ZWARP initial data

Wheels are subjected to a contact force of up to 35 kN on the two-axial testing
rig, which corresponds to the forces which would be seen over a vehicle’s entire
lifespan. The wheel is also subjected to lateral forces of up to 25 kN, simulating
wheel loads during maneuvers around sharp curves.

The testing conditions for veriﬁcation of wheels through the two-axial testing rig
are very stringent. To begin, the wheel is pre-damaged with a curbstone strike at 2.5
times the wheel load on the inner rim ﬂange. This initial damage is itself considered
a test of internal ﬂange impact strength. When the deformation from this initial test
is not more than a few millimeters, actual testing on the two-axial rig can begin.

2.5 Wheel Development

215

This testing is divided into 22 stress blocks, and is determined based on the wheel’s
intended use, be it for a limousine, off-road vehicle, roadster, or saloon car. To pass
the tests, the wheel should not show any cracks throughout testing, despite the
pre-damage. Experience shows that wheels which manage to pass two-axial testing
can withstand stresses equivalent to many times the lifespan of a vehicle, assuming
normal driving conditions.

Another wheel stress test is the rotating bending fatigue test, Fig. 2.70. In this
test, the inner side of the wheel is positively ﬁxed to a test stand using the normal
wheel bolt holes. Here, bending torques of 1900–11,000 nM are applied to the
wheel through tumbling motions, simulating maximum lateral acceleration. The test
runs in parallel with multiple wheels and different load cases.

Fig. 2.70 Rotating bending fatigue test

216

2 Wheels

(cid:129) Four wheels are tested with 100% bending moment and 200,000 load changes
(cid:129) Four wheels are tested with 75% bending moment and 800,000 load changes

These values correspond to several times the legal testing requirement. All
wheels should be able to withstand these conditions without the formation of any
cracks. The test is carried out until the ﬁrst signs of cracks appear. Often, light metal
wheels can withstand millions of load changes without suffering any damage.
Under normal operating conditions, this can represent several automobile lifespans.
In addition to the test of internal ﬂange impact strength which is integrated into

two-axial testing, light metal wheels must pass other impact misuse tests.

The so-called impact test simulates driving at an angle into an obstacle such as a
curbstone. Here, the wheel is ﬁxed at a slight tilt angle to a test stand and receives
an impact from a guillotine from a predetermined height onto the outer rim ﬂange,
Fig. 2.71. The force of the impact to the wheel is determined by the permitted
wheel load (0.6 times the wheel load plus 180 kg). The deformation which results
from this action should not exceed certain control measures, and no breakage or
leakage should occur.

A second impact test also involves a strike from a guillotine, but in this test, the
wheel ﬂange area is hit with great force. The resulting damage must not cause a
failure of the wheel–tire system. Again, no breakage or leakage should appear. The
radial impact is equivalent to running over an object at a high speed.

Fig. 2.71 Impact test

2.5 Wheel Development

217

The acceptance process for new light metal wheels also includes a check on their
geometric properties with a 3D measuring machine, Fig. 2.72. In this fully auto-
mated process,
the wheel is clamped into place, and 150 points representing
20 main dimensions are measured with micro-precision. These measurements are
then compared with saved CAD data. Only after several wheels pass this test, with
its narrow tolerance ranges, will the vehicle manufacturer conduct a ﬁnal test for
issuing the ﬁnal release.

Despite the abundance of technical criteria, some of the most important release

criteria require manual inspection. They include:
(cid:129) Paint quality: In addition to corrosion testing, wheel paint is examined with
respect to its tone, layer thickness, thickness variation, and pores. Also, contact
areas and wheel holes should be free of paint.

(cid:129) Casting quality: The casting should be free of pores and surface cavities.
(cid:129) Mechanical processing quality: Deburring should be clean.
(cid:129) Weights must be within speciﬁcations.

Fig. 2.72 Wheel measuring
machine

218

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.73 X-ray unit

(cid:129) Labeling must be correct.
(cid:129) Valve assembly and tire pressure monitoring assembly should be problem-free.
(cid:129) Valve must be accessible to typical tire pressure measurement tools and gas

station ﬁlling instruments.

(cid:129) Hubcap must be able to seat correctly.
(cid:129) Concentricity must be true.

Vehicle manufacturers base their wheel and tire development and testing pro-
grams on real load proﬁles as seen under real operating conditions. At the same
time, wheels must be able to pass comprehensive test programs which go far
beyond statutory requirements.

Unlike X-ray imaging, which can provide only 2D images (Fig. 2.73), computed
tomography (CT) offers 3D representations. These are obtained from up to 2880
individual X-ray slice images of the wheel by a cluster of computers with an
internal memory of more than 50 gigabytes. This scan is carried out in both a
horizontal and vertical direction in a lead-lined chamber.

Together with data collected from various test stands, CT evaluations can be
used to draw inferences as to where even the smallest malfunctions could have an
operational impact. These areas can then be improved through design and engi-
neering changes. In addition, casting techniques can be optimized, because CT
evaluations can identify these areas with precision in terms of size and location.
Insights gained can also be transferred to future wheel development efforts.

2.5.5 Large-Scale Series Production

The starting materials for wheels of light metal construction consist of primary
alloys, as well as metal residues such as milling chips and defective wheels from the
same production. In the smelting furnace, a temperature of around 775 °C must be

2.5 Wheel Development

219

maintained. After the run-off of the liquid aluminum alloy and the subsequent
cleaning of the molten metal with special additives, a “transport ladle” is used to
move the solution to the casting machines, which are then ﬁlled with the liquid
metal.

Aluminum cast wheels are manufactured exclusively using low-pressure die
casting. Using positive pressure, molten aluminum is pressed upwards through a
riser pipe from a lower reservoir. Here, a narrow temperature corridor must be
maintained so that the metal can ﬂow through the mold and solidify by means of a
carefully controlled process. Casting characteristics and the solidiﬁcation process
are precisely simulated during the development phase of new wheels. After
solidiﬁcation, the multi-part die is opened and the wheel blank is conveyed in a
fully automated manner to the next station, Fig. 2.74.

Every wheel passes through a fully automated X-ray unit after the casting
process, Fig. 2.75. In enclosed cabins, the X-ray machine scans the untreated
blanks and analyzes the resulting images in real time. Casting errors such as cavities
(air bubbles) or pores which could lead to reduced structural stability can be reliably
diagnosed. Based on these diagnoses, wheels are accepted or rejected. Rejected
wheels are melted down to be used again.

Wheels are made almost exclusively from the artiﬁcially aged aluminum alloy
Gk-AlSi7. This alloy derives its extraordinarily high strength from a three-stage
heat treatment which follows the casting process. In the heat treatment, the wheel
blanks are ﬁrst brought to a temperature of about 530 °C in a solution annealing
bath, and are then quenched in a water bath. Finally, they are aged artiﬁcially for

Fig. 2.74 Removing the cast wheel from the low-pressure die casting mold

220

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.75 100% X-ray test during ongoing production

several hours at a temperature of around 150 °C. Through this process, the alu-
minum material attains its ﬁnal strength.

Several mechanical processing steps bring wheel blanks to their ﬁnal shape,
Fig. 2.76. In this area of production, reliable dimensional tolerances and high
degrees of accuracy are necessary. Thus, only computer-controlled machining tools
which can comply with tolerances within a few hundredths of a millimeter are used.
In the turning, milling, and hole-drilling lathes, the following wheel areas are

shaped:
(cid:129) Rim bed—the part of the wheel on which the tire will later sit
(cid:129) Outer rim ﬂange—the proﬁle of the wheel’s circumference
(cid:129) Contact surface—the surface on which the wheel rests on the wheel hub of the

vehicle

Fig. 2.76 Mechanical processing of the cast wheel

2.5 Wheel Development

221

(cid:129) Middle centering—correct dimensioning here guarantees a centered positioning

of the wheel on the wheel hub

(cid:129) Center hole grooves where the hubcap is later inserted
(cid:129) Wheel bolt holes
(cid:129) Valve hole—the exact alignment

sensor, which is installed with the valve

is important for the tire pressure control

(cid:129) Brake installation space—the area on the inner side of the wheel disc and rim is

important to ensure adequate clearance for the brake system

During ongoing production processes, measurement devices which check for
quality are integrated with the individual manufacturing centers. In the event that a
machine begins to approach the outer limits of the narrow tolerances, it will
automatically correct itself. In addition, 100% checks are useful: middle centering is
checked separately, with another measurement station detecting inadmissible
imbalances in a reliable manner.

In the last step prior to painting, wheels undergo an automated leakage test.
Here, the wheel is clamped between two rubber-coated steel plates and impacted
with helium. Helium probes outside the wheel can detect even the smallest quan-
tities of escaping gas, and leakages can thus be reliably diagnosed. Wheels which
fail this test are rejected from the production process.

In the ﬁrst step in the production painting process, wheels undergo a pretreat-
ment that involves up to 16 stations which cover a length of nearly 100 m. Here, the
wheels are washed and degreased. A base coat is then applied, which acts as the
bonding agent between the blank metal and the next coating, while at the same time
providing the ﬁrst layer of corrosion protection, Fig. 2.77.

The wheels then receive an electrostatically applied powder coating, after which
they are baked in an oven. The powder coating is the wheel’s strongest layer in
terms of volume, and helps to balance out tiny irregularities on the surface of the
wheel. A specially trained employee subsequently checks the result of this coating
in a specially designed light chamber. If even a small irregularity is seen, the wheel

Fig. 2.77 Priming the wheels with powder coating in the paint shop

222

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.78 Fully automated conveyor in the paint shop

will be rejected. After this quality check, painting robots apply the colored paint
under cleanroom conditions, followed by sealing with a clear varnish. After a ﬁnal
test, the wheels are released for dispatch, Fig. 2.78.

In the case of bright-machined wheels, painted wheels are then transported to
special turning lathes equipped with diamond-tipped tools. These machines remove
some of the painted layers in precisely deﬁned areas, usually the spokes or the outer
rim well, Fig. 2.79. This process gives rise to high-sheen metallic areas which
contrast attractively with the remaining painted areas.

Fig. 2.79 Bi-color wheels: manufacturing step—bright-machined with diamond tools

2.5 Wheel Development

223

Of course, these bright-machined wheels must be sealed once again with a fresh
painting process. Three steps are involved: a fresh pretreatment, the application of a
transparent anti-corrosion ﬁnish, and the application of a ﬁnal clear varnish.

The ongoing production process is monitored in precise detail in the manufac-
turer’s laboratory per the vehicle manufacturer speciﬁcations. Here, laboratory staff
carry out the following tests, among others:
(cid:129) Check of the primary alloy Gk-AlSi7 with a spectrometer
(cid:129) Tensile strength check with specially prepared wheel samples
(cid:129) Dimensional check with a 3D measuring machine

A direct link between the laboratory and production line, together with stan-
dardized processes, makes it possible to quickly intervene and correct mistakes
during the production process.

2.6 Quality Assurance

A comprehensive quality assurance system is indispensable for safety parts such as
automotive wheels.

In addition to the standard criteria for automotive wheels, special attention
should be given to the material-speciﬁc properties and process-speciﬁc inﬂuences
on quality over the course of development.

At the beginning of development, a feasibility analysis should be conducted to
determine the extent to which the desired design is capable of fulﬁlling the stipu-
lations prescribed by the speciﬁcations manual. Simulations of casting and solidi-
ﬁcation processes provide information about
feasibility in terms of casting
technology.

2.6.1 X-ray, Computed Tomography, and Metallography

One important component in the development process of new light metal wheels is
tests concerning with inner microstructures, all the way down to atomic structure.
Studies in the various test and inspection areas provide information about whether
the performance capacity of a new wheel meets requrements. Additional tests using
incident light microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, X-ray, or CT provide
information as to exactly why different wheel prototypes are better than or inferior
to others.

The study of a light metal wheel begins with an incident light microscope with a
magniﬁcation of 20–1000 times. A sample weighing only a few grams is taken from
the wheel which is to be tested, ﬁnely ground, and polished. The microstructure of
the crystalline metal alloy is made visible through subsequent contrast enhancement

224

2 Wheels

of the 2D image, allowing one to draw inferences about the raw materials used and
the quality of the casting process. When irregularities are found here, the wheel
supplier is informed so that problems can be eliminated before the start of series
production.

Rupture points which result from testing can be evaluated only using a trans-
mission electron microscope, because this system generates a 3D image at a sig-
niﬁcantly higher resolution in the µ-range (1µ = 0.001 mm). With such precision,
rupture points can be analyzed and conclusions can be made as to whether its cause
is related to a casting defect, for example, or perhaps an unfavorable phase for-
mation in the metal structure. A crack that starts from an intact metal joint indicates
possible design vulnerabilities. Once again, the concerned parties will be informed
as to how these vulnerabilities can be ameliorated.

Due to the nature of incident light and transmission electron microscopy testing,
wheels must always be destroyed to create samples. Non-destructive testing is also
possible, as is the case with X-ray and CT tests. Non-destructive analyses are
necessary, for instance, if a wheel must remain available for further testing after
being examined. These tests augment the development phase and make important
contributions towards quality checking of subsequent series production wheels.
Experts can detect cavities and imperfections as small as 0.3 mm in X-ray images,
Fig. 2.73.

2.6.2 Radial and Axial True-Run

To evaluate the true-run quality of a wheel as though it were mounted on a vehicle,
it must be assessed as a complete wheel with tires mounted. During wheel manu-
facture, the middle center hole is balanced with respect to the two surfaces for the
inner and outer tire seat for the true run. Similarly, the contact surface at the wheel
hub and inner surfaces of the wheel ﬂanges are responsible for the lateral run-out of
the wheel. These surfaces are beset with manufacturing-related tolerances which are
overlapped by the tolerances of the tire. For the wheels, the axial and radial true-run
tolerances are typically 0.3 mm for passenger cars. For optimal true run of a
complete wheel, “matching” is used. Here, wheels and tires are positioned during
montage in such a way that the “true-run high point” of the wheel coincides with
the “low point” of the tire.

In the case of the wheel, the high point is determined from the true-run mea-
surements of the two tire seating surfaces. A separate high point is determined for
each surface with different angular positions on the circumference of the wheel.
These two values, upon vector addition, yield a common value with resulting
angular position. This point is marked on the wheel with colored paint or a sticker.
For the tire, the low point corresponds to the position where it reaches the lowest
force variation when rolling. It is also marked with a colored dot. Technically, the
tire can be compared to a spring which has a radial stiffness. Due to manufacturing
constraints, a tire cannot be manufactured with such precision that it has the same

2.6 Quality Assurance

225

stiffness across its entire periphery. Complete wheels with a poor true run are
noticeable not only through radial movement of the car body (in the z-direction),
but also in the direction of travel. Here, a small alternating force can be felt due to
the acceleration and deceleration every time the wheel brakes are applied.

In the case of faster-moving commercial vehicles, and also in the case of large
and heavy wheels, a good centering of the wheels on the vehicle is very important.
For commercial vehicles which drive at high speeds, the deviation between the axial
and radial true run on both shoulder and ﬂange sides of the rim should be as small
as possible to achieve good running smoothness. This not only ensures a higher
level of safety, but helps to conserve fuel as well.

2.6.3 Balance

Compensation for the differently distributed masses between the wheel and tire is as
important as the axial and radial true run when it comes to the smooth rolling of the
complete wheel. The inﬂuence of these imbalances is minimized through wheel
balancing. To this end, wheels for passenger cars are normally measured dynam-
ically due to the width of the rim, that is, measurements are made in two planes
(inner and outer tire seat positions). Using these measurements, the necessary
balancing mass is determined and applied at the point indicated by the wheel
balancing machine. Balancing weights can be glued, clamped, or punched. The
ideal position for balancing weights on dynamically balanced wheels is the maxi-
mum distance from the center of the rim at the largest possible diameter.

In most vehicles, a balancing error of about 5 g exists for each balancing plane,
known as the “residual imbalance.” This imbalance cannot be felt with certain
vehicle types and chassis conﬁgurations. For each balancing plane, a balancing
weight should be applied at only one point. In cases where a balancing mass of
more than 80 g is necessary on one plane, it is advisable to turn the tire on the
wheel and to repeat the balancing process. However, this technique only applies to
wheel and tire combinations which do not need to be turned for matching. The
smaller the mass of the balancing weight on the wheel, the smaller the potential for
residual imbalance. Narrow wheels, such as those for motorcycles, are balanced in
only one plane. With this method, known as static balancing, the balancing weights
are mounted at the center of the rim.

Wheels for commercial vehicles and compact spare tires with restricted maxi-

mum speeds are not balanced.

226

2 Wheels

2.7 Lightweight Engineering Techniques

If necessary, weight-optimized cast wheels can also be manufactured through a
modiﬁed, albeit more elaborate, process known as “ﬂow forming.” With this
technique, a weight savings of about 0.9 kg can be realized on a 19-in. wheel.
Rough castings produced for ﬂow-formed wheels are similar to those used for
forging. However, instead of a fully formed rim contour, a ring is provided around
the design surface as a material source for the rim itself. The ﬂow-forming process
as it relates to single-piece aluminum wheels is a relatively new production tech-
nique. Beneﬁts of ﬂow-formed wheels include the high degree of design freedom
normally characteristic of cast wheels, and the high strength and optimized com-
ponent weight typically achieved with the more expensive and tedious forged wheel
technology.

The manufacturing process of ﬂow forming is illustrated in Fig. 2.80. First, a
blank wheel is cast as described earlier. The blank wheel has a very narrow rim well
with a signiﬁcantly greater wall thickness. After it is heated to about 350 °C, the
blank is clamped to a cylinder which is tapered slightly at the top, similar to a cone.
The blank and cylinder rotate, while three revolving roller heads press down on the
blank from the top with a pressure of about 120 t, moving downwards in the
process. It is during this process that the rim is “ﬂow-formed” and compacted into
the desired shape. The resulting rim well has a microstructure similar to forged
rims, with the highest level of stability at the lowest possible weight. A subsequent
heat treatment brings the wheel to its ﬁnal strength (Fig. 2.81).

Fig. 2.80 Process steps in ﬂow forming

2.7 Lightweight Engineering Techniques

227

Fig. 2.81 Manufacturing process in the case of ﬂow forming (from right to left)

The blank formed in this manner is then fed back into the “normal” manufac-

turing process before heat treatment.

Another means of manufacturing weight-optimized wheels is the use of the lost
core technique in parts of the wheel which are subjected to smaller stresses. Here,
aluminum is replaced by hollow cavities, for example, in the spokes, and in rare
cases in the hump as well. Figure 2.82 shows the so-called Nature Wheel with a lost
core ﬁlled with sand. Figure 2.83 shows a wheel with a hollow spoke design.

Hollow spoke technology with sand-cast cores or with lost ceramic cores offers
good opportunities for weight reduction, but requires a design which is suitable for
this
such techniques, along with special manufacturing techniques. Moreover,
method is associated with higher costs.

Flow forming is presently more widely used in the case of cast wheels, where the
rim well is only partly cast and then rolled out to the corresponding width of the rim

Fig. 2.82 Nature Wheel with lost core

228

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.83 Hollow spoke wheel

using machines. Therefore, thinner wall thicknesses with lower weight can be
realized in the rim well with the compacted material.

“Structure wheels” are commonly used as spare wheels or as wheels covered by
synthethic claddings. The ultimate aim is to use only as much material as necessary
for adequate operational safety and function through design speciﬁcations, while
also controlling production costs.

2.8 Aerodynamics

In the context of “pulling out all the stops,” as mentioned earlier, increasing
attention is being paid to the airﬂow in and around the wheel. Such considerations,
however, aren’t completely new: the Blitzen-Benz of 1909—which was the ﬁrst car
to break the speed record of 200 km/h—featured wheel coverings to improve
aerodynamics, Fig. 2.84.

Walther v. Selve also considered this topic in 1920. In tests with wire-spoke
wheels, he determined that aerodynamic cladding was a positive inﬂuence in
attaining higher speeds. At this time, however, airﬂow was not a consideration,
since there were few issues with regard to brake cooling. Wheel claddings were
used here and there in Europe and the United States until the 1960s, but have since
disappeared.

The effect of wheel aerodynamics was ultimately demonstrated by the founder of
Lotus, Colin Chapman, in the 1970s. Among Formula One (F1) race cars with the
same amount of engine power, his cars were almost unbeatable—until his com-
petitors discovered his “wing-car” principle. Aerodynamics plays a special role in
present-day F1 race cars as well. Regulations permit only minor engine differences
and virtually no creativity when it comes to wheels. Thus, differences in perfor-
mance capabilities—if any—can be achieved only through modiﬁcations to the
chassis design and aerodynamics. Only rarely can knowledge gained from F1

2.8 Aerodynamics

229

Fig. 2.84 Blitzen-Benz wheel with aerodynamic cladding

experience be transferred to series production. However, ongoing studies regarding
high-speed wheel aerodynamics in a racing setting could inﬂuence wheel design in
the future, though the particular inﬂuences can’t be foreseen at the moment. In the
case that wheels are indeed clad with panels for aerodynamic reasons, the wheel—
no-longer-visible—would have to be engineered only according to strength- and
weight-optimized design, with less consideration for visual aesthetics.

Aerodynamic aspects could be taken into account during vehicle design in
cooperation with the various vehicle development departments. Flow simulations
have shown that aerodynamically optimized light metal wheels and tires improve
the overall vehicle aerodynamics, reducing fuel consumption and thereby poten-
tially contributing to a reduction in CO2 emissions of more than 1 g/km, Fig. 2.85.

Fig. 2.85 Complete vehicle aerodynamic simulation steel wheel with panel

230

2.9 Wheel Trim

2 Wheels

Wheel trim is used mainly to enhance visual appeal and is fastened with the help of
elastic retaining spring elements so that it can be easily detached, Fig. 2.86. The
rubber wheel valve helps to support the ornamental trim, which would otherwise be
subject to the possibility of spinning due to centrifugal force at high speeds.
Heat-resistant synthetic materials such as polyamide 6 have been found to be good
material for wheel ﬂashing and hubcaps. In some cases, even aluminum or stainless
steel covers are used. Covers are often designed in two colors with clipped-in
emblems.

Wheel trim is also used for cast wheels in an effort to improve aerodynamics.
Here, the wheel is usually lightweight and simple in design. In some cases, these
wheels even have screwed- or glued-on parts. Trim can also cover the wheel bolts,
Fig. 2.87. In any case, recesses are provided to allow the panel to be removed for
tire changes. Panels can also be bolted on.

On aluminum wheels, covers made of synthetic material are used to cover the
center hole. To achieve a more aesthetically pleasing appearance, these are often
thin painted sheets of aluminum featuring a logo or design, Fig. 2.88.

2.10 Wheel Bolt and Wheel Assembly

Wheel fastening elements are yet another safety-relevant topic when considering
the subject of wheels and tires. The wheel fasteners, wheel, brake disc chamber, and
wheel hub must all be able to withstand the forces associated with driving, braking,
steering, and wheel load, while avoiding any negative impact on the safety and
operation of the wheel and axle components.

Fig. 2.86 Decorative wheel panel for a steel wheel

2.10 Wheel Bolt and Wheel Assembly

231

Fig. 2.87 Partial panel for a
steel wheel with covered
wheel bolts

Fig. 2.88 Middle covers

Wheel bolt connections are typical screw-type connections classiﬁed as
Category A parts under VDI 2862 (p. 1). This classiﬁcation deﬁnes such fasteners
as those where any failure could present a danger to life and limb. At the same time,
wheel bolts are some of the most frequently detached and reattached screw con-
nections on a vehicle, meaning that the safety requirements are even greater.

The design of a wheel bolt is a typical engineering and design task. However, if
one were to consider the combination of every type of load at its highest level as a
baseline measurement (driving and braking torque, contact and cornering forces,
jerking loads, etc.), it would be very difﬁcult to achieve a realistic connection,

232

2 Wheels

especially between the wheel disc and brake disc chamber. Therefore, assumptions
which are as realistic as possible should be made for the design—for example, by
evaluating the load collectives from actual driving tests.

There is an increasing trend towards lightweight engineering of components,
with a simultaneous increase in engine power and vehicle weight. This leads to
higher dynamic loads, as well as movements and deformations in the wheel bolt
connection system. These loads can be even further ampliﬁed by shifts caused by
load changes between the brake disc and the wheel in the direction of the wheel’s
circumference. In extreme cases of deformation low coefﬁcients of friction could
result in the screws becoming detached at the headrest in the hemispherical head
region. If the coefﬁcients of friction are higher, on the other hand, micro-oscillations
can lead to wear in the region of the headrest. This tendency towards galling is
usually more pronounced in steel wheels than aluminum wheels, owing to the
greater yield strength of steel wheels.

In addition to the wheel screw connections themselves, misalignment and
deformation characteristics of the wheel disc, brake disc chamber, and hub have a
decisive inﬂuence on the dynamic wheel force ﬁt. The deformation characteristics
of the wheel disc and the “background” essentially determine the dynamic forces
and the deformations acting upon the wheel bolt connections and the safety level of
the connections. A high degree of stiffness of the wheel and the “background”
usually has a favorable impact on tight ﬁt, because it makes the additional screw
forces smaller, Fig. 2.89.

This image shows the inﬂuence of ﬂexibility (yieldingness) conditions on the

dynamic screw additional force in the case of cyclic operating forces:

Fig. 2.89 Warping proﬁle wheel bolt with the wheel and the “background”

2.10 Wheel Bolt and Wheel Assembly

233

(cid:129) Flat

characteristic

curve

for wheel + “background” = high

ﬂexibility

(cid:129) Steep

characteristic

curve

for wheel + “background” = low ﬂexibility

(yieldingness)
– high dynamic screw additional force

(yieldingness)
– low dynamic screw additional force.

The testing and release process for new wheel screw connections is extremely
time-consuming and cost-intensive, because it is necessary to simulate such a wide
variety of practical situations through driving tests and on test rigs.

It is the task of vehicle manufacturers to determine the geometric design of the
fastening elements, particularly the diameter, length, and number of fastening ele-
ments. Passenger car wheels are often fastened to the wheel hub with three to ﬁve
wheel bolts or wheel nuts which pass through the fastening holes of the wheel. In
the case of all-terrain and light commercial vehicles, six wheel bolts or wheel studs
are commonly seen. The shoulder designs of wheel-mounting elements vary by
manufacturer, but are generally dome- or cone-shaped. In rare cases, ﬂat-shouldered
fasteners are used.

Wheel fastening designs featuring a central nut and positive locking elements
(e.g. cotter pins) are used almost exclusively in the case of race cars. However, such
wheel-mounting systems are increasing seen in luxury sports cars as well. The
original motivation for a centrally fastened wheel was the need to change wheels
quickly. Such a feature should be avoided in series-manufactured vehicles owing to
anti-theft concerns.

In the premium car segment and in Europe, wheel bolts are the most frequently
used wheel fastening elements. In American and Asian markets, wheel studs with
lug nuts are traditionally used. The following explanations are therefore meant
predominately for European-style wheel bolt fasteners.

The layout, design, and manufacturing of wheel screws with the aim of
achieving greater operational safety requires comprehensive knowledge about the
function of the entire wheel bolt system, and an equal amount of practical expe-
rience. A careful matching of the geometry of wheel screw contact areas to the
wheel and the related friction parameters is important when deﬁning tightening
torques and processes.

Appropriate screw clamping forces should be deﬁned. Adequate torque is nec-
essary for the continued safe operation of the wheel bolts after initial assembly and
during subsequent removal and reattachment, and with consideration for all pos-
sible dynamic operating states. A wheel well-centered on its hub can be achieved by
making the wheel center hole a centering bore with exact clearance with respect to
the wheel hub rather than the wheel bolts.

One of the most underestimated factors with regard to wheel mounting is fric-
tional conditions. Wheel bolts generate clamping force, and the transmission of
forces after braking or acceleration should occur primarily through the force ﬁt/

234

2 Wheels

positive locking/friction locking which takes place between the wheel and wheel
hub. It is only in emergency situations where the wheel bolt or stud bolts should
block the relative motion between the wheel and the brake disc through contact with
the wheel fasteners themselves.

If the frictional conditions change in the wheel bolts, wheel, brake disc, and
wheel hub, an experimental veriﬁcation of the complete assembly must be con-
ducted in order to ensure adequate positive locking/friction locking.

It is also important to deﬁne friction conditions, especially at the wheel. One way
to do this is to place friction rings on the wheel ﬂange. Figure 2.90 shows an
example of printed images for this purpose, created by an aluminum cast wheel
(top) and a steel wheel (bottom) with two friction rings. In the chip removal process
during wheel manufacture, it is important that the outer friction ring contacts ﬁrst,

Fig. 2.90 Engineering
design of the wheel contact on
the brake disc drum through
the inner and outer friction
rings: proof of function
through printed image
measurements

2.10 Wheel Bolt and Wheel Assembly

235

and the inner friction ring second. This ensures that, when the wheel is placed
against the brake disc chamber, the mean friction radius—a decisive factor in
friction locking—is as large as possible. This also makes for reproducible friction
relations.

Aside from the advantage of offering a deﬁned friction radius, friction rings also
provide an additional level of safety by making up for potentially lost clamping
force which could occur during or after assembly due to contamination of contact
surfaces with grains of sand, corrosion residue, or paint abrasion.

Wheel bolts are often used as design elements when they are visible on the
vehicle. In these cases, unique requirements are applicable to the wheel screw
connections with regard to appearance. In general, silver or black is the preferred
color, depending on the design. Coatings should be as uniform and homogenous as
possible, especially in areas which are visible. In the case of screws with depres-
sions, the coatings should also be resilient against the use of tools for tightening,
Fig. 2.91.

Wheel bolts are subjected to a variety of external inﬂuences: weather and
temperature extremes, dirt, chemicals (e.g. de-icing salt, brake dust, wheel cleaning
agents). These are in addition to the mechanical stresses which occur during

Fig. 2.91 Mercedes wheel bolts as design elements: a black and b with stainless steel cap

236

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.92 Wheel after using an unapproved rim cleaner—heavy rust formation on the screw head
due to damage to the coating

corresponding
assembly and disassembly. Thus, wheel bolts must have
anti-corrosion requirements. These requirements must be particularly stringent
when the wheel bolts are exposed, and can be less rigorous when decorative panels
or covers protect them. For exposed screw connections, particularly those which are
zinc-coated, adequate white rust resistance is necessary. For black coated wheel
bolts, red rust resistance is necessary (usually 720 h in a salt mist spray test). In
addition, corrosion resistance should remain effective on wheel fasteners even
through 5–10 assembly/disassembly cycles, and also after temperature stresses of
120–180 °C over several hours. Wheel bolt coatings are not resistant to extremely
acidic or basic wheel cleaning agents. Misuse of these agents can lead to irre-
versible acceleration of corrosion, Fig. 2.92.

In addition to corrosion protection, the coating applied to wheel bolts is critical
for the process-safe adjustment of the ratio of tightening torque/preload force during
assembly and for later behavior during operation, particularly for the dynamic
force-ﬁt of the wheel. Vehicle manufacturers usually design wheel assemblies for a
minimum wheel bolt clamping force (torque value). When ﬁrmly attached to the
vehicle, wheel bolts should under no circumstances fall below these minimum
torque values. If the corresponding safety measures are taken into consideration, a
window is deﬁned for preload force during initial assembly (series assembly).
These preload values enable vehicle wheel assembly without issues and without
causing any unacceptable deformations. A tightening torque is also determined to
correspond to the preload force. During series assembly, a speciﬁc joining torque is
determined for each wheel type provided for the vehicle (e.g. cathodic dip paint
(KTL) coated steel wheel, aluminium-cast wheel, aluminium-forged wheel,

2.10 Wheel Bolt and Wheel Assembly

237

KTL-coated aluminium-band wheel). The tightening torques are monitored and
recorded to ensure that the proper preload torque and subsequent tightening torque
are achieved with minimal material diffusion.

In the case of steel wheels, the maximum preload torque should not be exceeded
during initial assembly; otherwise, unacceptable plastic deformation can occur
which could damage the beveled surfaces. Here, wheel bolts should be dimensioned
such that utilization of about 60–70% of the elastic limits of the screws is not
exceeded during series assembly. In the case of aluminum wheels (except alu-
minum band wheels), values should never rise above the pre-tensioning force even
after multiple assemblies and disassembles (e.g. 10–20 times). The latter require-
ment reﬂects the experience that the friction retention—and thus the ratio of the
tightening torque to pretension force—can be signiﬁcantly impaired by the fol-
lowing inﬂuences:
(cid:129) Corrosion in the region of the bolt head and/or thread
(cid:129) Local abrasion of the coating system or of the lubricant system in the case of

multiple assemblies

(cid:129) Temperature instability in the coating or lubricant system

These inﬂuences are frequently responsible for increased friction at the contact
surfaces and in the thread. This friction can lead to difﬁculty in loosening, small and
strongly scattered preload forces upon re-tightening, and in extreme cases, per-
manent fracture under higher dynamic loads due to inadequate preload forces.
Designs should be validated through comprehensive testing on test rigs.

One example of a design for the torque-preload force characteristics for an
is shown in Fig. 2.93, with a tightening torque of
aluminum forged wheel
MA = 110 Nm. For a utilization of v = 60% of the elastic limiting load, and for an
assumed frictional coefﬁcient of µ = 0.10 (initial assembly series tightening), a
preload force of roughly 41 kN is obtained. If the coefﬁcient of friction is increased
during operation to µ = 0.20 (e.g. due to multiple tightening operations, abrasion,
or corrosion), the pre-tensioning force will be only about 22 kN (Fig. 2.94).

Observe Fig. 2.95, and note the different extremes by which the shoulder of a
wheel bolt can contact the wheel rim. Extreme exterior contact has unfavorable
effects, especially in the case of aluminum wheels. Here, lower and more scattered
preload forces are seen during assembly and during operation due to high local
surface pressures. Extreme interior contact, on the other hand, has been found to be
beneﬁcial in most cases. This form of wheel bolt shoulder contact gives rise to a
clear and uniform pattern of wear over its assembled life. Furthermore, the surface
pressure is more evenly distributed, and higher preload forces with smaller dis-
persions are achieved, along with lower preload force losses through settling. It is
for this reason that the tolerances between wheel bolts and wheels should be
designed such that clean wear patterns are obtained during assembly, and local
contact pressures do not become unacceptably high.

In special cases, the use of two-piece wheel bolts can be advantageous. The
design shown in Fig. 2.96 illustrates a bolt with a large captive washer with a large

238

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.93 Ratio of the tightening torque to the pre-tensioning force in the case of a wheel bolt
connection

amount of ﬂexibility. Through the use of such a wheel bolt, the free expansion
length is increased. This reduces preload losses due to settling and relaxation, and
also reduces additional force due to dynamic operating loads. Another advantage is
that, with suitable design of the coating and pairing tolerances in the headrest and
spherical seating area/calotte, the screw always turns against the washer rather than
the wheel surface during montage. This occurs when the coefﬁcients of friction and/
or the friction radius in the headrest is smaller than in the seating area/calotte. In this
case, the friction characteristics, and thus the preload forces in the case of two-part
wheel bolts, are largely independent of the wheel itself, and scattering distributions
are kept to a minimum.

In general, wheel fastening systems should be designed such that preload force
losses due to settling and relaxation are kept to a minimum, and that independent
detachment of wheel bolts due to dynamic operating forces is avoided with a high
degree of certainty. Losses due to preload forces can be reduced by keeping layer
thicknesses of coating systems as thin as possible. This applies to the coatings of
wheel bolts, the wheels themselves (e.g. KTL coatings in the bevel and at the wheel
contact point), and the brake disc chamber (e.g. zinc-rich primer). To ensure a high
level of safety against the loosening of individual screws, connections should be
designed so that the ratio between the torque required for loosening and tightening
is sufﬁciently high. Here, operating temperatures (in particular,
temperature
increases due to braking) play a signiﬁcant role, since frictional characteristics can
vary at higher temperatures depending on the coating system. This allows for a

2.10 Wheel Bolt and Wheel Assembly

239

Fig. 2.94 Wheel assembly with steel wheels and aluminum wheels using Mercedes vehicles as an
example. a Short wheel bolt for aluminum and steel wheels; b long wheel bolt only or aluminum
wheels (heavy vehicles)

clean contact pattern during assembly and modiﬁes the loosening torque—by
reducing it (reduced safety against detachment or loosening) or increasing it (higher
safety against loosening).

When a double-tightening technique is used during series assembly—particu-
larly in the case of steel wheels—the safety of wheel bolt connections can be
increased signiﬁcantly. During the ﬁrst tightening, tolerances between the screw
and wheel bevels are balanced out through anticipated plastic deformations. With
this, setting contributions can lead to pre-tensioning force losses after assembly.
Furthermore, the cold hardening creates deformation reserves for operation. With
the second tightening, we obtain a largely linear tightening torque-angle of rotation
characteristic up to the nominal tightening torque and signiﬁcantly smaller scat-
tering of pre-tensioning forces with respect to a single tightening motion.

Wheel bolt connection systems are tested and released for series use by auto-
in close cooperation with suppliers, after extensive

mobile manufacturers

240

2 Wheels

Fig. 2.95 Inward and outward contours in a single-piece and b two-piece wheel bolts, depending
on the pairing tolerances between the screw head and wheel contact

Fig. 2.96 Two-part wheel bolt. Un-detachable, fastened steel plate with high ﬂexibility with plane
headrest and spherical calotte

system-speciﬁc tests. This includes the veriﬁcation of the torque preload force
characteristics for initial and subsequent assembly, as well as testing of dynamic
wheel friction ﬁt in special test rigs, Fig. 2.97, and in drive tests under deﬁned
conditions. Due to safety considerations, only wheels which have been approved by

2.10 Wheel Bolt and Wheel Assembly

241

Fig. 2.97 Wheel screw bolt test rig for veriﬁcation of torque/pre-tensioning force characteristics

Fig. 2.98 Wheel screw bolt
characteristics

test

rig for veriﬁcation of

the torque/pre-tensioning force

242

2 Wheels

the manufacturer should be used in combination with the original wheel bolts or
wheel nuts approved for that wheel assembly.

Non-compliance with these recommendations could result in wheel bolt failure
due to abrasion of the bolt or hub thread as a result of insufﬁcient screw depth or
material strength, should the wheel fastening elements not be matched with the
aggregate in terms of strength and length. Another risk is permanent fracture
because of inadequate preload forces with unmatched bevel geometry, or as is more
often seen, the use of unsuitable coating systems for accessory/replacement screws,
Fig. 2.98. This ﬁgure shows high and approximately uniform preload values in the
original wheel bolts and low preload values in accessory wheel bolts.

Chapter 3
Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems

Tire pressure is an important parameter which inﬂuences nearly all tire properties.
Minimum air pressure for a tire is deﬁned through the speciﬁcations of the ETRTO,
and depends on the load index, speed index, and additional indicators such as the
extra load, as well as the wheel camber while driving in a straight line. Minimum
vehicle-speciﬁc air pressure is deﬁned by a vehicle’s manufacturer, with the tire
manufacturer also having a say. Minimum air pressure can be higher if there are
criteria which necessitate it, such as the tire becoming unseated during the ﬁsh hook
test, stability reasons, tire matching between front and rear axles, or even due to
speciﬁcations aimed at reducing CO2 emissions. A vehicle’s recommended tire
pressure will often vary based on tire dimensions, load, and vehicle velocity,
Fig. 3.1.

Tire pressure affects rolling comfort and the overall feel of an automobile on the
road. Generally, the lower the tire pressure, the more comfortable the ride. The
decrease in vertical spring stiffness is primarily responsible for this. As air pressure
increases, the distance between the wheel rim and the street increases, and the roll
angle gradient of the vehicle decreases, partly because of the tire’s stiffness. With
regard to rolling resistance, the higher the air pressure, the lower the rolling resis-
tance. Cornering stiffness decreases slightly as air pressure increases for small to
medium wheel loads, and increases for larger wheel loads. Relaxation length and
lateral outward wandering under the action of lateral forces decreases as air pressure
increases, while longitudinal stiffness hardly changes. The size of the contact patch as
well as the pneumatic trail also decreases as air pressure increases. This has an impact
on the steering reset of the vehicle, and is especially apparent during maneuvers such
as parking: the higher the air pressure, the smaller the forces which come about
during parking. A decrease in the size of the contact patch as a result of higher air
pressure leads to poorer dry braking distances and can also lead to excess wear and
tear in the middle region of the tire tread. It is necessary to have the correct tire
pressure for high-speed operation: tires with low air pressure have greater deﬂection,
which leads to higher ﬂexing and creep, which leads to thermal heating. This could
lead to overheating and in the worst case, a complete tire failure.
Fig. 3.1 Air pressure chart in the fuel ﬁller ﬂip

Under hard use on rough terrain or while driving on sand, low air pressure is
beneﬁcial. This is due to the signiﬁcantly larger size of the tire’s contact patch with
the ground. Tire failures at high speeds are frequently seen in all-terrain vehicles
because of proper tire pressure not being restored after off-road usage.

There are two ways that tire pressure can be lost. The ﬁrst type of loss occurs as
a result of damage to the tire caused by foreign objects or from faulty valves or
wheels. In most cases, only one wheel is affected. The other form of air pressure
loss is the natural diffusion of approximately 40–60 mbar per month, which occurs
equally across all tires. Accordingly, tire pressures should be monitored at regular
intervals. Low air pressure not only increases operating costs because of greater
rolling resistance, but also increases the risk of accidents due to tire failure, making
automatic air pressure control a desirable feature. Thus, there are two types of tire
pressure monitoring systems (TPMS) to address these issues: indirect systems and
direct systems. Indirect systems do not measure air pressure, but rather the amount
of change in tire properties. Direct systems directly monitor air pressure for each
wheel, and typically the tire temperature as well, since tire pressure ﬂuctuates based
on temperature.

The tire is an approximately isochoric system (constant volume); hence, from the
gas law, we have P1/T1 = P2/T2. The isochoric curve starting from absolute zero
(−273 °C), has a slope of approximately 0.1 bar/10 °C (1.9 bar target pressure at
15 °C) to 0.15 bar/10 °C (3.3 bar target pressure at 15 °C), depending on the
pressure, Fig. 3.2. This means that as a tire heats up, the internal pressure in the tire
also increases. While performing on-road tire evaluations, tire pressure should be
documented in along with the tire temperature.

3 Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems

245

Fig. 3.2 Isochoric relations in tires

The development and veriﬁcation of direct and indirect tire pressure control
systems is done with external tire pressure control systems which make it possible
to change the tire pressure even while the vehicle is in motion, Fig. 3.3. With this
system, deﬁned leakage rates can be simulated on one or more tires and deﬁned
breakdown scenarios can be executed in a reproducible manner.

Tire pressure control systems are mandatory in some countries. Since 2005, only
vehicles equipped with a TPMS can be introduced into the US market. This is man-
dated by a US federal safety standard established in the same year by the National
Highway Transportation Safety Administration (NHTSA). The main reason behind this
regulation was a unique series of accidents in North America which occurred around
the turn of the century. Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard FMVSS138 requires
that pressure deﬂation of 25 percent referring to placard pressure including an addi-
tional psi (0,068 bar) has to be detected by TPMS in all four wheels. Placard pressure is
the nominal pressure speciﬁed by the car manufacturer. The minimum pressure for a
tire is 1.4 bar under normal loads and 1.6 bar under extra load.

The testing procedure for verifying the correct operation of the TPMS consists of
two parts. First, a vehicle ﬁtted with TPMS is operated at nominal tire air pressure for
20 min. This allows the direct or indirect TPMS time to “learn” the current state of the
vehicle. These 20 min represents the time speciﬁed by NHTSA in which the vehicle is
not braked and is operated at a speed between 50 and 100 km/h. Immediately after this
20-min interval, the tires are deﬂated to a predetermined value. The vehicle is then
driven for another 20 min, during which the TPMS should detect the deﬂation. If the
deﬂation is not detected and no warning is communicated, the system fails the test.

The European counterpart to the NHTSA test has roots less in safety and more in
preventing increased CO2 emissions as a result of increased rolling resistance due to
low air pressure. The European law is slightly more difﬁcult to comply with than
the comparable US law. The main differences here are that the European law
requires a sensitivity which can detect a 20% deﬂation from the hot pressure, and

246

3 Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems

Fig. 3.3 Tire pressure control system (Source IPW, Hannover)

that breakdown and diffusion cases must be handled separately. A 20% deﬂation
from warm pressure is manifested as a pressure loss slightly less than that required
by the US law, and therefore requires systems to work even more precisely.

In short, statutory regulations obligate all automobile manufacturers to integrate
TPMS into all products in their brand portfolio for both European and American
markets.

3.1

Indirect Systems

Indirect tire pressure control systems fall back on components already installed in
the vehicle, particularly the ABS system. Therefore, they do not require any
additional hardware. Such systems are also known as ﬂat tire indication systems.
Such systems are known in the Mercedes-Benz context as a “Plattrollwarner,” or in
general as a ﬂat tire warning system. Such systems can detect individual tires which
have gone ﬂat or which have lost air. These systems work on the principle that,
when a tire has reduced air pressure, its dynamic rolling radius is reduced causing
an increase in rotational speed relative to the other wheels when moving at a
constant velocity. The change in rotational speed can be detected by the system and
a warning is output.

Rolling circumference is easy to measure in modern vehicles since wheel
velocity is measured already for ABS systems. By comparing rotational speeds of

3.1 Indirect Systems

247

the four wheels, air pressure losses in an individual wheel can be recognized easily.
An indicator function is normally used here, e.g.:

ððFL þ RR)=ðFR þ RL))=Velocity

In this indicator function, the wheel rotational speeds are represented by the

variables FL (front left), FR (front right), RL (rear left), and RR (rear right).

To function properly, an indirect system must ﬁrst “be taught” the correct ratio
of rolling circumferences, Fig. 3.4. For a customer, this means that the system must
be re-initialized or reset every time a tire change takes place. Learning is arranged
into different speed classes, and some drive states should be recognized and hidden,
if necessary. These hidden states include driving with snow chains or spikes as well
as operation over poor terrain such as gravel, grass, or ﬁeld paths. Even driving
along curves should be detected with a steering wheel sensor and treated appro-
priately with an algorithm.

One challenge here is posed by the fact that, in the ﬁrst approximation, rolling
circumference is primarily a function of wheel load with air pressure being a
secondary factor. This means that circumstances such as asymmetric loading, roof
load, trail towing, or even wheel load regulation algorithms such as those used in air
suspension systems must be recognized by the TPMS. Even dynamic ride control
systems should be parameterized with particular care to suit TPMS which work on
the basis of rolling circumference. Another challenge arises under circumstances
where a mixed set of tires is used, for example, when three used tires are run along
with one new tire. Indirect systems cope with this abnormality by learning rolling
circumference in “speed classes.” Rolling circumferences of mixed tires differ far
less at high speeds than at lower speeds. As a result, the robustness and sensitivity

Fig. 3.4 Learning and warning process in the run-ﬂat indicator

248

3 Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems

of the system decreases as the vehicle velocity increases. Since indirect systems
work only through comparison of rolling circumference, it is not possible to detect
diffusion losses.

3.2

Indirect Systems with Diffusion Detection

To compensate for the indirect system’s inability to detect diffusion losses, there are
systems which also analyze the eigenfrequencies of individual
tires. The tire
eigenfrequencies, which are inﬂuenced in particular by oscillations of the tire belts,
changes as the inﬂation pressures change. These changes can be used to estimate
the amount of air pressure reduction in the tire, Fig. 3.5 [56]. For systems to be able
to evaluate the eigenoscillations of the tires at various air pressures, these eigen-
frequencies must be learned on a per-vehicle/per-system basis, each time air is
added to the tires. This reset or re-initialization has been necessary in all of the
indirect systems that have been mentioned so far, including the ﬂat tire warning
system.

A disadvantage of the indirect system is the lower performance level due to its
inability to determine and therefore display the absolute tire pressure. A clear advantage
over direct measuring systems with this capability, however, is the lower cost and
signiﬁcantly simpler handling during tire changes. Furthermore, indirect systems are
not usage-bound to tire sets with special measurement electronics. That is to say that
with indirect systems, the customer need not do anything apart from re-utilization when
switching from winter to summer tires, for instance, or when mounting new tire/wheel
combinations. Indirect TPMS are also maintenance-free [57].

The rotational speed of each individual speed is sent as a signal which is broken
down with the help of a spectral analysis, namely the Fourier transformation, into

Fig. 3.5 Inﬂation
pressure-dependent frequency
shift

3.2 Indirect Systems with Diffusion Detection

249

tires whose functionality with these systems is limited.

the main excitation frequencies. To conﬁgure the software for the range of tires
which are approved for the vehicle, a so-called tire screening is necessary. During
tire screening, tires are ﬁrst run with standard pressure and then with the front left
and right rear tire deﬂated. With the resulting measurement data, vendors can then
analyses the frequency differences between the two states. Tire screening rules out
the usage of
In
frequency-based evaluation of tires, those with a high cross-sectional ratio, that is,
with a taller side wall, are more sensitive to heat. The larger the tire, the more the
tire belt oscillates about the rim. Similarly, in such tires, the resonance frequency
also changes signiﬁcantly at reduced air pressures, which is why it is quite easy for
the TPMS to detect pressure losses. Conversely, low-cross-section and emergency
spare tires exhibit entirely different sidewalls. These types of tires have stiffer or
reinforced sidewalls, and it is therefore hard to detect frequency differences since
the tire belt does not oscillate so much.

Systems based on rolling circumference, such as the ﬂat tire warning system,
actually beneﬁt from tires with smaller cross-sections. These tires have a greater
deviation in dynamic rolling radius under after a loss in air pressure. Therefore,
differences in rotational speed can be easily detected. Such tires are considered to be
heat-sensitive for this type of indirect air pressure detection. Tires with larger
cross-sections have an even greater reduction in radius in the case of static deﬂation,
but the dynamic rolling radius does not change so much.

The rubber compound of a tire also has an impact on vibration characteristics. It
is assumed that the softer the compound, the easier it is to distinguish changes in
frequency. Since winter tires have a softer compound but are used at low tem-
peratures, there is no advantage here. In addition to the inﬂuence of temperature, it
must be mentioned that heat sensitivity of tires reduces at low temperatures in
indirect systems which evaluate the frequency.

To train for tires with a speciﬁc pressure, the vehicle should be moved for a
deﬁned time across various speed ranges. These speed ranges are also the ranges in
which evaluation takes place after the software learning phase. Once all speed
ranges have been learned, the system can compare current states to calibrated states.
Learned values are used here as a reference and it becomes clear why indirect
systems measure the air pressure in a relative manner, since only the difference from
reference values are determined.

In the detection phase, which normally starts once calibration is complete,
indicators suggesting a ﬂat tire will trigger an alarm. The breakdown alarm appears
early on, since damage to tires or rapid air pressure loss in a tire is easy to detect
through rotational speed differences. Diffusion alarms require more time before
giving a warning, because diffusion pressure losses are creeping in nature and occur
over the course of several months, Fig. 3.6. In the case of diffusion, several-minute
delays do not put the customer at risk since another 10 or 15 min will not make
much of a difference in the case of a 25% inﬂation reduction over the course of, for
example, ﬁve months. During this period, however, the CO2 emissions will be
slightly higher because of reduced rolling resistance.

250

3 Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems

Fig. 3.6 Schematic warning sensitivity of the diffusion alarm (red) and breakdown alarm (green)

The disadvantage with this kind of system is that there could be situations where
the system does not react properly due to customer misuse of the reset button or the
usage of non-suitable tires such as run-ﬂats. For vehicles which use these types of
systems, run-ﬂat tires are normally not recommended.

3.3 Direct Systems

Direct measurement systems have sensors which are usually attached at the tire
valve and occasionally even directly to the rim, opposite the valve. These electronic
systems send pressure and temperature signals to one or more recipients, which in
turn forward the signals to a central electronic control unit (ECU) which performs
calculations [58]. One important aspect of this system is the unique electronic
identiﬁcation signals which help to system recognize the location of each sensor,
Fig. 3.7. Several antennae can be used for this task, but the strength of the elec-
tronic signal from the wheel electronics as well as rotation direction detection can
also be used to detect sensor position with one single antenna.

The main tasks of a TPMS are to recognize the desired target pressures and to
offer a warning in the case that actual pressures are too low or too high. “Learning”
the air pressures with the help of a calibration button has two main advantages: a
warning in case of a breakdown can be more precise, since the difference between
current and initial inﬂation pressure is known and can be considered, and the
customer can choose to learn and monitor their “own” air pressures, which could
differ from those of the vehicle manufacturer. In any case, however, air pressures
which are too low should be detected by the system and rejected.

One issue that cannot be underestimated here is the question of which pressure
should be displayed. There are several options here, each with advantages and
disadvantages. One possibility is to display the absolute pressure in the tire minus
100 kPa (1 bar). This pressure is closer to what would be measured during a stop at
a fuel station. Deviations are found at higher altitudes, such as in the mountains.
Another option is to display relative tire pressures, which requires a measurement of

3.3 Direct Systems

251

Fig. 3.7 Automatic position-assigned air pressures

the ambient pressure. This pressure has the advantage of corresponding exactly to
the pressure which would be measured with a fuel station inﬂation gauge. Another
possibility is the display of a pressure with compensation for temperature. This
value is the best for providing information about leakage, but is problematic as it
will not match the pressure reading offered by a fuel station pressure gauge.
A difference of up to 0.3 bar is possible in this instance, depending on tire
temperature.

The display of target pressure deﬁned by the customer has the advantage that it
does not show any differences between left and right tire pressures. Some customers
attempt to inﬂate their left and right tires to exactly the same speciﬁcations which is
not really optimal while displaying measured air pressures owing to unavoidable
tolerances due to heat and diffusion. Display of differences between expected and
actual air pressure is also subject to tolerances and hence often leads to confusion.
Owing to regulations put forth by the ETRTO, the development of a warning
strategy is very difﬁcult. Even the law governing placard pressures in the United
States date back to a time when tire pressure control systems were not available, and
are therefore not adjusted to suit modern tire thermodynamics.

The law mandates that relative pressures should be set in the tire. That is, the
actual environmental pressure must be taken into consideration, not the tempera-
ture, Fig. 3.8. This leads to the paradox that a warning may be issued for an air-tight
tire whose air pressure was adjusted correctly in a service station under extremely
low, possibly negative temperatures.

Another complex issue is the thermodynamics within the tire and wheel system.
Since the tire pressure sensor is fastened to the wheel, it measures the wheel

252

3 Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems

Fig. 3.8 Yellow and red warning threshold of a tire pressure monitor

temperature rather than the tire temperature. If a warm tire is cooled quickly, after
being taken through a car wash for example, the air pressure in the tire drops far
more quickly than the temperature of the wheel. The same problem occurs during
pauses in driving after descending mountain passes. Here, the brakes heat up the
wheel and sensor while the tire pressure remains approximately the same. These
cases should be considered by the ECU, Fig. 3.9. Premium vehicles usually account
for a variety of different warning scenarios. The following system relates to the
TPMS used by Mercedes.

Every tire loses air over time due to diffusion. According to the vehicle user
manual, customers should check tire pressure once every four weeks. Tire pressure
control systems have taken over this routine check and offer a warning message
when tire pressure drops, allowing the operator to adjust tire pressure at the next
fuel station.

When tire pressure drops only slightly below target values during a drive,
warnings will be suppressed as to avoid alerting the driver unnecessarily. The tire
pressure warning lamp in this case will activate only upon the next ignition on, and
will reset only after the TPMS measures a corrected tire pressure after driving has
been resumed or if the driver restarts the tire pressure monitoring program through
the vehicle’s control menu.

Tires can be irreversibly damaged when pressure losses measuring greater than
20% are left unchecked. Therefore, a warning message is displayed nearly imme-
diately along with a glowing tire pressure monitoring lamp. In this circumstance, a
driver should stop and check the tires at the next opportunity. The indicator will
continue to glow as long as the tire pressure issue persists, and will turn off only
after the TPMS measures a corrected pressure upon resumption of driving or if the
driver resets the system themselves through the control menu.

3.3 Direct Systems

253

“Soft warning” after driving 
(cid:129) Gradual loss of pressure occurs due to diffusion 
(cid:129) After a certain number of months, air refill will be needed 
(cid:129) If pressure loss is >0.25 bar, the message “Correct tire pressure” appears 

when the ignition is turned off 

(cid:129) In this way, driver is relieved of having to check tire pressure regularly 
“Hard warning” while driving 
(cid:129) Possible cases: tire damage, tire puncture by foreign object 
(cid:129) If there is significant loss of pressure (>0.5 bar), the message “Check 

tires” appears 

(cid:129) If there is strong deflation (>0.2 bar/min), a red warning message 

“Caution tire defect” appears 

(cid:129) Yellow TPMS warning indicator glows (legal requirement in the USA) 

Fig. 3.9 Warning strategy for diffusion and breakdown

Should a sudden loss of pressure of >0.2 bar/min be detected during a drive, a
red warning message “Caution Tire Defect” will be displayed, along with the
glowing tire pressure warning indicator. In this case, a driver should stop imme-
diately and inspect the tires for defects.

One disadvantage of a direct measuring system is its connection to the wheel: as
a result of adaptation to the valve, special valves must be used which remain on the
wheel for several years, Fig. 3.10. These valves must be able to withstand extre-
mely high stresses, particularly those caused by centrifugal forces. Moreover, these
special valves are not robust when it comes to bending stresses, and can break off if
handled roughly during tire inﬂation. The rubber valve equivalent, on the other
hand, is replaced every time that tires are changed.

Fig. 3.10 Wheel electronics, recipient, and ECU of a tire pressure monitoring system (Schrader
system)

254

3 Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems

Another disadvantage is the battery, which allows for the telemetric transfer of
signals to the car. These batteries have a lifespan of 7–10 years and must be
disposed of appropriately after their service life.

During the telemetric transfer of signals from the wheel to the car’s onboard
computer, the signal noise should be taken into consideration, i.e. it cannot be
assumed that all signals will be received all the time. Therefore, the evaluation
algorithms should account for special situations where signals are not being
received. In addition, the path of transmission should be taken into consideration,
since these conditions can vary from model series to model series.

Chapter 4
Wheel Assembly

The process of industrial tire assembly for series production differs signiﬁcantly
from manual tire assembly. Figure 4.1 shows a schematic representation of a fully
automated complete wheel assembly production line. The process of industrial
wheel assembly, which ensures the highest levels of assembly quality, is only
economical if the numbers of produced units is suitably large.

Prior to assembly, all assembly components must be stored for around 6 h at
temperatures of around 15 °C so that the tire beats are suitably ﬂexible. Tires
should be stacked one on top of another, that is, in the “chimney” style. The
alternative “pretzel” storage method, Fig. 1.19, is allowed only for a few days;
otherwise the true-running quality can suffer. Once tires are placed on the conveyor
towards the assembly area, the age of the tire is checked with the USDOT mark,
and a visual inspection is carried out on wheel rim surfaces and valve holes,
Fig. 4.2.

4.1 Valve Assembly

In the ﬁrst step of wheel assembly, the rubber valves are lubricated and are pulled
into the valve hole with a suitable tool. It is important that the valve body, insert,
and ﬂap should not be damaged in any way through excessive turning, pulling, or
squeezing. Valves upon which tire pressure electronics are installed are screwed on,
and the tightening torques of the nuts are monitored and documented, Fig. 4.3.
Wheel Assembly

Fig. 4.1 Automated tire assembly process

Fig. 4.2 Fully automated complete wheel assembly

4.2 Wheel Uniformity

257

Fig. 4.3 Screwing on the tire pressure checking valve

4.2 Wheel Uniformity

Prior to assembly, wheels are measured for their uniformity, Fig. 4.4. The position
of the maximum ﬁrst harmonic of the true run, determined through vector addition
of the ﬁrst harmonic of the outer and inner shoulder, is marked by a colored dot.
This marking is used in a later step as a matching/calibration point. Additionally,
the center hole is checked to ensure that there will be no clearance between it and
the wheel hub. A slight expansion of the center hole is allowed by smoothing of the
roughness.

Fig. 4.4 Wheel measurement before the assembly

258

4 Wheel Assembly

4.3 Wheel Mounting

Before the complete wheel is assembled, the bearing surface of the tire, the wheel
hump, and the two parts of the bead along their entire circumference are wetted with
a suitable lubricant in an automated manner. Mounting, matching, and ﬁlling of the
tire should be done immediately after the tire is lubricated to avoid drying of the
lubricant, Fig. 4.5. When the tire is pulled onto the wheel, there is no contact made
with the wheel rim ﬂange. The assembly forces (torque) used in this step are
monitored and documented, Fig. 4.6.

4.4 Matching

To optimize true-run quality, tires should be arranged on the wheel in such a way
that the match point/calibration markings for the true run and radial force lie on an
imaginary line through the center of the wheel, Fig. 4.7. In other words, the highest
point of the wheel should coincide with the lowest height of the tire sidewall, which
leads to an optimized geometry of the complete wheel.

Fig. 4.5 Automated laying
off the tire

Fig. 4.6 Automated
mounting of the tire

4.5 Filling and Tire Inﬂation Pressure

259

Fig. 4.7 Matching tire and
wheel to optimize the quality
of the concentric running

4.5 Filling and Tire Inﬂation Pressure

The tire is ﬁlled with air with the help of an inﬂation bell over the tire bead,
Fig. 4.8. Here, the air pressure is about 3.5 bar, which helps the tire to spring neatly
over the hump.

4.6 Bead Seat Optimization

After assembly, a 100% bead seat optimization should be carried out. In this
process, rollers tumble and move the bead area around until it is completely seated,
Fig. 4.9. This helps to improve tire uniformity, and above all ensures that the tire
seat will not change once it is mounted to the vehicle.

Fig. 4.8 Automatic inﬂation with the inﬂation bell

260

4 Wheel Assembly

Fig. 4.9 Bead seat optimization

4.7 Tire Uniformity

The overall quality of the assembled complete wheel is assessed and documented
through a 100% test of the tire uniformity. With this, statistical evaluations, error
detection, and reverse tracing are possible, Fig. 4.10.

4.8 Balancing Process

Static and dynamic balancing is also performed in an automatic manner with a
horizontal balancing machine. During the balancing process, the wheel should be
completely free of all kinds of contamination, grease, and assembly materials. It
should also be ensured that there is adequate pressing force while applying the

Fig. 4.10 Tire uniformity measurement

4.8 Balancing Process

261

Fig. 4.11 Balancing

balancing weight, Fig. 4.11, so that the weights do not fall off during operation
once the assembly is mounted to a vehicle. After balancing weights are applied, a
check for residual balance and documentation of measured values follow. Typical
values of permitted residual balance are obtained during the initial testing and
control balancing cycle, directly after applying the weights. These allowances are
usually 5g static with respect to the balancing plane and 5g dynamic per plane with
respect to the rim ﬂange. During re-testing, which is conducted after the wheel is
re-clamped to the balancing machine, changes of up to 3g are allowed.

4.9 Quality Assurance

Before it is transported to the assembly halls of the vehicle manufacturer, the
complete wheel assembly must be free from contamination of all kinds including,
lubricant residue or handling traces, Fig. 4.12. There should be no damage to any

Fig. 4.12 Preparation for dispatch

262

4 Wheel Assembly

surfaces or to the processing edges, especially in the region of the center hole. The
wheel mounting surface should also not have any scratches.

The complete wheels which are sold by dealerships are also normally assembled
using a fully automated process, and hence are delivered with the highest level of
quality.

Outlook

Tire development is a dynamic process which will never be completed. Technical
progress must arrive to the customer so that drivability, safety, and comfort
requirements can be achieved. New systems, changes in legislation, and new
requirements from customers will fuel the need for additional change in the future.
One of the most important duties of a tire developer is to understand the physical
foundations of tires, to accept trade-offs, and to learn from experience. Focusing on
the management of current projects and processes is not enough in the world of
wheel and tire development.

Substantial changes sparked by the introduction of completely new tire and wheel
systems are not expected in the coming years. This is simply because vehicles and
tires have reached such an extremely high degree of complexity that any change in
the concept of the various subsystems can only be realized at very high costs.

Process optimization is the most

important challenge to deal with in tire
development. Tire performance should not be neglected under any circumstance,
despite increasing complexity and the large number of tire variants.

A key factor in improving processes is the development and further optimization
of simulation methods. Here, the goal should be the ability to make statements
about safety, efﬁciency, and feasibility as early as possible in tire development.

The development process for wheels is subject to constant change. Wheels are a
primary focal point for an automobile; therefore, the driving factor for wheel
development is visual design, in contrast to the tire. Wheel surface and stylistic
design is of paramount importance.

There are two major technical challenges in wheel development: lightweight
construction and aerodynamics, which conﬂict with the business challenge of cost.
Therefore, wheels constructed from lightweight materials such as ﬁber-reinforced
plastic and carbon will continue to be examined in addition to the development of
more aerodynamically minded wheel designs.

Tire pressure monitoring technology will continue to evolve. At this point, the
open topics relate primarily to operation and handling of these systems. The variety
of systems in use across the various vehicle manufacturers will provide signiﬁcant
challenges to spare parts management organizations.